           ePortfolio
       Performance
 Support Systems

Constructing, Presenting,
  and Assessing Portfolios

                                                    Edited by
                                        Katherine V. Wills

                                              and Rich Rice
            EPORTFOLIO
   PERFORMANCE SUPPORT
 SYSTEMS: CONSTRUCTING,
PRESENTING, AND ASSESSING

             PORTFOLIOS
PERSPECTIVES ON WRITING
Series Editor, Susan H. McLeod

The Perspectives on Writing series addresses writing studies in a broad sense.
Consistent with the wide ranging approaches characteristic of teaching and
scholarship in writing across the curriculum, the series presents works that take
divergent perspectives on working as a writer, teaching writing, administering
writing programs, and studying writing in its various forms.

The WAC Clearinghouse and Parlor Press are collaborating so that these books
will be widely available through free digital distribution and low-cost print edi-
tions. The publishers and the Series editor are teachers and researchers of writ-
ing, committed to the principle that knowledge should freely circulate. We see
the opportunities that new technologies have for further democratizing knowl-
edge. And we see that to share the power of writing is to share the means for
all to articulate their needs, interest, and learning into the great experiment of
literacy.

Other Books in the Series

Charles Bazerman and David R. Russell (Eds.), Writing Selves/Writing Societies
    (2003)

Gerald P. Delahunty and James Garvey, The English Language: From Sound to
    Sense (2009)

Charles Bazerman, Adair Bonini, and Débora Figueiredo (Eds.), Genre in a
    Changing World (2009)

David Franke, Alex Reid, and Anthony Di Renzo (Eds.), Design Discourse:
    Composing and Revising Programs in Professional and Technical Writing
    (2010)

Martine Courant Rife, Shaun Slattery, and Dànielle Nicole DeVoss (Eds.),
    Copy(write): Intellectual Property in the Writing Classroom (2011)

Doreen Starke-Meyerring, Anthony Paré, Natasha Artemeva, Miriam Horne,
    and Larissa Yousoubova, Writing in Knowledge Societies (2011)

Andy Kirkpatrick and Zhichang Xu, Chinese Rhetoric and Writing: An
    Introduction for Language Teachers (2012)

Charles Bazerman et al. (Eds.), International Advances in Writing Research:
    Cultures, Places, Measures (2012)

Chris Thaiss et al. (Eds.), Writing Programs Worldwide: Profiles of Academic
    Writing in Many Places (2012)

Mike Duncan and Star Medzerian Vanguri, The Centrality of Style (2013)
            EPORTFOLIO
   PERFORMANCE SUPPORT
 SYSTEMS: CONSTRUCTING,
PRESENTING, AND ASSESSING

             PORTFOLIOS

              Edited by Katherine V. Wills and Rich Rice

                         The WAC Clearinghouse
                             wac.colostate.edu

                          Fort Collins, Colorado
                                 Parlor Press

                           www.parlorpress.com
                        Anderson, South Carolina
The WAC Clearinghouse, Fort Collins, Colorado 80523-1052
Parlor Press, 3015 Brackenberry Drive, Anderson, South Carolina 29621

© 2013 by Katherine V. Wills and Rich Rice. This work is released under a Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial-No Derivative Works 3.0 United States License.

ISBN 978-1-64215-049-0 (pdf ) | 978-1-64215-050-6 (epub) | 978-1-60235-441-8 (pbk.)

DOI 10.37514/PER-B.2013.0490

Produced in the United States of America

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

ePortfolio Performance Support Systems: Constructing, Presenting, and Assessing Portfolios /
   edited by Katherine V. Wills and Rich Rice.

p. cm. -- (Perspectives on writing)
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 978-1-60235-441-8 (pbk.: acid-free paper) -- ISBN 978-1-60235-442-5 (hardcover:

   acid-free paper) -- ISBN 978-1-64215-049-0 (pdf ) -- ISBN 978-1-64215-050-6 (epub)
1. Electronic portfolios in education. 2. Academic achievement--Evaluation. 3. English

   language--Rhetoric--Study and teaching (Higher) I. Wills, Katherine V. 1957- II. Rice,
   Richard Aaron.
LB1029.P67E69 2013
378.166--dc23

                                                2013019920

Copyeditor: Don Donahue
Designers: Mike Palmquist
Series Editor: Susan H. McLeod

The WAC Clearinghouse supports teachers of writing across the disciplines. Hosted by Colo-
rado State University, it brings together scholarly journals and book series as well as resources
for teachers who use writing in their courses. This book is available in digital format for free
download at wac.colostate.edu.

Parlor Press, LLC is an independent publisher of scholarly and trade titles in print and mul-
timedia formats. This book is available in paperback, cloth, and Adobe eBook formats from Par-
lor Press at www.parlorpress.com. For submission information or to find out about Parlor Press
publications, write to Parlor Press, 3015 Brackenberry Drive, Anderson, South Carolina 29621,
or e-mail editor@parlorpress.com.
CONTENTS

Acknowledgements3
Introduction5

         Katherine V. Wills and Rich Rice

Section 1: Systematic Performance Support Systems17
Chapter 1. Postmodernism, Palimpsest, and Portfolios: Theoretical Issues in

    the Representation of Student Work 19
         Kathleen Blake Yancey

Chapter 2. The Hypermediated Teaching Philosophy ePortfolio Performance
    Support System 41
         Rich Rice

Chapter 3. The Social ePortfolio: Integrating Social Media and Models of
    Learning in Academic ePortfolios57
         Lauren F. Klein

Section 2: Constructing the Bridge75
Chapter 4. ePorts: Making the Passage from Academics to Workplace77

         Barbara J. D'Angelo and Barry M. Maid

Chapter 5. What Are You Going to Do With That Major? An ePortfolio as
    Bridge from University to the World89
         Karen Ramsay Johnson and Susan Kahn

Chapter 6. Career ePortfolios: Recognizing and Promoting Employable
    Skills  109
         Karen Bonsignore

Section 3: Presenting Interactive Designs121
Chapter 7. Showcase Hybridity: A Role for Blogfolios123

         Geoffrey Middlebrook and Jerry Chih-Yuan Sun

Chapter 8. Accessible ePortfolios for Visually-Impaired Users: Interfaces,
    Designs, and Infrastructures135
         Sushil K. Oswal

Chapter 9. From Metaphor to Analogy: How the National Museum of the
    American Indian can inform the Augusta Community Portfolio155
         Darren Cambridge

                                                                                                    v
Contents

Section 4: Authentic Assessment Tools and Knowledge Transfer181
Chapter 10. Mapping, Re-Mediating, and Reflecting on Writing Process

    Realities: Transitioning from Print to Electronic Portfolios in First-Year
    Composition183

         Steven J. Corbett, Michelle LaFrance, Cara Giacomini,
         and Janice Fournier
Chapter 11. ePortfolios as Tools for Facilitating and Assessing Knowledge
    Transfer from Lower Division, General Education Courses to Upper
    Division, Discipline-specific Courses205
         Carl Whithaus
Chapter 12. Balancing Learning and Assessment: A Study of Virginia Tech's
    Use of ePortfolios 221
         Marc Zaldivar, Teggin Summers, and C. Edward Watson

vi
            EPORTFOLIO
   PERFORMANCE SUPPORT
 SYSTEMS: CONSTRUCTING,
PRESENTING, AND ASSESSING

             PORTFOLIOS
    ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

   ePortfolios are considered "authentic assessment" learning tools. Reflecting
over the process and the product built for end task, capstone, or assessment
purposes can be enormously instructive. Working with contributors to edit this
collection of essays; gathering advice from colleagues at both Texas Tech Uni-
versity and Indiana University Purdue University Columbus; bouncing ideas
off members of our professional communities such as those in the fields of
Computers and Writing, Writing Program Administration, Technical Commu-
nication, Rhetoric, First-Year Experience, Secondary English Education, and
Assessment; discussing new directions and new emerging technologies with
researchers in assessment, website design, interaction design, social media, mo-
bile media, communication, and assessment areas; as well as working with the
fabulously innovative people at The WAC Clearinghouse and Parlor Press, has
been incredibly valuable to us. We want to thank Susan H. McLeod especially,
the series editor, whose tireless work with our project is a model for all editors.
Publishers Mike Palmquist with The WAC Clearinghouse and David Blakesley
with Parlor Press have both been very generous with their feedback and time
and direction. Thank you, Kathy Yancey and Barbara Cambridge and Darren
Cambridge, for the amazing work you've done on portfolios over the years.
Your work is a model for anyone and everyone working in this area. Thank you,
Kanika Batra, for your editing work and support with the project. Further, we
thank our anonymous peer reviewers, and we thank the many graduate students
in training who reviewed and helped offer style and editing advice as part of
their own coursework and development as scholars, including, specifically, Jes-
sica Badger (Texas Tech University), Christopher Andrews (Texas Tech Univer-
sity), Melanie Doulton (Texas Tech University), Deborah Fontaine (Northwest
Florida State College), Dan Lovejoy (Texas Tech University), Jon Ostrowski
(Texas Tech University), Richard Rabil (Texas Tech University), Rhonda Stan-
ton (Texas Tech University), and Xiling Wang (Texas Tech University). Finally,
as with every project of this scope, the many students who have shared their
thinking and ideas through our courses, through the courses of our contribu-
tors, through the courses cited in the scholarship of this text, and through the
continuation of ideas from this collection, we are indebted and thank you. Just
as the construction, presentation, and assessment of any ePortfolio is an authen-
tic learning opportunity, the creation of this text and its continuation through
Creative Commons licensing has been a wonderful learning experience. This
live text will continue to grow. Please review additional examples and the on-

                                                                                                    3
Acknowledgements

going programs discussed in this collection online through The WAC Clearing-
house's Open-Access Books page (http://wac.colostate.edu/books).

4
    INTRODUCTION

      Katherine V. Wills
      Indiana University Purdue University Columbus

      Rich Rice
      Texas Tech University

   Institutions of higher learning have dedicated much energy and many re-
sources to assessment measurements and standards through individual tools,
through high-stakes testing, and through ePortfolio management systems. An
ePortfolio is a selected collection of work presented electronically. An electronic
performance support system, specifically, is an integrated electronic environ-
ment designed to reduce complexity in order to make sense of things, to pro-
vide employee performance information in order to foster improvement, and to
provide workers with a decision support system in order to maximize produc-
tivity. As higher education continues to learn from efficiencies and new technol-
ogies in the workplace that refine performance measurement, study knowledge
transfer and Web 2.0 tools (Gerben, 2009), and develop viable and sustainable
products through interaction theory and website design principles, this col-
lection of essays from knowledgeable scholars and practitioners of ePortfolios
helps foster increased understanding of intersections between ePortfolio com-
posing, presentation, and assessment in the academy and workplace, includ-
ing ideas for embracing electronic performance support systems. Ideas and the
discussion related in this collection published by the WAC Clearinghouse are
extended online through Creative Commons licensing, as well. Please consider
purchasing the print version, but also freely link to and share materials in the
online version.

   Essays in this collection ask readers to consider ways in which ePortfolios,
as distinguished from non-electronic portfolios, facilitate sustainable and mea-
sureable writing-related student development, assessment and accountability,
learning and knowledge transfer, principles related to universal design for learn-
ing, just-in-time support, interaction design, and usability testing. The collec-
tion contributes to recent scholarship on ePortfolios and provides new dimen-
sions to the field of portfolio development in the academic and in workplaces.
Traditionally, portfolios have been considered valuable tools because in addition
to embracing principles of validity and reliability as assessment measurements,
they enable students to continue to learn as they construct their portfolios.
Portfolios have specific audiences--most traditionally a program or a teacher

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0490.1.3  5
Introduction

in an institution. But institutions work to prepare students for the workplace
(including academic workplaces), and the workplace demands much different
forms of performance and support measurements. ePortfolios should be de-
signed with scalability and potential workplace applications in mind.

   The collection is categorized into four sections each with three essays (chap-
ters) that conduct an intertexual discussion and point to possibilities and gaps
for ePortfolios future discussion.

1. SYSTEMATIC PERFORMANCE SUPPORT SYSTEMS

   We open the discussion with Kathy Yancey's seminal article, "Postmodern-
ism, Palimpsest, and Portfolios: Theoretical Issues in the Representation of Stu-
dent Work," which is reprinted with permission from the National Council
of Teachers of English. Originally published in College Composition and Com-
munication in 2004, Yancey's piece situates portfolios as reflective "exercises in
remediation" in a public space. Classrooms, too, are public spaces.

   Throughout the collection, contributors Rice, Ramsay Johnson and Kahn,
Cambridge, Corbett et al., and others expand on Yancey's concept of how eP-
ortfolios can iteratively resituate and reconstitute ePortfolio artifacts into new
interpretive understanding. This ability of ePortfolios to not only reproduce,
but also to reformulate meanings across time and space lends ePortfolios their
additive possibilities. Adding one plus one artifact does not equal two, but more
than two because of the variety of possible interpretations. The intentional
gathering and remixing of artifacts lends to the viability of ePortfolios across
workplaces and lives, as Yancey alluded to in her 2004 CCC article. We felt we
would be remiss if we did not launch this collection with Yancey's piece because
we knew her work would be foundational to the ePortfolio conversations of
this collection. And, as Yancey predicted in her article and as this collection
shows, digital portfolios are evolving nationally and internationally and atten-
tion should be paid to the intentionality of the development.

   Yancey is Kellogg W. Hunt Professor of English and Distinguished Research
Professor at Florida State University, where she directs the Graduate Program
in Rhetoric and Composition (http://ncte2008.ning.com/profile/kathleen-
yancey). She has served in several national leadership roles, including President
of the National Council of Teachers of English; Chair of the Conference on
College Composition and Communication; and President of the Council of
Writing Program Administrators. In January 2013, she assumed the Presidency
of the South Atlantic Modern Language Association. She also co-founded and
co-directs the Inter/National Coalition for Electronic Portfolio Research, which

6
                                                                                                 Introduction

has brought together over 60 institutions from around the world to document
the learning represented in electronic portfolios. Editor of the flagship jour-
nal of writing studies College Composition and Communication, Yancey has au-
thored or co-authored over 70 articles and book chapters and authored, edited,
or co-edited eleven scholarly books, including Portfolios in the Writing Classroom
(1992), Reflection in the Writing Classroom (1998), Situating Portfolios (1997b),
Delivering College Composition: The Fifth Canon (2006), Electronic Portfolios 2.0:
Emergent Research on Implementation and Impact (2009), and the forthcom-
ing co-authored Contexts of Writing: Transfer, Composition, and Sites of Writing,
which is a study of the transfer of writing knowledge and practice in college.

   Rich Rice follows Yancey's principles and core values of representation in
"The Hypermediated Teaching Philosophy ePortfolio Performance Support
System." Rice directs the Multiliteracy Lab in the Texas Tech University De-
partment of English, and he teaches using ePortfolios both online and face-to-
face in the TTU Technical Communication and Rhetoric program. See http://
richrice.com. He is a member of the Conference on College Composition and
Communication's Committee on Best Practices for Online Writing Instruc-
tion. His recent articles are in the areas of new media knowledge creation, mo-
bile medicine, basic writing and photo essays, remediated film, nontraditional
graduate support systems, ePortfolios, and media labs. With Nedra Reynolds
(2006a, 2006b) he has co-written the second editions of Portfolio Keeping and
Portfolio Teaching. Reynolds is soon to release third editions. In this essay, Rice
draws on research in electronic performance support systems in order to point
out ways in which the traditional teaching philosophy essays fall short as a genre
of invoking its intended audience and multiple purposes because of hypertex-
tual and reflective exegeses similar to those in ePortfolios. He suggests that in
order to become an effective ePortfolio support system, the teaching philoso-
phy should be taught and received as a networked performance space. In this
second essay, Rice opens by expanding on Yancey's belief that ePortfolios, like
a palimpsest, can be "retooled." Rice then hints at upcoming ideas in Lauren
Klein's essay that discusses how blurring the boundaries of social media and
ePortfolios can enhance classroom and workplace experiences. Furthermore,
Rice elaborates on Carl Whithaus' discussion later in the collection of teaching
philosophies as a "thirdspace" from Grego and Thompson (2008). ePortfolios
multiply opportunities for presenting the self in diverse kairotic performances
such as hypermediated teaching philosophies.

   Next, Lauren F. Klein details another systematic approach to academic
portfolios using social media. Klein directs the portfolio program in the City
University of New York's Macaulay Honors College (http://macaulay.cuny.edu/
eportfolios/lklein). She is an Assistant Professor in the School of Literature, Me-

                                                                                                   7
Introduction

dia, and Communication at the Georgia Institute of Technology, where she also
directs the Digital Humanities Lab. Her essay, "The Social ePortfolio: Integrat-
ing Social Media and Models of Learning in Academic ePortfolios," examines
recent research in social networking. She points out how many users can apply
ePortfolio systems and social network sites in order to bridge the academy and
other workplaces. What can an ePortfolio be? An ePortfolio can shapeshift into
almost anything, according to Klein. Her essay closes Section 1 by moving
readers among Yancey's foundations, Rice's teaching philosophy constructions,
and then Klein's worlds of social networking: practical and creative, personal
and social, textual and digital. This builds a foundation for the essays in Section
2, Constructing the Bridge, which explores ePortfolio transitioning into non-
academic workplaces as sustainable academy-to-workplace programs, capstone
courses, and feedback loops that improve the ePortfolio experience and product.

2. CONSTRUCTING THE BRIDGE

   The first essay in this section is by Barbara D'Angelo and Barry Maid. "eP-
orts: Making the Passage from Academics to Workplace" builds on the idea
that ePortfolios can be useful for both individuals and systems by talking about
ePortfolios as passageway from demonstrating proficiencies and meeting pro-
grammatic outcomes to demonstrating entry-level skills in various workplaces.
The essay situates perceived dichotomies of academic versus practical, and theo-
retical versus applied. A key finding in D'Angelo and Maid's ePortfolio evalua-
tion is that "direct instruction in tools or software" is a common shortcoming.
How can teaching institutions serve many stakeholders? Ultimately, the authors
conclude teachers using ePortfolios must serve in their role as technical com-
munication educators. Any institution rebuilding its use of ePortfolios would
benefit from this analysis of Arizona State University's program. It serves as
a technical communication bridge between the academy and the workplace.
D'Angelo's publications include several book chapters and articles on the use
of outcomes for curriculum development and assessment and on information
literacy. Maid founded the Technical Communication program at Arizona State
University in 2000 and headed it for more than 10 years. His recent publica-
tions are in the area of information literacy, writing assessment, online edu-
cation, and independent writing programs. Most recently, with Duane Roen
and Greg Glau, he is co-author of The McGraw-Hill Guide: Writing for College,
Writing for Life, currently in its 3rd edition (2012). Learn more about these
researchers' ongoing work at http://www.public.asu.edu/~bdangelo and http://
www.public.asu.edu/~bmmaid.

8
                                                                                                 Introduction

   Next, Karen Ramsay Johnson and Susan Kahn at Indiana University Purdue
University at Indianapolis (IUPUI) highlight their perspectives on challenges
embedded in capstone projects. The essay connects the dots with English ma-
jors and professional programs transitioning to careers or further study. Similar
to the previous essay regarding ASU, the authors relate work being done at
IUPUI, including integration of ePortfolios with other adopters across campus.
Johnson and Kahn show the evolution of their work in relation to work from
Barrett (2004), to matrices and webfolio work of Hamilton and Kahn (2009),
to Zubizarreta (2009), and to Cambridge, Cambridge, and Yancey in Electron-
ic Portfolios 2.0 (2009). This chapter continues a thread on reflective process
in ePortfolios that runs through the work of Darren Cambridge. Whether in
the classroom or community, reflective process weaves through the collection.
More than a case study of ePortfolios within the collection, Johnson and Kahn's
piece shares the reflective experiences of four English Capstone students us-
ing ePortfolios. The feedback loop between students and authors/researchers
shows that the technology of ePortfolios may not resolve inherent pedagogical
and social problems. Readers are reminded that ePortfolios are always already
"works-in-progress." Johnson has given numerous presentations on ePortfolios
and their use in both Liberal Arts programs and in assessment. Kahn has pub-
lished, presented, and consulted widely on faculty development, assessment,
and electronic portfolios, including co-editing Electronic Portfolios: Emerging
Practices in Student, Faculty, and Institutional Learning (2001). She currently
chairs the Board of Directors of the Association for Authentic, Experiential,
and Evidence-Based Learning (AAEEBL), the international association for eP-
ortfolio practitioners.See http://academicaffairs.iupui.edu/plans/ePort for more
discussion on IUPUI's approachs.

   Karen Bonsignore in "Career ePortfolios: Recognizing and Promoting Em-
ployable Skills," writes about "City Tech," an organization that helps students
prepare career ePortfolios. Bonsignore is Director of the New York City College
of Technology ePortfolio Project (http://eportfolio.citytech.cuny.edu). She has
offered numerous presentations on various ePortfolio, assessment, and tech-
nology related topics including, most recently, "Comprehensive Support for a
Successful ePortfolio Project," "Designing an Effective Online eTutor Writing
Assistance Program to Support Career ePortfolios at City Tech," and "Career
ePortfolios: A Showcase of Student Work." This essay relies on student perspec-
tives, but with the career ePortfolio and its multiple and diverse audiences in
mind. Bonsignore's text brings into sharp relief the public life of the ePortfolio
as an artifact for the marketplace. These portfolios offer significant advantages
over traditional dossiers, including offering numerous versions. The program
prepares students with competitive job market and graduate school admissions

                                                                                                   9
Introduction

advice. Thus, the three discussions in Section 2 about constructing bridges ex-
amine the nuanced interplay of outcomes, reflection, and audience in variety of
ePortfolio capstone courses and community projects.

3. PRESENTING INTERACTIVE DESIGNS

   Geoffrey Middlebrook from the University of Southern California and Jerry
Chih-Yuan Sun from National Chiao Tung University begin "Showcase Hy-
bridity: A Role for Blogfolios" with a powerful volley to the ePortfolio field
about the limitations of static approaches to ePortfolios. They encourage data-
base-driven and more dynamic approaches to the ePortfolio imagination. Spe-
cifically, this chapter discusses a project at USC to implement a portfolio-based
system. Hybrid "blogfolios" can result in flexible research processes for person-
al, intellectual, and vocational benefits. Middlebrook and Chih-Yuan Sun evoke
Ali Jafari's (2004) positioning of students as stakeholders at the "cyber-table."
Students and web bloggers do not only reproduce digital identity through con-
tent; their identity is developed through aesthetic, software, and media choices
(Farmer, 2006). Chih-Yuan Sun has published journal and conference papers in
the areas of online teaching and learning, student motivation, electronic feed-
back devices, OpenCourseWare, and ePortfolios. Middlebrook is the recipi-
ent of numerous grants and awards, among them the University of Southern
California Provost's Prize for Teaching with Technology. For more information
about current work, see Middlebrook at http://dornsife.usc.edu/cf/faculty-and-
staff/faculty.cfm?pid=1003534, and Chih-Yuan Sun through http://blog.jerry-
sun.net and http://elearning-lab.nctu.edu.tw.

   Similarly, in "Accessible ePortfolios for Visually-Impaired Users: Interfaces
Designs, and Infrastructures," author Sushil K. Oswal focuses on questions
of interface and content design in ePortfolios for blind users. The chapter is
relevant for those with other disabilities as well. Oswal's research is anchored
in digital technology and the questions of accessibility for the disabled. Os-
wal established the First-Year Writing Portfolio Project at Middle Tennessee
State University and the university's newly-minted Ph.D. program has to date
resulted in three doctorate degrees on the topic of portfolios. Oswal received
the C. R. Anderson Award for the work on his doctoral study of an Environ-
mental Taskforce in a Japanese-owned corporation. He is currently a Techni-
cal Communication faculty of an Interdisciplinary Program at the University
of Washington, Tacoma, with additional appointments in the Environmental
Studies unit of his department and the Disability Studies unit of the University
of Washington, Seattle. His discussion guides readers to Zaldivar, Summers,

10
                                                                                                 Introduction

and Watson's chapter regarding what constitutes effective ePortfolio production
and accessibility. For more information on Sushil K. Oswal's current work, see
http://depts.washington.edu/disstud/faculty/sushil_oswal.

   And the third chapter in this section comes from Darren Cambridge: "From
Metaphor to Analogy: How the National Museum of the American Indian can
inform the Augusta Community Portfolio." Cambridge's latest books on eP-
ortfolios are well-cited throughout this collection. Cambridge works for the
American Institutes for Research, and spends much time analyzing ePortfolio
work being done around the world. Cambridge explores the use of a specific
metaphor to suggest that the individual and the system must be better inte-
grated. The metaphor he uses is that of a museum. Here, Cambridge studies the
Augusta Community Portfolio project and uses details from the National Mu-
seum of the American Indian to suggest ePortfolio design must be highly inter-
active in order maximize effectiveness. Cambridge asks for a "balanced relation-
ship between community ePortfolio authors and readers, developing design and
content that both provides audiences with immediate value." The demands of
public, academic, professional, and personal spaces should not override authen-
tic literacy. This third section at once heralds, praises, and critically questions
the value of interactivity of digital literacies. He co-leads the Inter/National
Coalition for Electronic Portfolio Research; is third country coordinator for the
Europortfolio project funded by the European Union's Lifelong Learning pro-
gram; and serves on the board of the Association for Authentic, Experiential,
and Evidence-Based Learning. He has developed technical specifications for
IMS Global Learning Consortium and open source ePortfolio software through
the Sakai Foundation. For more of Cambridge's recent work, see Electronic Port-
folios 2.0: Emergent Research on Implementation and Impact (2009), and Eport-
folios for Lifelong Learning and Assessment (2010). Links can be found at http://
ncepr.org/darren.

4. AUTHENTIC ASSESSMENT TOOLS
AND KNOWLEDGE TRANSFER

   In the first essay of the last section, co-written by Steven J. Corbett, Michelle
LaFrance, Cara Giacomini, and Janice Fournier, "Mapping, Re-Mediating, and
Reflecting on Writing Process Realities: Transitioning from Print to Electronic
Portfolios in First-Year Composition," the authors describe conditions critical
to understanding how best practices are implemented. Specifically, they look at
ePortfolios in first-year composition at the University of Washington through
shifting attitudes, practices, and technological affordances. Academia, too, is

                                                                                                 11
Introduction

a workplace. What results are enhanced by critical reflection, better under-
standing of learning processes, and a more specific understanding of audience?
Corbett et al.s' student data models authentic and evidence-based learning in
much the same way as Johnson and Kahn's. All authors draw attention to in-
cremental changes in instructional practices, cultures of assessment, and insti-
tutional support that will have to go hand in hand with ePortfolio application
at the programmatic level. Corbett is Southern Connecticut State University
Co-Director of Composition (http://writing.colostate.edu/portfolios/portfolio.
cfm?portfolioid=2870), LaFrance is at the University of Massachusetts, Dart-
mouth (http://michellelafrancephd.com), Giacomini is University of Wash-
ington Research Manager of Academic and Collaborative Applications (http://
sites.google.com/a/uw.edu/cara-giacomini), and Fournier is University of
Washington Research Scientist of the Program for Educational Transformation
Through Technology (http://depts.washington.edu/pettt/team). See their Web
pages to learn more about their current work.

   Next, Carl Whithaus' chapter, "ePortfolios as Tools for Facilitating and As-
sessing Knowledge Transfer from Lower Division, General Education Courses
to Upper Division, Discipline-specific Courses," investigates relationships be-
tween ePortfolios and knowledge transfer at a divisional level general educa-
tion program. Whithaus' work is of particular used to administrators, program
directors, and internal and external assessment bodies. Whithaus uses Grego
and Thompson's (2008) notion of "thirdspace" (previously discussed) to sug-
gest ePortfolios can be used as valuable tools for outcome-based assessments of
lower-divisions. How can knowledge transfer be tracked from lower-level cours-
es though upper division, graduate, and beyond? Whithaus shares convincing
cases for the use of ePortfolios from around the world. He has published two
books that focus on writing instruction and information technologies: Writing
Across Distances and Disciplines: Research and Pedagogy in Distributed Learning
(2008) and Teaching and Evaluating Writing in the Age of Computers and High-
Stakes Testing (Erlbaum, 2005). The three chapters of this last section, in some
part, deal with measuring and improving writing skills through ePortfolios.
The data gathering, reflecting and, and archiving functions of ePortfolios lend
greater depth and validity than the traditional culminating student surveys.
The archiving function (through use of databases) mentioned in Whithaus' text
paves the way to Zaldivar, Summer, and Watson's final discussion that seeks
to capture useful assessment data, student voices, and authentic learning. For
more information on Whithaus' current work, see http://writing.ucdavis.edu/
faculty-staff/directory/whithaus.

   Finally, Marc Zaldivar, Teggin Summers, and C. Edward Watson of Virginia
Tech University ask us to consider once again strategies to use authentic and

12
                                                                                                 Introduction

evidence-based portfolios to both teach and assess in "Balancing Learning and
Assessment: A Study of Virginia Tech's Use of ePortfolios." Specifically, the essay
which closes our collection opens new questions for us, such as how do we en-
courage administrators and faculty and staff to see value in ePortfolio learning?
What are the greatest challenges confronting us with ePortfolio performance
support systems? Zaldivar is Virginia Tech University Director of the ePortfolio
Initiatives and works with EDUCAUSE (see http://www.educause.edu/mem-
bers/virginia-tech), Summers is Assistant Director of Virginia Tech's ePortfolio
Initiatives (see http://eportfolio.vt.edu), and Watson is Virginia Tech University
Director of Professional Development and Strategic Initiatives (see http://www.
uopd.vt.edu/IT_Leadership/Scholar_Bios/Edward_Watson.html). This final
chapter in the collection asks readers to reflect on useful assessment data with
attention to student voices and authentic learning.

   Ultimately, this gathering of thought-provoking essays asks how ePortfolios
can be used not only to document past experience, but also to change the cli-
mate of learning and assessment on college campuses while preparing college
graduates for successful job applications and careers. How do ePortfolios evolve
into and out of workplace environments, public spaces, and across academic
curricula? What are the benefits and drawbacks of authentic, evidence-based
ePortfolios that link students' voices and their learning to ePortfolios and da-
tabases? ePorfolios are mediation of performance, participation, and (re)inven-
tion. Contributors present findings and recommendations based on their expe-
riences and research using ePortfolios in a variety of institutional and workplace
settings for a variety of purposes. Through additive uses of interactive media,
databases, feedback loops, and global networking, ePortfolios are positioned to
make continued and significant contributions to learning and knowledge cre-
ation. Please review additional examples and the on-going programs discussed
in this collection online through The WAC Clearinghouse's Open-Access Books
page (http://wac.colostate.edu/books).

REFERENCES

Cambridge, B., Cambridge, D., & Yancey, K. B. (Eds.). (2009). Electronic portfo-
   lios 2.0: Emergent research on implementation and impact. Sterling, VA: Stylus.

Cambridge, D. (2010). ePortfolios for lifelong learning and deliberative assess-
   ment. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Farmer, J. (2006). Blogging to basics: How blogs are bringing online education
   back from the brink. In A. Bruns, & J. Jacobs (Eds.), Uses of blogs (pp. 91-
   103). New York: Peter Lang.

                                                                                                 13
Introduction

Gerben, C. (2009). Putting 2.0 and two together: What web 2.0 can teach
   composition about collaborative learning. Computers and composition online,
   (Fall 2009). Retrieved from http://candcblog.org/Gerben

Grego, R., & Thompson, N. S. (2007). Teaching/writing in thirdspaces: The Stu-
   dio Approach. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.

Hamilton, S., & Kahn, S. (2004). Enhancing learning, improvement, and ac-
   countability through electronic portfolios. Metropolitan Universities Journal,
   14(4), 90-101.

Jafari, A. (2004). The "Sticky" ePortfolio system: Tackling challenges and iden-
   tifying attributes. EDUCAUSE Review, 39(4), 38-49.

Reynolds, N., & Rice, R. (2006a). Portfolio keeping: A guide for students (2nd
   ed.). Boston: Bedford/St. Martin's.

Reynolds, N., & Rice, R. (2006b). Portfolio teaching: A guide for teachers (2nd
   ed.). Boston: Bedford/St. Martin's.

Roen, D., Glau, G., & Maid, B. (2012). The McGraw-Hill guide: Writing for
   college, writing for life. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Whithaus, C. (2005). Teaching and evaluating writing in the age of computers
   and high-stakes testing. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Whithaus, C., & Lakin, M.B. (2005). Working (on) electronic portfolios: Con-
   nections between work and study. Kairos: A Journal of Rhetoric, Technology,
   and Pedagogy, 9(2). Retrieved from http://english.ttu.edu/kairos/9.2/bind-
   er2.html?coverweb/whithaus/cover.htm

Yancey, K. B. (Ed.). (1992). Portfolios in the writing classroom: An introduction.
   Urbana, IL: NCTE.

Yancey, K. B. (1998). Reflection in the writing classroom. Logan, UT: Utah State
   University Press.

Yancey, K. B. (2004a). Postmodernism, palimpsest, and portfolios: Theoretical
   issues in the representation of student work. College Composition and Com-
   munication, 55(4), 738-762.

Yancey, K. B. (2004b). Teaching literature as reflective practice. Urbana, IL:
   NCTE.

Yancey, K. B., & Weiser, I. (1997a). Situating portfolios: An introduction. In
   K. B. Yancey, & I. Weiser (Eds.). Situating portfolios: Four perspectives (pp.
   1-20). Logan, UT: Utah State University Press.

Yancey, K. B., & Weiser, I. (1997b). Situating portfolios. Logan, UT: Utah State
   University Press.

Zubizarreta, J. (1997). Improving teaching through portfolio revisions. In P.
   Seldon, The teaching portfolio (2nd ed.), pp. 37-45. Bolton, MA: Anker.

Zubizarreta, J. (2004). The learning portfolio: Reflective practice for improving
   student learning. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

14
                                                                                                 Introduction

Zubizaretta, J. (2009). The learning portfolio: Reflective practice for improving
   student learning (2nd ed.). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

                                                                                                 15
SECTION 1: SYSTEMATIC
PERFORMANCE SUPPORT
SYSTEMS

  What our age needs is communicative intellect. For intellect
  to be communicative, it must be active, practical, engaged.
  In a culture of the simulacrum, the site of communicative
  engagement is electronic media.

                                                 --Taylor & Saarinen,
                         Imagologies: Media Philosophy (2004), p. 2

  AFSMI-NJ, "Market to the Younger Generation Using Social Media,"
  http://afsmi-nj.org/market_to_the_younger_generation_using_social_media
CHAPTER 1.

POSTMODERNISM,
PALIMPSEST, AND
PORTFOLIOS:
THEORETICAL ISSUES IN
THE REPRESENTATION OF
STUDENT WORK

Kathleen Blake Yancey
Florida State University

What we ask students to do is who we ask them to be. With this as
a defining proposition, I make three claims: (1) print portfolios offer
fundamentally different intellectual and affective opportunities than
electronic portfolios do; (2) looking at some student portfolios in both
media begins to tell us something about what intellectual work is
possible within a portfolio; and (3) assuming that each portfolio is
itself a composition, we need to consider which kind of portfolio-as-
composition we want to invite from students, and why.

         I was of three minds,
         Like a tree
         In which there are three blackbirds

                                                            --Wallace Stevens

   To begin at the beginning ...
   One beginning for thinking about the representation of student work is
located in the context of our own research. When someone talks about rep-
resentation of student work, what's often being discussed is a mediated repre-
sentation, that is, our representation of that work--typically presented as part.

Reprinted with permission from the NCTE. Originally published in College Composition and
Communication, Vol. 55, No. 4 (Jun., 2004), pp. 738-761.

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0490.2.01                        19
Yancey

A number of issues locate this meaning of

representation, many scholars and organi- As in a file cabinet, information

zations--among them the CCCC--ad- is organized into categories (file

dressing them.                                 drawers), subcategories (file
   Backing up, we might consider an earli-     folders), and elements (pieces of
                                               information in the file folders)
er beginning: the representations of students  .... the information resides in the
that we as teachers invite or permit. These    owner's portfolio, providing easy
representations, regardless of the form that   access to all the data needed to
they take (essay test, PowerPoint project,     support a lifetime of formative and
or portfolio), simultaneously invite certain   summative evaluations (my italics).

constructions and (yet) provide the texts          --Truer and Jensen (2003, p. 27)
that we assess. Put differently, what we ask

students to do is who we ask them to be.

As important, these representations con-

stitute a rhetorical situation, precisely (1) because they are immediate, direct,

and substantive--composing, as they do, the material of our teaching lives and

those of our students'--and (2) because they perform a double function--pro-

viding grist for the twin mills of identity and assessment.

    (Yet) Another beginning is both professional and personal, the practices

we've developed with and through the portfolios that began populating writing

classrooms and programs over two decades ago. For many, portfolios played a

major role in the quest for a better way of representing student achievement--

qua grades--than summing their grades on individual essays. As a selected body

of plural performances narrated by the writer in a reflective text and located at

a particular point in time, portfolios seemed (and still seem) a representation

preferable to incremental measures that seem, by contrast, to represent our suc-

cesses as teachers at least as much as a student's successes as a writer.1

    In other words, any representation is situated in multiple contexts. And: a

single representation, regardless of how innocent it may seem, can also serve

multiple intents and can also work to unintended effects. So here a small post-

modern beginning--in the sense that I have abandoned a master narrative

about representation of student work, calling instead upon what Richard Freed

describes as a "proliferation of little narratives" or, in Clifford Geertz's terms, a

"dialogue of local interpretations." Each interpretation presented above--

    1. representation of student work by faculty;

    2. representation by students of their own work in response to faculty;

    3. representation of students by faculty in the currency of grades

    --is located within its own context, its own narrative. Making sense of an

issue--in this case, representation of student work--requires multiple contexts,

20
                                           Postmodernism, Palimpsest, and Portfolios

fluidity, plurality. Or: in a postmodern world, what in earlier times might have

regarded as fragmentation, indeterminacy, and heterogeneity are understood

today as necessary virtues.

How we organize and represent the world: that too is the palimpsest of my

title. In The Practice of Everyday Life, Michel de Certeau presents palimpsest

as another kind of representation, focusing in his illustration on the map as

type. Mapmaking itself, he says, is exemplar par excellence of representation:

typically, maps seek through various representational devices to stabilize a fluid

and dynamic space, which (admittedly) is a useful practice for those needing

the direction maps provide. At the same time, of course, what goes unnoticed

is that such a stable representation achieves this stability precisely through

misrepresentation: a map fundamentally misrepresents the thing represented.

Moreover, such representations, as the example of the Mercator map attests, are

ubiquitous, and we are impervious. Seeking a radical design practice that would

permit representation of multiplicity in maps of various kinds--located in per-

spectives oriented to territory, socioeconomic distribution, political conflicts,

identifying symbolism, and the like--de Certeau found in palimpsest a new

semiotic, a new means of showing the "imbricated strata" inherent in any space

a map might mark. The space itself, according to de Certeau, is a palimpsest,

which only becomes obvious if and when

the means of representation are likewise

multiple.                                  CHAPTER ONE I AM BORN

   Taking a cue from de Certeau, Ben Bar-  Whether I shall turn out to
ton and Marthalee Barton have discussed    be the hero of my own life, or
layering as one "palimpsest" method for    whether that station will be held
accomplishing a fuller representation. As  by anybody else, these pages must
they suggest, we might think in terms      show.

of multiply layered maps of the world      CHAPTER LXIII A VISITOR
through which we achieve a representa-     [The Penultimate Chapter]

tion.2 As important, whenever we seek to What I have purposed to record

"map" materially or metaphorically, we is nearly finished; but there is yet

might go "multiple," as in the case of us- an incident conspicuous in my

ing x-rays--taken from various vantage     memory, on which it often rests
points--to represent and thus assist in    with delight, and without which
constructing a more accurate diagnosis.3   one thread in the web I have spun
And of course, we might use such multiple  would have a raveled end.

mapping to represent student development   --David Copperfield

and achievement. Recently, literary theo-  Charles Dickens

rist Michael Davidson has talked about a

                                                                             21
Yancey

related concept, what he calls the role of palimtext--a specifically verbal applica-
tion of palimpsest--in understanding any given work of an artist. He claims:

         The palimtext is neither a genre nor an object, but a writing-
         in-process that may make use of any number of textual
         sources. As its name implies the palimtext retains vestiges of
         prior writings out of which it emerges. Or more accurately,
         it is the still-visible record of its responses to those earlier
         writings. (Davidson, 1995, p. 78)

   According to Davidson, reading a text in its own developmental context--that
is, reading it as a palimtext, much as we read the final draft of a student text in
the context of earlier drafts of that essay or a portfolio of finished texts in the
light of earlier work, including notes and peer reviews and teacher commen-
tary--is a best way of reading precisely because of the contextual framework
it privileges. As important, both of these--palimpsest and palimtext--speak
to the shifting relationships between context and text: to make meaning, they
both include context as a central element of text.

   Context is what allows us to understand, to interpret, to make meaning.
It allows us to answer the question, "Relative to what?" "Relative to the mul-
tiple contexts from which the writing emerged, to the contexts made visible
and made an explicit part of the reading," we reply. Related to teaching and
learning, the idea of context allows us to interpret, to represent, in many ways,
simultaneously. As teachers we do this as part of daily practice, often tacitly:
interpret what we intend in the context of past experiences, relative to what we
hope. Students likewise:

   In a first instance (perhaps a default instance), a student represents learning
within the context of time past and present: her past, for instance, explaining what
knowledge she has brought with her from previous experiences to current time
as she explores what she seeks to know now.

   Concurrently, in a second instance, she represents what she is learning with-
in the context of space: learning in multiple contexts concurrently, she notes
what she learns in one setting, a class or service learning setting, for example, at
the same time that she includes what she is learning in another class.

   And in a third instance, she can do both in the context of the subordinate
(the context of what might be), while she "translates" what she is learning into
the context of the future, one where she may explore questions she cannot an-
swer now or, alternatively, in a context more focused, that of her professional
aspirations.

22
                                                              Postmodernism, Palimpsest, and Portfolios

   The inclusion of these contexts in our teaching and learning as a kind of pa-
limpsest makes meaning more complex, more sophisticated (if not always more
immediately coherent) as it makes it more specific, less anonymous.

   Never more so than when we ask students to represent their work and, thus
of course, their selves when we ask them to compose portfolios.

   These claims--among them that an assessment (like a portfolio) constructs
that which it purports to measure--aren't new. What is new, at least in terms of
portfolios, is the medium in which they are created. Print portfolios, in class-
rooms and programs, have enriched writing programs for nearly two decades
(Belanoff & Dickson, 1991; Yancey & Weiser, 1997); electronic portfolios, as
the recent American Association for Higher Education publication Electronic Port-
folios (Cambridge) suggests, aim for analogous changes both in what and in
how we learn and teach.

   The student represented in each portfolio--print and digital--is not co-
identical, however, principally because these spaces that students are invited to
make their own offer fundamentally different intellectual and affective oppor-
tunities: that's my first claim.

   Looking at some student portfolios in both media begins to tell us some-
thing about what intellectual work is possible within a portfolio: that's my sec-
ond claim.

   And if it's so that the intellectual work made possible differs according to
medium, then a question we need to consider when we design our courses isn't
so much, portfolios or not, but which kind of portfolio, which kind of compo-
sition, and why? That's my third claim.

   There are several ways to think about the resemblances between and differ-
ences characterizing print portfolios and digital portfolios; as a focus, I want to
consider briefly the arrangement permitted within each and as context for that,
the rhetoric of ancient Greece. As we know, when preparing a speech, ancient
rhetors were advised to think in terms of the five canons of rhetoric: inven-
tion, arrangement, style, memory, and delivery. When speech was the primary
text for rhetoric, delivery received the attention we might expect: a rhetor's
intonation, physical gestures, and general demeanor were understood to influ-
ence both construction and reception of text. When medium became pluralized
to the media of speech and writing, however, delivery changed, maintaining
viability in oral contexts, largely disappearing from those of print. For those
interested in writing, delivery became (as did memory) an invisible canon.4 As
Richard Lanham points out, however, with the addition of the digital to the set
of media, delivery takes on a critical role.5 More specifically, it brings invention
and arrangement into a new relationship with each other: what you arrange--

                                                                                                 23
Yancey

which becomes a function of the medium you choose--is who you invent. And:
who you invent is who you represent. Or:

         If arrangement constrains and shapes what we invent, and
         if what we invent leads to what it is that we represent, then
         what arrangements do we require, request, or recommend?

         And how do we invite and review these arrangements?

   Within this rhetorical context, I want to begin (again) by thinking about
how we arrange materials in print portfolios. Typically, we have three options:
(1) in a genre-based way, according to the documents of the course (essay one,
argument two, and so forth); (2) in an outcomes-based way, according to what
a student knows and can do (showing evidence of conceptual understanding
and applications of concepts); and (3) in an intellectual framework, according
to major questions or key terms of the course (using work samples to answer
questions like "what is rhetoric?"). A fourth option is possible, as well: some
hybrid combination of the earlier possibilities. Most often, students are asked
to use a document- or genre-based approach that mirrors the sequence of as-
signments; the tendency is for students in their portfolio arrangement to repli-
cate the (linear) curriculum and their always-forward processes of development
almost hand-in-hand. In addition, the notebook often encasing the portfolio
underscores this sense of development in its linear representation of materials.
And while it is possible to read such a portfolio hypertextually (Allen, Frick,
Sommers, & Yancey, 1997), the medium makes such a hypertextual reading
process more difficult, not less, and as important, the design of the notebook
itself acts to frame what appears as a linear development of the student. (And
it's worth noting that this forward-progress development is precisely what we
teachers hope for, so it too matches neatly with our desires.)

   Likewise, digital portfolios can take one of three principal arrangements,
and in this case, since the three offer very different rhetorical opportunities,
it's worth pausing a moment to define them. The first, what we might call an
online assessment system, is a portfolio-qua-collection housed in a digital envi-
ronment where students store preselected pieces of work in a commercially or
institutionally designed template. Florida State University's Career Center, for
instance, offers such a portfolio template that is keyed to nine attributes, such as
creativity and communication, organized into a matrix allowing students both
to analyze their development as they progress through school and to represent
their accomplishments. Each portfolio in the Florida State career model opens
with the same interface and offers basically the same navigational path.

24
                                              Postmodernism, Palimpsest, and Portfolios

More ambitious (and disconcerting) in its own way is the OpenSource Uni-

versity of Minnesota "cradle-to-grave" model of electronic portfolio, created for

employees and students at all UM campuses. This portfolio model offers the

user the ability to "store and selectively share information in that portfolio with

anyone, anywhere, at any time," a feature the designers call a "virtual identity"

(Truer & Jensen, 2003, p. 34). To add "self-reported information" into the

portfolio, much as in the Florida State model, the "UM Electronic Portfolio

owner fills out text fields in a template that corresponds to a portfolio element"

(Truer & Jensen, 2003, p. 35). There are (as of this printing) sixty-five such ele-

ments, each one of which (name of institution attended, degrees earned, and

so on) permits the user to attach a file or link to a URL. Portfolio owners can

also "create new elements to meet specific needs" (Truer & Jensen, 2003, p.

35). As the careful reader will note, however, not all information in this port-

folio model is "self-reported." The UM "administrative system," through the

software PeopleSoft, automatically displays system information in each owner's

portfolio. This includes the user's name, university ID photo, contact informa-

tion, demographic information, and education records. An essential part of the

UM Electronic Portfolio design is that system information is displayed dynami-

cally. This means, first, that an owner can-

not modify system-entered information,

and, second, the portfolio always displays Whatever else learning may be,

the most up-to-date information (Truer & it is clearly a disposition to form

Jensen, 2003, p. 36).                         structures.

   The opportunities for assessment in        --Berthoff qtd. in Tinberg, 2002, p. 5
such a model are numerous, including ad-

visors using it to help students in "place-

ment and course selection"; instructors assessing "learning achievement"; and

even the parents of students, with permission, checking to see how their stu-

dent-children are progressing. (Interestingly, the parents are apparently check-

ing their children's performance in the single course requirement represented in

the prototypic model: composition.) The online assessment electronic portfo-

lio, then, is portfolio-like in its capacity to collect exhibits and in its inclusion

of opportunities for reflection. An online assessment system, however, is very

un-portfolio-like, as we in composition studies have understood portfolios, in

several ways, most notably in that each portfolio has two composers, (1) a stu-

dent and (2) the system, with the system's override capability exerting greater

authority.

A second model of digital portfolio, what we might call "print uploaded," is

a version of portfolio that is identical in form to the print but that is distributed

electronically. In this model, the reviewer typically links from an item on the

                                                                              25
Yancey

opening page to a second item--and back,

much as one does in the online version [In designing my digital portfolio]

of university phone books. This model is       I do realize that it seems strange
particularly useful for students morph-        for me to include a section entitled
ing into the digital from the print. Lizette   "Visual Communication" ....
Piccello, a teacher at Virginia Beach City     I decided ... for the following
Schools, uses this approach to help stu-       reasons. First, I eventually want
dents move from one medium (print) to          to add more work from my Visual
the next (digital), advising students, first,  Communication course to the
to create a Table of Contents, and, second,    website. Much of the work I'd like
                                               to include is being finished up

to link each entry in the table to the ap- toward the end of the semester.

propriate exhibit--and back (L. Piccello, I hope to eventually include it in

personal communication, July 22, 2003).        the site. Second, I avoided the title
While such a model doesn't fully exploit       of "Rhetoric" and used "Other"
what digital environments make possible        instead because I would like to
(the inclusion of images and pictures,         leave space in that section available
links to other sites, and audio, color and     to include coursework I complete
photographs), such a portfolio is very like    down the road in other classes.

the print model in its collection, selection,  --Cate Heatly

and reflection and, at the same time, like

the digital in its use of technology to cre-

ate connections. To use another metaphor, it's a bit like the interlanguage that

a speaker of a new language creates between the home language (print) and the

target language (digital), including elements of each in a hybrid design.

    A third digital portfolio, the one I'll focus on here, is what we might call

"Web sensible," one that through text boxes, hyperlinking, visuals, audio texts,

and design elements not only inhabits the digital space and is distributed elec-

tronically but also exploits the medium. In other words, this model may include

print texts, but it will include as well images and visuals, internal links from one

text to another, external links that provide multiple contexts, and commentary

and connections to the world outside the immediate portfolio. For example, in

                                      a portfolio composed inside a course, a stu-

In some exhibits, you see the         dent might include links to process pieces as
progression of a painting: a sketch,  well as to completed drafts; links to a stream-
a study, another study, then a        ing video that welcomes the portfolio reader
canvas partially painted ... re/      and narrates the opening; links to the class
iterations until what appears as the  blog as well as to a group PowerPoint presen-
culminating version.                  tation. An audio file may narrate the Power-
                                      Point presentation, and the PowerPoint may

26
                                                 Postmodernism, Palimpsest, and Portfolios

also link to several Web pages that provide context for the concepts presented

in the PowerPoint as well as links to an explanation of the kinds of links that

are being used. The portfolio may also link to texts composed in other classes,

some of which have separate reflections. The medium, then, is media; the links

numerous and varied, connecting to multiple kinds of exhibits. Typically, as I

have argued elsewhere (Yancey, 2004), the "Web-sensible" model offers at least

two navigational paths, and it's not uncommon for a portfolio composer to sug-

gest explicitly to readers ways to chart those paths. In this sense, the portfolio

composer sounds much like the "Dear Reader" narrator of the Victorian, novel,

each instructing the reader both how to read and how to understand the new

genre:

Once you do get into this site, here are a few tips to help you with browsing.

This site is divided into three parts: computers I work with, the hobbies I enjoy

... and my reputation. There are three ways to navigate this site. This homepage

has all the links, with a short description of each neatly planned out. If you get

lost, or want to jump to something, use the

side frames. But first you should go to the      Only final because nothing came
reflective essay. It describes all the works in  afterward.
this portfolio and has links to them inside

of it. If you want to see something else,        --Myka Vielstimmig

simply come back to the homepage.

                                   * * *

        The most important part of this website is for you to leave it.
        You don't have to leave now, but there are some really cool
        sites out there.

                                                 --Matthew Yancey

   The Web-sensible digital portfolio, then, offers a new kind of space for stu-
dent work.

   All of which allows me to suggest that these portfolios--the familiar model
of print and the Web-sensible digital--are different in kind rather than degree
and that their differences speak to the possibilities for student invention and
representation.

   As Jay Bolter and Richard Grusin explain in Remediation, and as Marshall
McLuhan suggested before that, nearly every medium is re/mediated on an-
other medium. In other words, consciously or otherwise, we create the new in

                                                                                  27
Yancey

the context of the old and based on the

model of the old. Television is commonly Because the web portfolio is

understood to be remediated on film, for    a newer medium, criteria for
example, and the Web is commonly un-        evaluating them will emerge as the
derstood to be remediated on magazines.     medium itself matures. Generally,
Remediation can be back-ended as well, as   excellent web portfolios will be
we see in the most recent CNN interface     characterized by the extent of the
on TV, which is quite explicitly remediat-  web, the creativity of the links, the
ed on the Web. In early September 2003,     meaningful coherence of the whole,
The Miami Herald announced its remedi-      the quality of the individual sites,
                                            the clarity of the overall design

ated iteration, also intentionally based on (its logic), the degree to which

the Web (S. Apostle, e-mail, September the rationale for particular links is

15, 2003). As Bolter and Grusin observe,    explicit and sensible, the critical
"Whenever one medium seems to have          judgment apparent in the selection
convinced viewers of its immediacy, other   of external sites, and the overall
media try to appropriate that convention"   aesthetic quality of the portfolio.
(Bolter & Grusin, 2000, p. 9). The new,     http//www.stolaf.edu/depts.cis

then, repeats what came before, while at

the same time remaking that which it models.6

    Portfolios are exercises in remediation. Like new media themselves, portfo-

lios "emerge from within cultural contexts, and they re-fashion other media,

which are embedded in the same or similar contexts" (Bolter & Grusin, p. 19).

From this perspective, a print portfolio seems remediated on a book. Typically,

it opens with a letter or table of contents, then proceeds in a linear fashion

from beginning to end. It privileges a single story, typically an argument, or a

narrative that argues; it highlights the story of development told by the writer;

it culminates in a narrative of accomplishment. Like chapters in a book, the

entries in the portfolio testify to this story line. Although the reader may move

through the portfolio hypertextually, the linear arrangement of the book argues

for a beginning-to-end reading. The reader of the portfolio is, more often than

not, singular: the teacher. The portfolio is typically read in isolation, silently.7

The portfolio, in other words, is public in the small sense: within the classroom.

Because of the print medium, which outside of a school culture culminates in

a publication that is only revised if the number of copies sold is sufficient, the

argument is frozen in a particular spot of time: a print portfolio is, typically,

published only once. And once published, the story opens, progresses, and most

importantly, concludes. In sum, the arrangement of the portfolio, modeled on

a book, provides for the invention of a particular kind of student: one who can

state a claim, synthesize material, lead a reader through a tale of progress and

achievement, and conclude.

28
                                                              Postmodernism, Palimpsest, and Portfolios

   Still, a print portfolio is a re-mediation: as such, it offers more and other
than a book. A book itself, for instance, is the product of many processes, most
of which are invisible: what we tend to see in the finished product is the trace of
the processes that produced it. In contrast, a print portfolio, particularly a class-
room print portfolio, can intend to show process, proposes to show the pulleys
and galleys that went into the final publication as well as the final publication
itself. Much like Coosje Van Bruggen's Frank O. Gehry's Guggenheim Museum
Bilbao, which records in reiterative detail the museum's "conception through
design and construction" (1997), a print portfolio often shows us the how of
development as well as the achievements of it. In the terms of literary theorist
Davidson, what a print portfolio offers, in this way of process and product, is a
palimtext, the still-visible record of its responses to earlier writings (1992, p. 78).

   As students compose the print portfolio, showing both the making and the
made, they engage in activities that the authors of The Myth of the Paperless Of-
fice identify as knowledge making. The product of research into the activities
of "knowledge workers," The Myth of the Paperless Office outlines the myriad
processes of gathering, storing, and sorting of documents that writers use to
"construct and organize thoughts" (Sellen & Harper, 2001, p. 61), processes
that, the authors claim, rely quite explicitly on the presences and arrangement
of print documents. Writers, for example, keep information available as "con-
textual cues to remind them of where they were in the space of ideas" (Sellen &
Harper, 2001, p. 61, emphasis added). The "laying out of the paper reports,"
and the "time bringing together and organizing reports for themselves or other
people" are two critical activities for making knowledge. Another is the follow-
ing: "... act of flicking through these documents, bringing to mind what was
important to them and why they were important. The main implication of
all this is that paper is important because it makes information accessible and
tangible and gives it a persistent presence." (Sellen & Harper, 2001, p. 63)The
collection of the documents and the arrangement of them, as with portfolios,
permit the creation of knowledge needed in an information age. And the pat-
tern, Abigail Sellen and Richard Harper claim, is consistent across a diversity
of workplaces:

         Since the time of our study, we have noticed that when we
         look at most workplaces, it is easy to see who is engaged in
         intensive knowledge work: it is the person whose desk is
         strewn with paper. Find a desk littered with stacks of reports,
         written notes, and every inch of space used up, and you
         will find someone creating a document, planning work, or
         doing some other sort of deeply reflective activity. (Sellen &

                                                                                                 29
Yancey

         Harper, 2001, p. 72)

   Portfolios, of course, are exercises in deeply reflective activity. More generally,
print portfolios, by virtue of the medium, ask students to engage in processes
leading to knowledge and processes associated with reflective thinking.

   Not least, the coherence achieved in the print portfolio is a verbal coherence,
as is the means of representation. Put in terms of Howard Gardner's multiple
intelligences, print portfolios are more singular than plural (1993).8 Digital
portfolios, like their print cousins, are exercises in re-mediation; they can re-
mediate in one of two ways. As we saw earlier, some electronic portfolios, even
though they are created in a digital environment, remediate a print model. This
portfolio is the academic analogue to the print catalogue, a genre that is written
for the page, not the screen, and whose digitality serves two purposes: easier
storage, quicker dissemination. As noted elsewhere, it is one version of print
uploaded (Wickliffe & Yancey, 2001). Its arrangement is identical to that of a
print model: regardless of the fact that it is housed in the digital environment,
it does not participate in the environment, and the student resembles her print
cousin. She is the invention of print.

   But other digital portfolios enact another re-mediation, this one less print
portfolio than digital gallery. Like a gallery, a digital portfolio has a central entry
point, which for portfolios is typically called a portal. Like a gallery, the digital
portfolio includes verbal text and image and audio text, using the one modality
to explain and juxtapose the others. Like a gallery, the digital portfolio makes
multiple contexts a part of the display, which in the case of portfolios means
linking internally to the student's own work, linking externally to multiple
worlds outside the student's own purview to show multiple and complex rela-
tionships. The readership for a digital portfolio is, likewise, multiple, as are the
ways of processing the portfolio. Often, there is an implied linear path, but that
may be interrupted by peripheral links that themselves take one to the nooks
and crannies of the digital portfolio gallery. In the terms of linguistics, digital
portfolios can right branch, and they right branch again; they left branch, and
they left branch again. Cumulatively and literally, the right and left branches
produce a textured literacy that is different in kind than the thesis-and-sup-
port literacy of the print model. Depth of thought is created and demonstrated
through multiple contexts: evoked verbally, evoked visually, evoked through
internal links, evoked through external links. The arrangement of this portfolio,
modeled on the gallery, thus provides for the invention of a different particu-
lar kind of student: one who can make multiple connections and who creates
depth through multiplicity and elaboration, who can work in visual and verbal
and aural modalities, who can offer a reader multiple narratives extending ever

30
                                                              Postmodernism, Palimpsest, and Portfolios

outward. It is the electronic text described by Richard Lanham in The Electronic
Word: "No `final cut' means no conventional endings, or beginnings or middles
either. Interactive literary texts will ... require some basic non-Aristotelian ad-
justments" (Lanham, 1993, p. 7).

   If, then, the print portfolio is Aristotelian, the digital is post-Aristotelian.
The digital portfolio seems gallery-like both within a single course, as student
portfolios span temporal, spatial, and intellectual contexts, and beyond the
single course, as students develop portfolios that span courses, that chart devel-
opment over longer time, that from semester to semester provide a continuing
place for students to compose. Indeed, the digital portfolio, located in multiple
and multiple kinds of relationships, is a digital composition: a single, unified
text through which various fragments rational and intuitive are related to each
other, directly, associatively. Moreover, as students move from one curricular
experience to another--from first-year composition to service learning assign-
ment to the introduction to the major to the internship to the junior seminar
to the capstone--they find in the portfolio a continuing site where experiences
can be planned, articulated, interrogated, reflected upon, made sense of. Much
as we see in a gallery, in the digital portfolio students continue a re/iteration
project. Students create multiple iterations of the portfolio, returning to the
original, carrying forward some prose and reworking it, creating new images,
raising new questions. Located both within the curriculum writ large and yet
outside and between it--a key distinction I'll return to--the digital portfolio is
the gallery canvas on which the student composes identity between, as it were,
electronic drafts. And much as in a gallery, the various drafts are explained,
interpreted, represented chronologically and juxtapositionally more than in a
master narrative of progress uninterrupted; that is, a student may well plot a
linear narrative of progress within this medium, but the medium itself invites
other narratives, other arrangements, and thus other selves.

   Like a print portfolio, the digital includes traces of earlier thinking: palim-
text and palimpsest both. The palimpsest of multiple representations occurs
through linking, which itself functions to provide multiple layers. Digital port-
folios, because they are "spatial," inhabit three dimensions. They are quite liter-
ally and materially another space of ideas. Like maps, each link takes the viewer
to something not quite captured-and thus the value of multiple layering.

         Because you can link externally as well as internally and
         because those links are material,
         you have more contexts you can link to,
         more strata you can layer,
         more you to invent,

                                                                                                 31
Yancey

         more invention to represent.

   Digital portfolios, then, precisely because they are digital, privilege perspec-
tive and multiplicity and a representation of palimpsest. Or: that is the hope.

   Which is not always realized, of course. As in the case of print, students
may weave a narrative that is not supported by the "textual evidence." Stu-
dents may not write well for either page or screen, and digital tends to require
both. Students may produce links that literally don't link, or that don't create
a substantial or significant relationship between the linked items. (And in fact,
the linking may be the point on which the digital hinges: who decides if a link
"works"? Or why?) The task of design may be overwhelming.

   More generally, however, what this list of concerns demonstrates is that the
medium is suggestive rather than deterministic. The virtues of the digital out-
lined here are more potential than realized, but this articulation demonstrates
potential for a new identity, one not fully determined by medium, but possible
within and through it.

   Finally, I want to borrow from humanist geography to think in another way
about digital portfolios. The concept of weaving is instructive here. The word
itself derives from the Latin texere, meaning "to weave," which came to mean
the thing woven (textile) and the feel of the weave (texture). But it also refers
to a "weave" of an organized arrangement of words or other intangible things
(context). A textile is created by bringing together many threads and, as such,
represents ordered complexity. Language, too, is ordered complexity, and when
we understand a word by its context we are discerning a pattern and filling in
a gap, sewing together what is torn, extracting meaning not only from what is
said but from the relationships this act of saying sets up with other statements,
conditions, events, and situations (Adams, Hoelscher, & Till, 2001, p. viii).

   Knowledge, in this metaphor, is created through relationships, which pro-
vide the center of the digital portfolio, the pattern of the intellectual weave.
We see such complexity valued in models like that at St. Olaf College, where
students create digital portfolios to represent their individual majors. It's knowl-
edge as a function of the weaving of ordered complexity.

   Multiple modes of coherence are possible: verbal, contextual, visual. Like
the print portfolio, the digital is produced through the processes outlined in
Myths of the Paperless Office, but those processes may be managed quite differ-
ently: how so (as story boarding, or as organic development of ideas) is an open
question. They include design, of course: who will teach design and how, and
how might this change what we do in the teaching of writing? Not least, what is
the relationship of (this kind of ) digital composition to the more familiar print
composition that has defined the field for the last fifty years?

32
                                                              Postmodernism, Palimpsest, and Portfolios

   And from yet another vantage point, there are curricular issues associated
with the digital that haven't surfaced with print portfolios or other forms of pro-
gressive pedagogy. As Lanham points out in The Electronic Word, the electronic
medium provides a new place for students to work:

         Electronic text creates not only a new writing space but a
         new educational space as well. Not only the humanities
         curriculum, but school and university structures,
         administrative and physical, are affected at every point, as
         of course is the whole cultural repository and information
         system we call a library. (Lanham, 1993, p. xii)

   Perhaps so, but if so, this new medium of portfolio may need to find a
new curricular place within--but probably not inside of--the curriculum. The
distinction is critical. Inside the curriculum is the place where students stay
inside. In the aggregate, inside the curriculum is inside each of the disparate
courses that compose a student's course of study. Inside the curriculum is the
minimal portfolio submission. Because of institution's exigency, because of an
exit requirement, let's say, or a rising junior hurdle, students put a portfolio
together, submit it, and hope it suffices. Digitally, this portfolio takes the form
of a "dynamically delivered, web-interfaced" system; like a standardized test, it
asks that students fill up the predigested slots and comment reflectively on how
satisfying it felt. The new place cited by Lanham is the digital portfolio created
within and beyond the curriculum, and this place is likewise a new curricular
place. If the curriculum is one text and the extracurriculum another, this port-
folio is intertextually curricular, itself an exercise in palimpsest. It asks students
to write for the screen as well as for the page; to create relationships between and
among linked material, as between and among experiences; to update it as a
habit of mind; and to represent learning in part by exploring the connections
the digital environment invites.

   Or: so digital portfolios are developing at several places across the country.
As they do, it behooves us to be intentional, to understand that these portfolios,
like their print cousins, bring with them opportunities and challenges.

   Among them:
   Where will students do this work--and why? Will they, like students at
LaGuardia Community College, complete portfolio assignments in several
"portfolio courses" as part of their graduation requirements? Will students pe-
riodically work on their digital portfolios as part of the advising process, as at
Alverno College? Will students complete portfolios as a capstone experience in
a self-designed major, as at St. Olaf? Will students do all of the above?

                                                                                                 33
Yancey

   As program portfolios are developed, will they be "thematized" as artifacts of
local culture? The LaGuardia model, for instance, invites students to represent
both their home culture as well as their school culture, which makes particular
sense given that a majority of students (and of faculty as well) are immigrants;
they speak in two cultures already; the portfolio model welcomes that. The
Clemson general education model may well include the theme of the "higher
seminary of learning," given that this is part of its mission, and other initiatives
(like an orientation reading program) are being built around that idea, too.

   Will students work on their portfolios in some new physical space, a studio
of some kind, as at Clemson University?9

   What effects will these portfolios exert? Embedded in an interdisciplinary
yearlong first-year seminar at Portland State, digital portfolios are cited as one
reason the retention rate, from first year to second, has more than doubled in
the last four years, from 30+% to 67%: is the power of connecting, within the
intimate context of a yearlong themed seminar, this powerful?10

   What are the exhibits that will most help students? Are they the same as
we see in print? Different? What is the role that the concept and processes of
composition will play in these portfolios, especially if we define the digital port-
folio not as a templated drag-and-drop online assessment, but as a new kind of
composition?

   What is the relationship between intellectual connections and digital linking?
   Does the kind of linking matter? There are many ways to categorize links,
from the simple dichotomy of internal and external to the kinds of classification
offered by Scott DeWitt and Kip Strasma and by Emily Golson. Does one kind
of link lead to greater learning? Does one set of links, either of one special type
or of a certain mix, characterize more sophisticated learning?
   What will students tell us about the learning in digital portfolios?11
   What will teachers need to learn in order to teach the digital portfolio? How
can this learning be supported?
   If digital portfolios call for a new definition of composition, how will that
affect graduate programs? How will that affect the labor of composition, both
in terms of our "work" and in terms of the qualifications for those who teach
composition?
   How will we read digital portfolios? As we navigate these texts, at what
point is the arrangement we-as-readers plot sufficiently different one person to
the next that we are creating different texts? When (if ever)/ Is such difference
a problem?12
   What are the values associated with digital portfolios? Will the values we as-
sociate with print portfolio suffice, will we need new criteria, or will the criteria
themselves be remediated?

34
                                                              Postmodernism, Palimpsest, and Portfolios

   How/Will the digital portfolio change teaching, learning, and the academy
itself? Will we continue to move to a visual rhetoric only, or will we, in main-
stream composition classes, begin to incorporate media, not for the sake of
teaching writing but for the sake of teaching media? As important, what role, if
any, will we teachers of composition play?

   The answer to the previous question depends in part on the answer to this:
who is the digital composer, and where inside/outside the curriculum does she
or he learn this composing?

   Digital portfolios operate on the "felt edge" (R. Bass, personal communica-
tion, June 7, 1997) between technology and portfolio, in a space that could be
productive, that, alternatively, could be Foucaultian, given the impulse of the
portfolio to collect, the impulse of technology to collect and systematize. How
do we navigate this felt edge without harming others, without getting hurt
ourselves?

         When the blackbird flew out of sight
         It marked the edge
         Of one of many circles

   Wallace Stevens' poem "Thirteen Ways of Looking at a Blackbird," a highly
associative poem, speaks to what and how we know. The blackbird's mark[ing]
the edge/ Of one of many circles suggests a plurality of possibility. "Each sense of
the blackbird defines an intelligible circle, the `meaning' of which exists only
until the blackbird crosses its horizon" (Leggett, 2000). In other words, the exis-
tence of the world isn't in question, only an existence outside the perspective of
the perceiver. Digital portfolios seek to represent exactly this-the perspective of
the perceiver-over time, in space, aesthetically, intuitively, intellectually. These
representations are themselves practices, which, as Todd May reminds us, are
constitutive in ways we don't always appreciate. Much like Donald Schon and
Lee Schulman, May suggests that what we know and what we hold dear are cre-
ated through practice. He also understands practice as social and thus ethical.
Like the rhetoricians of ancient Greece, May looks to language--to that or-
dered complexity--for the means of helping people move beyond information
to understanding, possibly to wisdom. Through practice, we compose identity,
task by rhetorical task, moment by reflective moment.

   Identity is itself a composition. The relationship between identity and the
digital portfolio is reciprocal, hence the importance of both print and digital.
Enabling different arrangements, they permit different inventions, invite differ-
ent representations. We understand fairly well the value of the one, print, but
we are only beginning to chart the potential of the digital. For those of us who

                                                                                                 35
Yancey

teach and learn composition, charting this potential may define us even more
than it will define our students, and for all of us, we should, in Cindy Selfe's
terms, pay attention.

   Our future will be shaped as we do.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

   I am indebted to several colleagues: Barbara Cambridge and Pat Hutchings
for inviting me to the MLA session where I gave an early version of this paper;
David Booth of St. Olaf College for inviting another version, and whose work
inspires much of my own thinking; Todd Taylor who provided encouragement,
suggestions, and (best of all) questions; Donna Winchell and Shane Peagler for
their work with me on the Clemson project; reviewers Bill Condon and Gill
Creel for their helpful readings and recommendations; and Marilyn Cooper for
her thorough reading and able advice.

NOTES

1. Of course, as I suggest later in the chapter, a digital portfolio doesn't guarantee that
this won't happen, either.

2. It's interesting that the syntax cues us as to the issue: is a fuller representation
achieved, or do we achieve a fuller representation?

3. As the example of the x-rays for diagnosis makes clear, the issue of how we represent
is not merely a theoretical point.

4. For a discussion of this point regarding delivery, see Martin Jacobi's "Delivery: A
Definition and History," in Kathleen Blake Yancey (Ed.) (2006), Delivering College
Composition, Heinemann.

5. My argument here is similar to Richard Lanham's in that I see the potential of digi-
tal technology to radically alter the delivery of education as well as its substance. As I
explain later, the digital portfolio is one specific site for such education.

6. The idea that we refashion what came before is not, of course, limited to technology:
see, for example, Harold Bloom's The Anxiety of Influence (1985), which traces the influ-
ence of earlier canonical poets on later ones, as well as the recent historical scholarship
on Adams and Jefferson. Interestingly, as I suggest regarding technology, this influence
often back-ends as well, so that it's more in the nature of a dialogue than patriarchal
influence. See, for example, the recent MOMA exhibit on Picasso and Matisse, which
argues a kind of call-and-response relationship between the two artists, much as was the
case with Adams and Jefferson.

36
                                                              Postmodernism, Palimpsest, and Portfolios

7. Often portfolios are read communally, for programmatic purposes, in the case of
high-stakes assessment, and occasionally for other purposes, i.e., principally for formal
and summative assessment. This is different than having a portfolio on the Web that
invites responses outside of the sphere of the classroom and the teacher and that is in-
tended to speak to a myriad of readers, as Joe Harris suggested in his interview for "New
Media Live" (Taylor & Halbritter, 2003).

8. As Bill Condon notes, the verbal coherence, (merely) a single intelligence in How-
ard Gardner's term, is an intelligence worth exercising.

9. Clemson's Class of 1941 Studio for Student Communication (http://www.clemson.
edu/1941studio) provides a single curricular and physical space for work in commu-
nication across the curriculum, including continuing and cumulative portfolio work.

10. T. Rhodes, personal communication, June 2003.

11. At least two studies across the country have explored student reaction to the cre-
ation of digital portfolios, one produced by the University of Washington, which
tracked what students learned in freshman interest groups in fall 2002; and another
produced by Clemson University in 2002, which interviewed students about what they
had learned across the curriculum and what they saw as the value of a digital portfolio.

12. As Bill Condon suggested when he reviewed this manuscript in July 2003, all read-
ings are different: "I'd raise the specter of Fish and ask when two readers are not expe-
riencing different texts." Point taken, and one I've addressed about print in print (e.g.,
Reflection in the Writing Classroom). At the same time, it seems to me, but certainly
remains to be documented, that readings of print portfolios tend to differ by degree,
while those of the Web-sensible can (and will) differ by kind, given the variety of navi-
gational possibilities they offer. Just as the arrangement possible for a writer provides
for invention of self, so too the arrangement of texts provides for the invention of the
digital composition.

REFERENCES

Adams, P. C., Hoelscher, S., Till, K. (2001). Place in context: Rethinking hu-
   manist geographies. In P. C. Adams, S. Hoelscher, & K. Till (Eds.), Textures
   of place (pp. xiii-xxxiii). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Allen, M., Frick, J., Sommers, J., & Yancey, K. (1997). Outside review of writ-
   ing portfolios: An on-line evaluation. WPA: Writing Program Administration
   (Spring), 64-88.

Barton, B., & Barton, M. (1993). Ideology and the map: Toward a postmodern
   visual design practice." In N. Blyler & C. Thralls (Eds.), Professional Com-
   munication (pp. 49-79). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Belanoff, P., & Dickson, M. (Eds.), (1991). Portfolios: Process and product.
   Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook.

                                                                                                 37
Yancey

Bloom, H. (1985). The Anxiety of influence: A theory of poetry. Oxford: Oxford
   University Press.

Bolter, J. D., & Grusin, R. (2000). Remediation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cambridge, B. (Ed.), (2001). Electronic portfolios: Emerging practices in student,

   faculty, and institutional learning. Washington, DC: American Association of
   Higher Education.
Conference on College Composition and Communication Guidelines for the
   Ethical Treatment of Students and Student Writing in Composition Stud-
   ies. (2000). The National Council of Teachers of English. Retrieved from
   http://www.ncte.org/cccc/resources/positions/ethicalconduct
Davidson, M. (1995). Palimtexts. In M. Perloff (Ed.), Postmodern genres (pp.
   75-95). Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press.
de Certeau, M. (1984/1988). The practice of everyday life. Berkeley: University
   of California Press.
DeWitt, S., & Strasma, K. (Eds.). (1999). Contexts, intertexts, and hypertexts.
   Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press.
Dickens, C. (1950). David Copperfield. New York: Modern Library.
Freed, R. (1993). Postmodern practice: Perspective and prospects." In N. Blyler,
   & C. Thralls (Eds.), Professional Communication (pp. 196-215). Newbury
   Park, CA: Sage.
Gardner, H. (1993). Frames of mind: The theory of multiple intelligences. New
   York: Basic Books.
Geertz, C. (1983). Local knowledge. New York: Basic Books.
Golson, E. (1999). Cognition, meaning, and creativity: On reading student
   hypertexts. In L. DeWitt, M. Farr, & K. Strasma (Eds.), Contexts, Intertexts,
   and Hypertexts (pp. 155-77). New York: Hampton Press.
Jacobi, M. (2006). Delivery: A definition and history. In K. B. Yancey (Ed.),
   Delivering college composition: The fifth canon. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Lanham, R. (1993). The electronic word: Democracy, technology, and the arts.
   Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Leggett, B. J. (2000). On thirteen ways of looking at a blackbird. In C. Nelson
   (Ed.), Modern American Poetry. Retrieved from http://www.english.uiuc.
   edu/maps/poets/s_z/stevens/ blackbird.htm
May, T. (2001). Our practices, our selves. University Park, PA: Penn State Uni-
   versity Press.
McLuhan, M. (1964). Understanding new media. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Schon, D. (1983). The reflective practitioner. New York: Basic Books.
Schulman, L. (1996, January). Course anatomy: The dissection and transfor-
   mation of knowledge." Presented at the AAHE Faculty Roles and Rewards
   Conference in Atlanta, GA.

38
                                                              Postmodernism, Palimpsest, and Portfolios

Selfe, C. (1999).Technology and literacy: A story about the perils of not paying
   attention. CCC 50(3), 411-436.

Sellen, A., & Harper, R. (2001). The myth of the paperless office. Cambridge,
   MA: MIT Press.

Stevens, W. (2003). "Thirteen ways of looking at a blackbird." In I. Lancashire
   (Ed.), Representative Poetry Online. Retrieved from http://eir.library.utoron-
   to.ca/rpo/ display/poem2018.html

Taylor, T., & Halbritter, S. (2003, March). New media live. Paper presented at
   the Annual Convention Conference on College Composition and Commu-
   nication in New York City.

Tinberg, H. (2002). Starting where students are, but knowing (and letting
   them know) where we want to take them. TETYC, 30(1), 5.

Truer, P., & Jensen, J. (2003). Electronic portfolios need standards to thrive?
   EDUCAUSE Quarterly, 26(2), 34-41.

Van Bruggen, C. (1997). Frank O. Gehry Guggenheim Museum Bilbao. New
   York: Guggenheim Museum.

Vielstimmig, M. (1998). Not a cosmic convergence: Rhetorics, poetics, per-
   formance, and the web." Kairos: A Journal of Rhetoric, Technology, and Peda-
   gogy, 3(2). Retrieved from http://english.ttu.edu/kairos/3.2/features/myka/
   cosmic4.htm

Wickliffe, G., & Yancey, K. B. (2001). The perils of creating a class web-site:
   It was the best of times, it was the .... Computers and Composition, 18(3),
   177-186.

Yancey, K. B. (2004). Looking for sources of coherence in a fragmented world:
   Notes toward a new assessment design. Computers and Composition, 21(1),
   89-102.

Yancey, K. B. (1998). Reflection in the writing classroom. Logan, UT: Utah State
   University Press.

Yancey, K. B., & Weiser, I. (1997). Situating portfolios. Logan, UT: Utah State
   University Press.

                                                                                                 39
CHAPTER 2.

THE HYPERMEDIATED
TEACHING PHILOSOPHY
EPORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE
SUPPORT SYSTEM

Rich Rice
Texas Tech University

The teaching philosophy assignment is a staple of professional
development. Oftentimes, however, students new to the genre
imbalance the theoretical and the practical, rendering lessons learned
and what can eventually serve as an effective bridge between school
and workplace, instead, an inauthentic representation of teaching
praxis. Teaching students how to compose balanced teaching philosophy
statements by using hypermediated comments and hyperlinks to
artifacts in support of theory offers opportunities to create more effective
teaching philosophy spaces.

   The teaching philosophy assignment is a staple of professional development.
It is a regular in English Education and Composition Theory courses. It serves
as a reflective space for preservice and practicing teachers alike, exploring theo-
retical underpinnings and making clear ideological knowledge-making. The
teaching philosophy can be used as an ePortfolio's reflective essay for the pur-
pose of working with colleagues, for grant proposals, for job application dos-
siers, and for promotion and tenure, linking artifacts which support extensive
claims. And like a modern palimpsest which is scraped and re-tooled again and
again, the teaching philosophy can take on numerous revisions throughout the
experiential maturation of the reflective practitioner (Zubizarreta, 1997, 2004).
Oftentimes, however, students new to the genre imbalance the theoretical and
the practical, rendering lessons learned and what can eventually serve as an ef-
fective bridge between school and workplace, instead, an inauthentic represen-
tation of teaching praxis.

   Teaching students how to compose balanced teaching philosophy state-
ments by using hypermediated comments and hyperlinks to artifacts in sup-

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0490.2.02                            41
Rice

port of theory, what is often called a practical theory approach to composing,
can offer opportunities for deeper reflection. The approach follows the College
Composition and Communication call for "a changed understanding of the re-
lationship between performance and composition," in particular (Fishman et
al., p. 241). In one article in this CCC issue from 2005, "Performing Writing,
Performing Literacy," in particular, written in part by Andrea Lunsford, specific
performance techniques, such as flashback as it relates to portfolios, are exam-
ined as tools composition can use. In fact, the introductory reflective essay to
a portfolio, as a sort of performance, can serve as an invaluable tool. Writing
is performance, and performance is writing: a situated rhetorical positioning
(see Manis, 2009). We all want students and workplace employees to reflect
over what they're doing in meaningful ways in order to improve individual
performance to impact larger systems productively. This is the purpose of an
ePortfolio, generally, as well. But just as most definitions of ePortfolio include
multimodality, so too can traditional assignments. Consider this definition: an
ePortfolio is "a collection of digitized collection of artifacts including demon-
strations, resources, and accomplishments that represent an individual, group,
an organization, or institution. This collection can be comprised of text-based,
graphic, or multi-media elements archived on a website or any other electronic
media" (Lorenzo & Ittelson, 2005). What if this is the basic definition of a
teaching philosophy statement as well?

   A quick look at the teaching philosophy statement assignment from The
Teaching Center at Washington University in St. Louis demonstrates how such
enhancements improve effectiveness and clarity. This website is clear and well-
considered, and was featured in The Chronicle of Higher Education in 2010. The
teaching philosophy statement is defined as "a one- to two-page document that
provides a clear, concise account of your teaching approach, methods, and ex-
pertise" (Fisher, 2012). Writers are encouraged to identity why, what, and how
one teaches as well as how one measures teaching effectiveness. Accordingly,
the teaching philosophy statement "should include concrete examples of specific
course topics, assignments, assessments, and strategies drawn from courses that
you have taught or are or prepared to teach, or from past mentoring and advis-
ing experiences" (emphasis theirs). But in the same paragraph the assignment
quickly morphs into a teaching portfolio, because demonstrating a range of
teaching expertise and fleshing out the philosophy with supporting documents
such as syllabi, assignments, assessments, and graded papers is simply impos-
sible to do well in a page or two. What is needed are not concrete examples, but
specific yet malleable examples.

   Teaching statements must demonstrate teaching performance, which is
necessarily malleable according to shifting content and audiences, and hyper-

42
                                                                 ePortfolio Performance Support System

textual content is critical in showing flexible performance. These are not the
same documents or assignments, however. The latter is much more dynamic.
Reticence to move toward native hypertextual composing with this assignment,
because one- to two-page statements required in job applications is critical to
the process of selecting viable applicants for interviewing, gives an incomplete
view of the teacher. In fact, the type of information that could be revealed more
accurately from a hypermediated teaching philosophy statement (a teaching
portfolio) could be shared at the point of application instead of interview as an
electronic performance support system quite efficiently (see Rosenbloom, 2008;
see also Wright, 1980, on teaching writing for the digital Generation Me).

   Here are other well-informed discussions about what should go into teach-
ing philosophy statements. Please review them online in their entirety. But
note the complexity of what should go into a brief statement, even when the
genre and medium provides obvious limits. Rachel Narehood Austin (2006)
offers career advice in Science Careers, emphasizing commitment rather than
creativity on teaching philosophy statements. She says they should be tailored
to the institution to which one is applying, identifying specific courses, draw-
ing upon experiences as a student and scholar and human being, all the while
avoiding promising too much. Lee Haugen (1998) in the Center for Excel-
lence in Learning and Teaching at Iowa State University recommends start-
ing with teaching objectives, highlighting how one does what one preaches,
identifying effective teaching practices, and then closing with why teaching is
important. James M. Lang (2010) in The Chronicle of Higher Education asks
us to consider how to write a statement different than everyone else's. Avoid
the generic at all cost. He says relate best practices, make distinctions that
connect to specific sorts of classes one is applying to teach, provide specific
examples, and reference sources to support claims. Teresa Mangum (2009)
in Inside Higher Ed says relate teaching and learning objectives clearly, bal-
ance theory with evidence of practice, use personal examples and anecdotes
which are reflective of relevant theory, and present a sort of "love story of
an intellectual life." Avoid clichés. Oh, and include life experience. Forster
reflective practice through ePortfolios, as T. Sporer and K. Bredl (2011) sug-
gest. Similarly, Gabriela Montell (2003) in The Chronicle of Higher Educa-
tion warns against rehashing one's CV, advises avoiding "empty" statements,
and suggests adopting a tone of humility while emphasizing student-centered
teaching. And Nancy Van Note Chism (2012) through The Ohio State Uni-
versity's University Center for the Advancement of Teaching offers teaching
philosophy statements across the curriculum which value unique and con-
textual approaches. All great advice and helpful stories that adds to portfolio
teaching lore (Carney, 2002). All more possible to do well by demonstrating

                                                                                                 43
Rice

teaching performance through the teaching philosophy statement, which in
result could strengthen systems of hiring.

PERFORMING THROUGH DOCUMENTS

   Research on electronic performance support systems is directly relevant.
For instance, in Electronic Performance Support Systems: How and Why to Re-
make the Workplace Through the Strategic Application of Technology, Gloria J.
Gery (1991) points out that the most common problem in organization re-
design for improvement is a denial or refusal to admit the truth, such as
perceiving what workers simply want to perceive, avoiding problematic cir-
cumstances, explaining data with "yes, but ..." responses, covering up the
unacceptable, and reviewing information superficially (p. 3). Little is lost in
translation when thinking about how this works specifically with teachers. In
philosophy statements, generally, writers will often refuse to admit that they
simply can't reach every student as effectively as they wish. They will imply
that their classroom management and assessment skills work perfectly every
time. They don't highlight problems in their own philosophies which are dif-
ficult to address, and how they've addressed them. They don't mention that
adequate resources are critical to their effective teaching. They can't include all
of the great advice above. And they don't often reference their work and cite
their own action research as practical evidence to support theoretical claims
about their own teaching.

   Productive support systems, however, embrace what Gery calls the "perfor-
mance zone"; this is a kairoic, rhetorical space where an employee's workplace
skills are honed to match varying workplace situations. According to Gery,
"individual employees and entire organizations can systematically work and
achieve in the performance zone" (p. 13). And this is done through retooling
old paradigms, and through re-envisioning how we justify and resist change,
because the goal of any electronic performance support is to enable people to
perform in a system. Teaching philosophy essays are designed to demonstrate
theories of performance, but instead of asking a teacher to simply tell it, those
writing such essays must compose transactionally in the dialogic context of
various teaching situations and capabilities to show it. Otherwise, there can
be relatively little demonstration of the transfer and application of teach-
ing praxis in the intended audience's context. The inexperienced teacher will
try another approach or make specific, yet often implausible, examples when
something doesn't work in order to generate the same outcome. But more
experienced communicators, Gery suggests:

44
                                                                 ePortfolio Performance Support System

         [C]ommunicate dynamically in relation to the situation
         and to the needs and to each other's capabilities. In the
         best situations, this process is fluid, complementary, and
         energizing. Learners maintain or increase their motivation as
         skill, knowledge, and confidence increase. Masters, teachers,
         or coaches increasingly understand what's necessary and what
         works--and they anticipate the needs of the learner and
         avoid unproductive paths. (p. 32)

   Thus, the ideal performance zone or most effective teaching philosophy es-
say is one which demonstrates situated change just-in-time; sound principles
on-demand at any time and in any place. Good teaching, perhaps deceptively
simple, is flexible teaching, and the traditional genre of the teaching philoso-
phy essay as represented by traditional print exposition offers limited opportu-
nity to demonstrate flexibility and affordances of change on-demand. In other
words, text-only teaching philosophy statements, like print-only portfolios, of-
fer relatively little rhetorical and situational maneuvering opportunity, which
is quintessential to good teaching performance. See also Light, Chen, and It-
telson (2012) on building faculty buy-in, training, and support systems (pp.
109-120), and their analysis of Virginia Tech's ePortfolio system, which is also
analyzed by Zaldivar, Summers, and Watson in this collection).

   As technological affordances change what we can do with what we have,
value-added situated teaching philosophy statements with hypermediated
metareflections is a more dynamic composition. Philip Auslander (1990) offers
a useful analogy in Liveness: Performance in a Mediatized Culture, when he dis-
cusses relationships between television, cinema, and the theater: "the television
image was frontal and oriented toward the viewer in much the same way as a
performance on a proscenium stage would be. This was reflected in the actors''
playing [toward the camera]" (p. 21). Traditional essay writing in general, and
the traditional teaching philosophy essay specifically, is akin to early television
or theatrical performances that are performed with a specific audience-seated-
in-the-near-distance in mind. But new technologies, new audiences, and new
teaching situations with new media call for more realistic or "live" or enlivened
performance, simulation which embraces practical theory and "re-directable"
application. Auslander analyzes what liveness means in terms of legal (re)pre-
sentation as an extension of a performer's identity having value (pp. 148-149).
In fact, that new media is what Kember and Zylinski (2012) refer to as life
itself in Life after New Media: Mediation as a Vital Process. When writers share a
teaching philosophy statement, but do not address varied situations to which it
can be applied, which is critical in today's post-process classrooms, or the hid-

                                                                                                 45
Rice

den ideologies from which the teaching approaches are rooted, the performance
is mediated by static text rather than dynamically performed to create realistic
identity and voice. It is not owned, in other words, as an inhabited "thirdspace,"
something Carl Whithaus discusses in this collection of essays. Ultimately, a
teaching philosophy is not intended to be a live performance, although readers
who analyze teaching philosophies do so with the intention of envisioning a
teacher--live--performing in front of students.

   Let's look at this another way. In 2002 Lee-Ann Kastman Breuch published
"Post-Process `Pedagogy': A Philosophical Exercise" in the Journal of Advanced
Composition. She considers Sid Dobrin's, Thomas Kent's, Joseph Petraglia's, and
Irene Ward's theories about post-process, dialogic pedagogy which philosophize
the potential of divergent teaching praxis. Kastman Breuch reasons that, like
realistic performance through teaching philosophy statements, post-process
theory should not remain a theoretical endeavor but a "how-centered" approach
to teaching emphasizing what we do with content:

         It means becoming teachers who are more in tune to the
         pedagogical needs of students, more willing to discuss ideas,
         more willing to listen, more willing to be moved by moments
         of mutual understanding. It means, in sum, to be more
         conscientious in our attempts to meet the needs of students
         in their educational journeys. (p. 122)

   An educational journey involves contextualizing teaching approaches ac-
cording to changing student demographic, according to changing technologi-
cal affordances and experiences, and according to changing programmatic or
systematic influences and requirements in syllabus development and assessment
measurements. The movement from product to process in order to provide
more learning opportunities for unique students was an obvious move in the
history of composition instruction, but oftentimes we create approaches to
assignments and specific genre which, in effect, render processes a product.
Instead, to move from emphasizing what to how, such genre must adopt op-
portunity to massage or contextualize or re-center writing given new audiences
for which we must invoke and perform, in order to recognize value in many
dynamic and revolving processes.

   Kastman Breuch, in fact, cites Ward (1994) and Kent (1999) who describe
a "functional dialogism" writing pedagogy, emphasizing internalized audiences,
and increased dialogues between students/teachers, between students/larger
communities, and between students/subject matter. More dialectical engage-
ment, formally, enables writers to gain insight into multiple perspectives (p.

46
                                                                 ePortfolio Performance Support System

103). And this emphasis of functional infrastructure is critical to Shepherd and
Goggin's (2012) more recent work, calling for us to pay attention to technologi-
cal as well as social infrastructures. What if scoring guides for assessing teaching
philosophy statements helped identify the value of increased dialectical perfor-
mance? In "Employee Performance Management: Policies and Practices in Mul-
tinational Enterprises," Dennis Briscoe and Lisbeth Claus (2008) define perfor-
mance management this way: "[T]he system through which organizations set
work goals, determine performance standards, assign and evaluate work, provide
performance feedback, determine training and development needs, and distrib-
ute rewards" (p. 15). They go on to investigate performance management in
global and organizational contexts, but applying their definition in the context
of hypermediated teaching philosophy essays demonstrates functional dialogism
and Bartholomae's (1988) concept of inventing the university as well. Light,
Chen, and Ittelson (2012) highlight ePortfolios as global bridge tools, as do
many theorists, pointing out that "today, most students can expect to explore
cultures and have life experiences, and world views that are different from other
people they meet, learn and work with. Valuing the `other,' therefore, is a central
contemporary competency. ePortfolios can provide a way for students to docu-
ment their experiences with other cultures whether this is through experiential
learning in their own community, or through study abroad experiences" (p. 59).

   For instance, traditional text-only based teaching philosophy essays don't
match the goals and objectives of the writer with work goals of institutions be-
cause such complex and specific goals are difficult to squeeze into a short philos-
ophy statement. Yet, any rhetorically effective document works to match goals.
A hypermediated teaching philosophy can link to or metareflect over such goals
of a variety of types of institutions to demonstrate realistic application. The tra-
ditional genre can theorize about how performance standards can be met in the
future, whereas much like an ePortfolio, hypermediated philosophies can link
to teaching videos and documentation outlining ways in which performance
standards have actually been met. Further, as a system, a hypermediated teach-
ing philosophy can demonstrate process or how work has been assigned and
revised and resubmitted based on evaluative feedback on materials produced
as well as teaching performed, which enables readers to see what training the
writer has effectively received as well as may still need. And beyond the scope of
a traditional teaching philosophy are artifacts deserving of rewards which dem-
onstrate effective praxis. An electronic portfolio performance system, then, and
a hypermediated teaching philosophy as a reflective essay beginning, outlining,
and defining a portfolio, can be considered part of such a performance manage-
ment composition, enhancing an individual's performance with the ultimate
purpose of improving an organization's performance.

                                                                                                 47
Rice

NETWORKED WRITING SYSTEMS

   More recently, in PostComposition, Sid Dobrin (2011) provides an over-
view of what he calls the (e)state of composition/theory. He traces the social-
construction of Stephen North's knowledge-making principles, through David
Smit's The End of Composition Studies, which emphasizes the spreading and in-
tegration of writing instruction with disciplines outside English Studies. Smit's
(2004) work identifies interdisciplinary venues as the true purpose and future
direction of writing instruction, that "research and scholarship in composition
studies have reached a certain limit in their ability to formulate fundamental
paradigms, models, and theories about the nature of writing" (p. 9), suggest-
ing that the best writing is therefore always already bridging into disciplines
and situations beyond the composition classroom (see also Batson, 2011 in the
International Journal of ePortfolio). In addition to questioning the (e)state space
that composition studies occupies, Dobrin points out we must teach students
how to occupy space authentically: "Writing requires space. Writing requires
the material space onto/into which writing is inscribed, and it requires cultural,
historical, political space to occupy. In both of these instance, writing sets up
occupancy within or saturates a particular space" (p. 56). Without space con-
tent can't move; it can't find power, it can't occupy. And as Dobrin continues,
"content is limited by capacity. Content limits space, limits possibility. Content
is subject matter, the matter of the subject, denoting both power of the subject
over the matter/the content and the makeup of the subject" (p. 57). What is
required is beyond socially-constructed transactional rhetorical spaces; writing
with voice, today, according to Dobrin, must make use of the "hyper-circulato-
ry, networked condition of writing" (p. 57). These are the minds of the future
(Gardner, 2007). See also Ira Shor's (1996) discussion of negotiating authority
in critical pedagogy.

   The hypermediated teaching philosophy is a genre exemplifying this new
type of system of writing performance within disciplines operation. Lee Rainie
and Barry Wellman (2012) call this a networked condition or process of net-
worked individualism as well in Networked: The New Social Operating System.
They raise the idea, following Sherrie Turkle, just like the medium and the
message is the message, that the virtual and the real are the real. Turkle's (2012)
latest book, in fact, is called Alone Together: Why We Expect More from Technology
and Less from Each Other. These writing lives of students exist only in as much
as they are both real and imagined, or in-text and hyper-connected to future
application or situation. According to Rainie and Wellman, "In-person encoun-
ters" are not the only "meaningful form of social connection"; emails, texts,
Facebook® posts, tweets, and more are just as significant and natural (p. 119).

48
                                                                 ePortfolio Performance Support System

The multilayered processes of layered and interwoven media forms and narra-
tives must be demediated in a sort of hypermediated pedagogy in order to make
sense as Kember and Zylinska (2012) write in their chapter "Face-to-Facebook,
or the Ethics of Mediation: From Media Ethics to an Ethics of Mediation" (pp.
153-172). Similarly, composing a teaching philosophy statement which is not
dialogically performing connections to artifacts intended to be used in the audi-
ence's own environments, renders teaching philosophy statements incomplete.
Byron Hawk (2011) underlines this point in "Reassembling Postprocess: To-
ward a Posthuman Theory of Public Rhetoric," which is a chapter in a collection
by Dobrin, Jenny Rice, and Michael Vastola called Beyond Postprocess. Hawk
begins with Kent's post-process assumptions that writing is public, interpre-
tive, and situated but connects them to networked identity and performance
to argue that "the subject of writing is the network that inscribes the subject as
the subject scribes the network" (p. 75). Accordingly, to create documents with
identity is to define and enliven the public sphere as a networked, integrated
loop. This dialogic connection between an individual's view of teaching and
how it can connect and adapt within an organization is also referred to as a
romantic social epistemic bringing together the individual and the socially-con-
structed (Gradin), "newly mediated" convergences (Atwan, 2002), networked
individualism (Rainie & Wellman, 2012), "smart" timeliness and the ability
to move quickly in dynamic and interconnected ways (Rheingold, 2002), in-
telligent growth (Kahn & Hamilton, 2009), networked and symphonic selves
(Cambridge, 2010), and even "glocalized" thinking (Jay, 2010).

   It is clear we are experiencing an epistemological shift in knowledge cre-
ation to an individuated expression from a personalized perspective that accrues
reliability through being distributed through networked spaces or distributed
visualities. As such, I want to turn now to an early draft of my own teaching
philosophy statement, in print form, and ask my readers to consider how best
to hypertextualize and metareflect over what it's saying in your own audience.
How might I better situate it beyond the print genre? I use my own teaching
philosophy statement because I know it best, because I know it has been re-
worked many times, but I see many problems in it because it is not designed to
demonstrate performance in a system. My interests, too, have now expanded
given many technological affordances, and my interests in glocalization and
intercultural communication and mobile media in networked society and other
trends (see Figure 1; see also Reese & Levy (2009) on ePortfolio trends and
uses).

   I use some of the techniques advised by experts on teaching philosophy
statements mentioned earlier, such as being specific, demonstrating a love for
teaching, referencing some ideas by citing specific theorists, pointing out tools

                                                                                                 49
Rice

Figure 1. Philosophy of Teaching Statement.
I use to measure my own teaching effectiveness, etc. I outline three ideas which
shape my philosophy, as an attempt to recognize how quickly this document
would be read if I were to use it to support a job application. I point out,
50
                                                                 ePortfolio Performance Support System

right away, that my philosophy evolves, and then I highlight that throughout
in terms of flexibility, connecting to different types of learners, and seeking in-
terconnections between language and learning and contexts. As far as teaching
philosophy statements go, it's fairly fluent. But there is a lot missing because of
the genre itself, and because this draft was written in 2001.

   If I could include hyperlinks and metareflections, I would link to student
traditional and multimodal assignments, to edited video clips of me working
with students, to comments on student writing, to a series of syllabi which look
at synchronizing assignment sets, to other materials I have written. Doing so
would be a true ePortfolio performance support system. This would not be a
CV, but present how I see myself as an integrated scholar, working to connect
teaching, research, service, and grant writing with changing needs and direc-
tions of the department I work in over time. That network of connections, an
individual within a system, cannot be separated from my teaching, and is now
what I would like to present to others if I were seeking a job or demonstrat-
ing how teaching works to other colleagues or students. I would walk readers
through a student experience in one of my classes, making my teaching philoso-
phy statement itself a sort of portfolio of portfolios. How do the approaches in
this paragraph provide a stronger augmented reality to my teaching philosophy
statement? If you were my audience, what else would I need to include, and
could that best be included in text or through a network of ideas? Others in
this collection, as well as C. S. Johnson (2006), regarding online portfolios in
technical communication, offer suggestions.

   In what ways does such an augmented reality support my own professional
development? Certainly my philosophy of teaching grows over time through
transitional phases in my own understanding of how my philosophy relates to
effective teaching and accurate presentation of my own teaching performance,
but my teaching performance work is directly rooted to my philosophical foun-
dation (Heath, 2004). Darren Cambridge (2010) and Helen Chen (2009) high-
light the significance of lifelong learning and assessment portfolio models with
regard to mediated self-representation and managed interaction, reinforcing this
point specifically. According to Cambridge, "Symphonic eportfolio composi-
tion, done iteratively through more intensive reflection at points of transition,
helps authors find coherence and establish commitments that are informed by
and have the potential to influence day-to-day decision making" (p. 186).

   The teaching philosophy statement as a one- to two-page document--simi-
lar to how the essay is a genre created largely for assessment purposes--is a
genre that should be expanded to embrace, much like ePortfolio performance
support systems, individual identity and rhetorically situated networked spaces.
The technology affords it, and hypermediated teaching philosophy statements

                                                                                                 51
Rice

fulfill in large part the purpose of the genre. Such documents can be short
enough for readers who are making quick judgments of the theory presented
in the document, but integrated enough for readers who want to see teacher
performance in more practical ways. Simply put, the genre enables students to
better demonstrate how specific reading, writing, and thinking ideas and values
can be directly connected to real contexts.

REFERENCES

Atwan, R. (2002). Convergences: Message, method, medium. Boston: Bedford/
   St.Martin's.

Auslander, P. (1999). Liveness: Performance in a mediatized culture. New York:
   Routledge.

Austin, R. N. (2006). Writing the teaching statement. Science Careers. Retrieved from
   http://sciencecareers.sciencemag.org/career_magazine/previ-
   ous_issues/articles/2006_04_14/writing_the_teaching_statement.
   doi:14633728089694563528.

Bartholomae, D. (1988). Inventing the university. In E. R. Kintgen, B. M.
   Kroll, & M. Rose (Eds.), Perspectives on literacy (pp. 273-285). Carbondale
   & Edwardsville, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.

Batson, T. (2011). Situated learning: A theoretical frame to guide transforma-
   tional change using electronic portfolio technology. International Journal of
   ePortfolio, 1(1), 107-114.

Briscoe, D. R., & Clause, L. M. (2008). Employee performance management:
   Policies and practices in multinational enterprises. In A. Varma, P. S. Budh-
   war, & A. DeNisi, Performance management systems: A global perspective (pp.
   15-39). New York: Routledge.

Cambridge, D. (2010). Eportfolios for lifelong learning and deliberative assess-
   ment. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Carney, J. (2002). Campfires around which we tell our stories: Confronting
   the dilemmas of teacher portfolios and new technologies. Retrieved from
   http://helenbarrett.com/campfires.htm

Chen, H. L. (2009). Using eportfolios to support lifelong and lifewide learning.
   In D. Cambridge, B. Cambridge, & K. B. Yancey (Eds.), Electronic portfolios
   2.0: Emergent research on implementation and impact (pp. 29-35). Sterling,
   VA: Stylus.

Chism, N. (2012). Writing a philosophy of teaching statement. Ohio State Uni-
   versity. Retrieved from http://ucat.osu.edu/teaching_portfolio/philosophy/
   philosophy2.html

52
                                                                 ePortfolio Performance Support System

Dobrin, S. (2011). PostComposition. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois Univer-
   sity Press.

Fisher, B. (2012). Writing a teaching philosophy statement. Washington Univer-
   sity in St. Louis: The Teaching Center. Retrieved from http://teachingcenter.
   wustl.edu/writing-teaching-philosophy-statement

Fishman, J., et al. (2005). Performing writing, performing literacy. College
   Composition and Communication, 57(2), 224-253.

Gardner, H. (2007). Five minds for the future. Boston: Harvard Business School.
Gery, G. J. (1991). Electronic performance support systems: How and why to re-

   make the workplace through the strategic application of technology. Cambridge,
   MA: Ziff Institute.
Gradin, S. (1995). Romancing rhetorics: Social expressivist perspectives on the
   teaching of writing. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook.
Haugen, L. (1998). Writing a teaching philosophy statement. Iowa State Uni-
   versity. Retrieved from http://www.celt.iastate.edu/teaching/philosophy.
   html
Hawk, B. (2011). Reassembling postprocess: Toward a posthuman theory of
   public rhetoric. In S. I. Dobrin, J. A. Rice, & M. Vastola, Beyond Postprocess
   (pp. 75-93). Logan, UT: Utah State Press.
Heath, M. (2004). Electronic portfolios: A guide to professional development and
   assessment. New York: Linworth Learning.
Jay, P. J. (2010). Global matters: The transnational turn in literary studies. Ithaca,
   NY: Cornell University Press.
Johnson, C. S. (2006). A decade of research: Assessing change in the technical
   communication classroom using online portfolios. Journal of Technical Writ-
   ing and Communication, 36(4), 413-431.
Kahn, S., & Hamilton, S. J. (2009). Demonstrating intellectual growth and
   development: The IUPUI ePort. In D. Cambridge, B. Cambridge, & K. B.
   Yancey (Eds.), Electronic portfolios 2.0: Emergent research on implementation
   and impact (pp. 91-96). Sterling, VA: Stylus.
Kastman Breuch, L. M. (2011). Post-process "pedagogy": A philosophical exer-
   cise. In V. Villanueva, & K. L. Arola. Cross-talk in comp theory: A reader (3rd
   ed). (pp. 97-125). Urbana, IL: NCTE.
Kember, S., & Zylinska, J. (2012). Life after new media: Mediation as a vital
   process. Boston: MIT Press.
Kent, T. (1999). Post-process theory: Beyond the writing-process paradigm. Car-
   bondale: Southern Illinois University Press.
Lang, J. M. (2010). 4 Steps to a Memorable Teaching Philosophy. The Chronicle
   of Higher Education. Retrieved from http://chronicle.com/article/5-Steps-to-
   a-Memorable/124199

                                                                                                 53
Rice

Light, T. P., Chen, H. L., & Ittelson, J. (2012). Documenting learning with ep-
   ortfolios: A guide for college instructors. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Lorenzo, G., & Ittelson, J. (2005). An overview of institutional e-portfo-
   lios. EDUCAUSE Learning Initiative, 2005. ELI Paper 1. Retrieved from
   http://www.educause.edu/ir/library/pdf/ELI3001.pdf

Mangum, T. (2009). Views of the classroom. Insider Higher Education. Re-
   trieved from http://www.insidehighered.com/advice/academic_career_con-
   fidential/mangum10

Manis, S. (2009). Writing as performance: Using performance theory to teach
   writing in theatre classrooms. Theatre Topics, 19(2), 139-151.

Montell, G. (2003). How to write a statement of teaching philosophy. The
   Chronicle of Higher Education. Retrieved from http://chronicle.com/article/
   How-to-Write-a-Statement-of/45133

Petraglia, J. (1999). Is there life after process? The role of social scientism in a
   changing discipline. In T. Kent, Post-process theory: Beyond the writing-process
   paradigm (pp. 49-64). Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.

Rainie, L., & Wellman, B. (2012). Networked: The new social operating system.
   Boston: MIT Press.

Reese, M. and Levy, R. (2009). Assessing the future: E-portfolio trends, uses, and
   options in higher education (Research Bulletin, Issue 4). Boulder, CO: EDU-
   CAUSE Center for Applied Research.

Rheingold, H. (2002). Smart mobs: The next social revolution. New York: Basic
   Books.

Rosenbloom, S. (2008, January 17). Generation me vs. you revisited. The
   New York Times. Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/2008/01/17/
   fashion/17narcissism.html

Shepherd, R., & Goggin, P. (2012). Reclaiming `old' literacies in the new lit-
   eracy information age: The functional literacies of the mediated workstation.
   Composition Studies, 40(2), 66-91.

Shor, I. (1996). When students have power: Negotiating authority in a critical
   pedagogy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Smit, D. W. (2004). The end of composition studies. Carbondale, IL: Southern
   Illinois University Press.

Sporer, T., & Bredl, K. (2011). Fostering reflective practice through e-portfolios
   in higher education. In Proceedings of world conference on e-learning in cor-
   porate, government, healthcare, and higher education 2011 (pp. 1720-1724).
   Chesapeake, VA: AACE.

Turkle, S. (2012). Alone together: Why we expect more from technology and less
   from each other. New York: Basic Books.

54
                                                                 ePortfolio Performance Support System

Ward, I. (1994). Literacy, ideology, and dialogue: Towards a dialogic pedagogy.
   Albany, NY: State University New York Press.

Wright, W., Jr. (1980). Teaching writing in the age of narcissism. The English
   Journal, 69(8), 26-29.

Zubizarreta, J. (1997). Improving teaching through portfolio revisions. In P.
   Seldon (Ed.), The teaching portfolio (2nd Ed.) (pp. 37-45). Bolton, MA: An-
   ker.

Zubizarreta, J. (2004). The learning portfolio. Bolton, MA: Anker.

                                                                                                 55
CHAPTER 3.

THE SOCIAL EPORTFOLIO:
INTEGRATING SOCIAL MEDIA
AND MODELS OF LEARNING IN
ACADEMIC EPORTFOLIOS

Lauren F. Klein
Macaulay Honors College, City University of New York

As recent research by danah boyd, Nicole Ellison (2007), and Caroline
Haythornthwaite (2005) has shown, social network sites have attracted
millions of users. The academy has begun to recognize and incorporate
opportunities the reconfigured social space of the web affords for
"identity formation, status negotiation, and peer-to-peer sociality"
(boyd, 2007, p. 119). Even more recently, industry professionals have
begun to embrace social network sites for the "web-based social values"
that they encourage in their employees (Hamel, 2009, ¶ 17). In each
of these contexts, however, users continue to view social network sites as
distinct from sites such as ePortfolios, which present professional work
to a public audience.

   These days, the business world is atwitter with talk of social media. In a
2009 Wall Street Journal article, management consultant Gary Hamel mapped
out the transformations to the workplace that must take place should businesses
hope "to attract the most creative and energetic members" of the "Facebook
Generation." "Gen F," Hamel explains, will "expect the social environment of
work to reflect the social context of the Web" (¶ 1). Meanwhile, in the acad-
emy, where the Facebook® eneration is currently being trained, the environment
continues to reflect a division between traditional approaches to learning and
the "social context" of Web 2.0. Blackboard, a course management system with
significant market share, has only begun to include aspects of social media in
its online learning environment (Gerben, 2009). The majority of ePortfolio
systems, including eFolio and TaskStream, offer carefully template-based so-
lutions to displaying student work, with few options for sociability. I argue
for the pedagogical benefits of social media in terms of opportunities for con-

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0490.2.03                          57
Klein

nection, communication, and collaboration. ePortfolio systems can emphasize
social media alongside professional presentation encourage students to develop
individual voices and produce a range of content. This content, which can be
translated across media and contexts, puts students' intellectual leadership, ana-
lytical ability, and personal creativity on display.

SOCIAL MEDIA DEFINED

   The term social media denotes a set of Internet-enabled environments
and practices through which people connect, communicate, collaborate, and
share. At present, these environments include social network sites such as
Facebook® and MySpace®, social bookmarking sites such as Delicious® and
Digg®, media tagging sites including YouTube® and Flickr®, blogging and
micro-blogging sites such as Twitter®, and wiki-based sites such as Wikipedia
(see Duffy, 2008). However, rather than define social media as a set of web-
sites, social media is best understood in terms of the modes of interaction that
it facilitates and the methods by which its content is produced (see Sweeney,
2008).

   The concept of social media inverts Marshall McLuhan's (1964) famous
phrase, "The medium is the message." In the case of social media, the method is
the message. Three unique characteristics associated with social media and the
idea of the medium is the message emerges in relevant literature: the ability to
forge relationships between individuals and within communities; the ability
to communicate, collaborate, and share ideas within these communities; and
the organic, egalitarian nature of the ideas themselves. The first characteristic,
the ability to forge relationships, is best modeled by popular social network
sites. These sites provide opportunities for interpersonal connection in what
boyd (2007) characterizes as "networked publics," which include both real-
life friends and "latent ties" (Haythornthwaite, 2005). Social network sites
make use of the mediated nature of online interaction to bring pre-existing
groups online and to bring new groups together.

   The second characteristic of social media, the ability to communicate, col-
laborate, and share ideas, can be observed in blogs, on wikis, and in social
bookmarking and tagging sites (Richardson, 2006). While these sites encom-
pass a diverse collection of media, including text, photography, video, and
web links, they are similar in their orientation toward a single community.
Each individual is considered a member of the site, and as such, contributes
his or her own content to a collective whole. This creates an online forum for

58
                                                                                       The Social ePortfolio

the participation in what Bruffee (1962) memorably describes as the "conver-
sation of mankind."

   Finally, in order to grasp the egalitarian nature of the ideas and content
produced through social media, it may be helpful to consider user-generated
sites like Wikipedia and meme-spreading sites like Twitter. As Hamel (2009)
explains, on sites such as Twitter® "all ideas compete on equal footing" (¶ 4).
Similarly, on Wikipedia it is consensus, not credential, which functions as the
arbiter of value and truth. While the networked, collaborative, and non-hi-
erarchical nature of social media signifies a conceptual departure from most
traditional modes of research and representation, the methods associated with
social media foreground new models for integrating interpersonal interaction
with uninhibited production of ideas. Schnurr (2013), too, discusses relevant
identity construction categorize based on social construction and interaction
principles in ways that relate to methods for learning (pp. 122-127).

SOCIAL MEDIA IN THE ACADEMY:
METHODS FOR LEARNING

   What are the benefits of social media for the academy? One needs only to
look at the (online) evidence in order to see the benefits of users having an
opportunity to connect, communicate, and collaborate. Moreover, the egali-
tarian nature of content associated with social media meshes seamlessly with
pedagogical models for empowering student voices. Incorporating social media
into classroom activities and research assignments also increases opportunities
for the cross-contextual "movement" that has been recognized by Jamie Bianco
(2007), among others, as a powerful tool for learning. Rethinking the major
components of social media within the context of the academy reveals the ways
in which social media can enhance a range of traditional learning objectives.

Connection

   Scholarly discussions about the role of technology in the academy often
center on creation of virtual classrooms and online environments for distance
learning. In these discussions, scholars distinguish between the digital, online
world and the so-called "real world" (see the CCCC position statement on
teaching, learning, and assessing writing in digital environments). The unique
ability of social media to forge both on- and offline can play an important--and
as yet unmet--role in connecting the physical world to the virtual one. Within

                                                                                                 59
Klein

communities formed through social media, as Moxley and Meehan observe,
"students can write documents for tangible audiences, which can often lead
to a greater sense of accountability on the part of the author" (2007, ¶ 1). In
addition to these benefits, the ability to connect with others through online
communities also begins to address the counterproductive, "counter-pointed"
relation between the forms of writing that are used in- and outside of the acad-
emy (Yancey, 2004).

Communication and Collaboration

   Teachers have debated the pedagogical value of collaborative learning for
decades, but social media provides a new model and new tools for communica-
tion and collaboration. In 1984, Kenneth Bruffee theorized a relation between
conversation and analytical thought and to that end began to introduce collab-
orative, conversation-based pedagogical strategies into his classroom. He admit-
ted mixed results, concluding only that "understanding both the history and
the complex ideas that underlie collaborative learning can improve its practice
and demonstrate its educational value" (p. 636). Because of the rapid spread
of social media tools, teachers should rededicate themselves to collaborative
learning; now that technology has caught up to theory, teachers can put ideas
about process-oriented writing, procedural authorship, and critical multimedia
literacy into practice (Jones & Lea, 2008).

Student-Generated Content

   Empowering student voices is a frequently-mentioned objective in the field
of Composition and Rhetoric (see Geraldine de Luca, Peter Elbow, and others).
Within the context of social media, this objective gains not only a technological
framework, but also a conceptual one (Warner, 2009). Students, more so than
teachers, are comfortable in the credential-less environment of the Web. When
teachers frame assignments in this new social context, students become more
inclined to express themselves in their own voices rather than in the register of
"clarity" they believe is required of them in the academy (Minh-ha, 1991, as
cited in Bianco, 2007, ¶ 13). In addition, the polyphony of voices that emerges
from this social context confirms the "active role" of writing and other forms
of expression in "producing different theoretical discourses and creating spe-
cific social identities" (Giroux, 1992, p. 221). Such attention to professional
discourses is highly useful, as Schnurr (2013) points out: "discourse and profes-
sion-specific ways of using language create, reflect and reinforce those activities,
knowledge and skills that charaterise a specific profession" (p. 14).

60
                                                                                       The Social ePortfolio

Cross-Contextual Movement

   Another benefit of introducing social media to the academy is an extension
of what Bianco (2007) identifies as "cross media movement." She describes a
learning environment in which "digital objects are produced such that compo-
sitional intertextuality folds into and/or unfolds across composited cross me-
diation, resonant through particularized and distributed fields and domains"--
media that is capable of moving across and between different contexts, both
online and off (¶ 22). By adapting Bianco's conception of "cross media move-
ment" to social media's methods and modes of representation, we arrive at a
conception of cross-contextual movement that underlies the work that we do at
the Macaulay Honors College of the City University of New York to develop,
promote, and sustain our social ePortfolio system.

THE MACAULAY EPORTFOLIO
COLLECTION: A CASE STUDY

History and Technical Overview

   The Macaulay ePortfolio Collection was introduced fall 2008 to incom-
ing students at Macaulay Honors College, CUNY. Students were presented
with the concept of an ePortfolio through a cabinet of curiosities metaphor con-
ceived by Joseph Ugoretz, Director of Technology and Learning at Macaulay.
We encouraged students to place "artifacts" of their thinking, their learning,
and themselves on display in their own ePortfolios. We emphasized that the
work that they engaged in might consist of a range of formats--research and
essays to be sure, but also conversations, quotations, photos, and other online
artifacts. In the same way that a curiosity cabinet, during the sixteenth through
eighteenth centuries, was arranged according to the owner's individual organi-
zation scheme, we impressed upon each student that ePortfolios must reflect a
sense of self.

   We chose WordPress Multi-User (WPMU) as the platform for our ePort-
folio system. WPMU began as a personal web-publishing platform--that is to
say, a blogging platform--although it has since expanded to support a wide
range of applications. WPMU integrates an updateable blog with standalone
pages that are all created and edited through a personal "dashboard," where stu-
dents can enter text and other media via an easy-to-use visual editor. Students
customize the look and feel of individual ePortfolios by selecting from a set of
pre-designed "skins," by adding new skins, or by editing preexisting ones. They

                                                                                                 61
Klein

can invite other students to contribute to collaborative ePortfolios in a variety
of roles, and can allow or disallow comments on any page. Individual ePort-
folios can be private, password-protected, or open to the public (the default).
Students can have additional functionality via WPMU plug-ins, such as the
ability to embed video or a calendar, or include an RSS feed. WPMU is also free
and open-source (FOSS).

   When we selected WPMU as the technical platform for our ePortfolio sys-
tem, we believed that the blog-style format would encourage students to cre-
ate and curate a range of multimedia content for public display. We hoped
that the social context of the WPMU platform would facilitate the connec-
tion, communication, and collaboration associated with social media. We saw
the WPMU system as a method of encouraging creative expression and cross-
contextual movement. In addition, we hoped that the self-managed aspect of
the WPMU system would engender a sense of ownership and empowerment
in each student.

   In spring 2009 we introduced the Macaulay Social Network, powered by
the WPMU BuddyPress plug-in. BuddyPress allows each student to create a
profile associated with his or her ePortfolio. Through our social network, users
can create profiles, befriend other users, join groups, and view other users' posts
and comments. In this way, our ePortfolio system now adheres to boyd and
Ellison's (2007) definition of a social network site. Although we designed the
Macaulay ePortfolio Collection with social media in mind, the overlay of the
Macaulay Social Network implements an explicitly social mode of interacting
with others within an otherwise conventional ePortfolio system.

   The following four examples demonstrate the advantages of incorporating
an ePortfolio system with a social setting, not only in terms of the ideas outlined
above, but also in terms of new opportunities for personal reflection, interper-
sonal conversation, professional presentation, and intellectual growth.

Example: "Cultural Encounters"

   One reason for our decision to use WPMU as our ePortfolio platform was
that our students were already familiar with WordPress from their experiences
with various course blogs and websites.1 When Roslyn Bernstein decided to
replace her course blog with a class-wide ePortfolio, the transition was seamless;
students could use the same editing interface they had used in previous courses
with the added benefit of a single login screen for all their ePortfolios, both
personal and class-related.

   Bernstein shaped the course ePortfolio, "Cultural Encounters," around a

62
                                                                                       The Social ePortfolio

multimedia collage project. For the assignment, students were asked to create
individual, themed collages that expressed a personal "cultural encounter." They
were encouraged to use a range of physical materials, including found objects,
and were then required to write a short essay describing their collage. Each col-
lage was scanned and put on the course ePortfolio alongside the accompanying
critical essay.

   One student created a collage containing artifacts from his upbringing in
communist China. It includes cutouts from his elementary school textbooks,
images of school supplies, and drawings of significant items from his child-
hood, such as the red scarf he wore to indicate his membership in the Chinese
Communist Party (see Figure 1). In his written analysis, the student described
the artifacts in the collage as "permanent reminders to me that I lived a life
which many people today in America have never experienced." In his essay,
expressing a sentiment of difference, the student provided a detailed rationale
for including each of the artifacts, assuming that his classmates would require
additional context with which to interpret the experiences of his childhood in
China. However, in the comment section of the ePortfolio page, his classmates
reflected on the collage in ways that expressed both identification with and
admiration for his work. A Russian student wrote, "I could relate to this be-
cause of the red scarves that my parents also had to wear in the Soviet Union."
Another student, palpably affected, praised the "emotion and symbolism [that]
were embodied in that report card" that the student from China included.

   This single ePortfolio page--the scanned collage, the written analysis, and
the comments below--models many of the benefits of social media in terms of
opportunities for connection, communication, and collaboration. Although no
single aspect of the collage assignment is explicitly social, its placement on the
course ePortfolio site contributes Moxley and Meehan's "tangible audience" to
an otherwise personal project. Initially a document of a life apart, the student's
collage became a means of connection. Sure enough, as other students began
to post their collages on the site, a conversation developed. Empowered by
their own experiences and bolstered by their online interactions with others, the
students of the "Cultural Encounters" ePortfolio demonstrated a deep level of
analytical ability as well as a creative engagement that moved across media and
contexts. This creative engagement was confirmed by the frequency with which
students involved in the "Cultural Encounters" project reposted their collage
projects on their own ePortfolio sites. These students have recognized that their
collages, placed within the social context of the Macaulay ePortfolio Collection,
represent not only their personal histories, but also their collective future. These
are the minds of the future (Gardner, 2007).

                                                                                                 63
Klein

Example: "Away and Abroad"
   "Away and Abroad" is a more explicitly social instance of a collaborative

ePortfolio (see Figure 2). The site, designed by Joseph Ugoretz functions as an
aggregator of content posted on the personal ePortfolios of students studying

Figure 1. "Childhood" by Jack.
64
                                                                                       The Social ePortfolio

abroad. When a student writes a blog post on or uploads a photo to his or her
individual ePortfolio, the content becomes immediately viewable on the "Away
and Abroad" site. Initially conceived as a site to showcase the diversity of stu-
dents' experiences studying abroad, the ePortfolio quickly became a social hub
for the students themselves.

   A recent visit to the "Away and Abroad" front page reveals one student's
photos of graffiti near the Gare du Nord in Paris, another student's written
reflection entitled "An American in China," a third student's link to a New York
Times article about international urban planning, and a fourth student's blog
post about hamburgers. Clicking through to each of the students' individual eP-
ortfolios reveals a range of topics and formats. The photographer's site takes the
form of a blog, with frequent short updates about his life in Paris. The student
in China, along with a detailed personal profile, has charted his semester-long
itinerary to the day. His blog posts, each a carefully composed meditation on
life abroad, are tagged and cross-referenced so that they can be viewed by topic,
location, or medium of composition.

Figure 2. The "Away and Abroad" Study Abroad ePortfolio.

                                                                                                 65
Klein

   Study abroad ePortfolios are noteworthy for their diversity of structure, con-
tent, and tone. Abrami and Barrett (2005), in their pioneering study of uses for
ePortfolios, distinguish between "process portfolios," which document learning
processes, and "showcase portfolios," which demonstrate skills and knowledge
attained. With the open-ended WPMU platform, Macaulay students can de-
cide for themselves--at any point in time--about the primary use and the in-
tended audience of each ePortfolio. In the case of the study abroad ePortfolios,
some students, like the student in Paris, opted for more flexible, process-orient-
ed ePortfolios. The student in China, like many others, conceived of his site as
showcase for both scholarly and personal growth. Common to both sites--and
to the study abroad ePortfolios as a whole--is the knowledge (or perception)
of an audience, and the belief that the experience of traveling abroad is worthy
of documentation. With no prompting from any classroom assignment, each
student engaged in substantial analysis of differences between life at home and
abroad. Through written reflections, digital photos, and--in some cases--short
films, students demonstrated critical multimedia literacy, the ultimate learn-
ing objective of many college-level courses (see Clive Thompson's discussion in
Wired on the new literacy, 2009).

   An additional, unanticipated outcome of the "Away and Abroad" site was the
conversation that developed between students studying abroad in different coun-
tries and between the students studying abroad and those about to depart. After
recounting a harrowing night at a youth hostel in Tokyo, one student received a
comment from a friend who had had a similar experience at a hostel in Rome.
Another student, preparing to leave for his own semester abroad, left a comment
on the student in China's ePortfolio, asking how much he should be prepared to
spend on food. A third student in Argentina received a comment from a class-
mate at home: "It's so wonderful to read your impressions thus far. I can almost
taste the steak and other more mysterious foods!" In the process of documenting
their experiences abroad, these students engaged in additional, unexpected forms
of connection and communication. By producing content that not only moves
across contexts, but also moves across continents, the study abroad students pro-
vide tangible evidence of the advantages of the social ePortfolio.

Example: "Altermania"

   One student's personal ePortfolio exhibits ways in which social media has
begun to shape how students present themselves to future employers. Consider
"Altermania," the ePortfolio of Tyler, a college sophomore (see Figure 3):

   The front page announces: "Tyler is a student in the Macaulay Honors Col-
lege at CUNY Hunter. He's pretty into creative multimedia production and

66
                                                                                       The Social ePortfolio

his inherited tie collection. For the future, Tyler aspires to get into the design/
guerrilla marketing business and create things like this, this, and this." (The
links lead to graphic design and marketing companies whose work he admires).
On the right-hand navigation menu, links lead to Tyler's contact information
and résumé as well as examples of his audio, video, and graphic design work. A
tag cloud provides an additional method of navigating his ePortfolio. In place
of a traditional mission statement or employment objective, Tyler describes his
career aspirations in his own voice (see Amarian & Flanigan, 2006). His self-
description mimics a profile on a social network site, but Tyler, a member of the
Facebook Generation, considers his casual tone appropriate to describe his pro-
fessional goals. His tone exemplifies the new "social context" of our Internet-
infused society (see Zhang, Olfman, & Rachtham, 2007).

   In his design portfolio, which can be accessed by following a link from the
navigation menu, Tyler includes a similarly conversational narrative that de-
scribes his involvement in a marketing campaign for an arts event. He provides
a scanned version of a "submission-garnering flyer," an embedded promotional
video that he created to publicize the event, a screenshot of the Facebook® event

Figure 3. "Altermania" the ePortfolio of Tyler.

                                                                                                 67
Klein

page, and photographic evidence of his own guerilla marketing campaign: "I
set the default home page on every computer to the [promotional] video," he
explains. Tyler uses the same conversational voice in each of his reflections on
the various components of the campaign. Through the content of his ePort-
folio, Tyler demonstrates his marketing skills, but through the tone of his de-
scriptions, he demonstrates himself. As Tyler intuits, in the increasingly social
context of the Web, skills and personality play an equal part in professional
presentation and future success.

Example: "A Design a Day"

   By exploring Tyler's profile on the Macaulay Social Network, one discov-
ers that he is involved in a second, collaborative ePortfolio. "A Design A Day,"
developed in partnership with another student, Phoebe, documents a challenge
to "create one new work or learn one new graphic design technique [or] prin-
ciple per day." This ePortfolio, intended as an informal record of the students'
whimsical challenge, consists of each day's completed design followed by an
explanation of how one or the other accomplished the effect. The ePortfolio
functions as a collaborative "progress portfolio," as a means of communication
between the two students, and as a technical reference for other aspiring design-
ers (see Figure 4).

   In this ePortfolio, Tyler and Phoebe embrace the flexibility of the WPMU
system in order to upload, comment on, and converse about a range of media.
The self-managed nature of the system, in addition, allows the two students to
demonstrate their personal creativity, professional engagement, and intellectual
leadership. In the future, this ePortfolio might be integrated into each student's
individual ePortfolio, accompanied by a narrative that conveys the ideas behind
the project and the skills they each acquired. In this way, "A Design A Day"
demonstrates the possibilities for a productive synthesis of social media and
professional presentation while facilitating acquisition of skills, collaboration
between peers, and public display of knowledge.

THE SOCIAL EPORTFOLIO: A NEW CONCEPTION
OF PROFESSIONAL PRESENTATION

   The above examples demonstrate how social media enhances opportunities
for connection, communication, and collaboration and provides opportunities
for showcasing a range of student-generated content when integrated into a tra-
ditional ePortfolio environment. From the perspective of potential employers,

68
                                                                                       The Social ePortfolio

the social ePortfolio can supply additional evidence of skills and qualities valued
in the workplace: analytical ability, intellectual leadership, and creativity, which
are often difficult to discern in other presentations of student work.
Analytical Ability

   The social ePortfolio encourages commentary and reflection. Because of the
blog-style format, students often frame their work within narratives that can
account for weakness in early work or express ideas for improvement. One stu-
dent, in the process of constructing her ePortfolio, apologized to the public for
her inexperience. "I am very excited to begin sharing my work with you," she
wrote. "You will have to excuse me as I take some time to get acquainted with
all of the available features." In her admission, she expresses her desire for a
higher quality level for her site and additional knowledge about the publishing
platform. Commentary like this can provide valuable information to potential
employers about students' thought processes as well as their ability and desire
to continue to learn. In the case of this student, as she began to post her work

Figure 4. "A Design A Day" by Tyler and Phoebe.
                                                                                                 69
Klein

on her ePortfolio, her self-analysis continued. In this way, the social ePortfolio
facilitates commentary and reflection, offering potential employers a glimpse of
a particular student's analytical ability and capacity for self-reflection.

Intellectual Leadership

   In terms of presenting a student's intellectual ethos to future employers, the
benefits of a social ePortfolio system extend beyond showcasing techniques of
analysis and reflection. Because they offer opportunities for communication
and collaboration, social ePortfolios allow students to demonstrate intellectual
leadership in a variety of contexts. Through the conversations that take place in
the comment section, students provide evidence of their ability to convey their
own ideas and accept others' criticism. One student, after posting a link to an
article he had written for his campus newspaper, received a comment from a
fellow student suggesting that he might revise his critique. The conversation
continued, culminating with a comment from a professor that validated the
student's original angle as well as the commenter's concerns. This evidence of
the student's ability to engage in constructive dialogue with peers and superiors
might provide future employers a window into the student's workplace person-
ality and intellectual ethos.

Creativity

   The flexible format of the social ePortfolio allows students to showcase more
than intellectual leadership; it provides a forum in which they can pursue mul-
tiple ideas. Because social ePortfolios encourage students to rapidly produce
and display content in a context of peer comment and review, students can
test out a variety of approaches to exhibiting their work. At Macaulay, students
have created ePortfolios that document short-term events, such as attending the
2009 Presidential Inauguration or organizing a school-wide movie night; or eP-
ortfolios that persist through long-term commitments, such as a semester spent
abroad or a summer involved in community service. Students can choose to
adapt these event-based ePortfolios into cumulative, showcase sites, or they can
simply begin again. The Macaulay ePortfolio Collection, infused with an ethos
of openness and experimentation, encourages each student to pursue a range
of projects and ideas. Some projects culminate in polished, public-facing ePort-
folios while others remain fragmentary and unfinished. But with each project,
students demonstrate--to their peers and to future employers--their enthusi-
asm for learning and their willingness to pursue creative ideas.

70
                                                                                       The Social ePortfolio

CONCLUSION

   Gary Hamel is not alone in identifying the value of social media for work-
places. In a recent article for Business Week, Stephen Baker and Heather Green
(2008) describe the changes to workplace environments and practices that so-
cial media will affect. "Blogs are not a business elective," they declare, "They're
a prerequisite" (¶ 2). Significantly, they draw upon academic constructs--the
"elective" and the "prerequisite"--in order to convey the urgency of adopt-
ing the blog as a new business practice. In their symbolic language, Baker and
Green underscore the fundamental interconnection of social media and mod-
els for learning. Indeed, social media and models for learning influence each
other; incorporating social media into academic practices not only enhances
traditional learning objectives, but also introduces new methods and skills with
which to prepare students for productive roles in the workplace.

   The case study of the Macaulay ePortfolio Collection demonstrates the myr-
iad benefits associated with integrating social media into ePortfolio systems. In
terms of opportunities for connection, communication, and collaboration, so-
cial media supplies an exceptional technological and social framework for inter-
action. Furthermore, situating student ePortfolios within the social context of
the Web fosters authentic student voices and facilitates student-centered social
content. This content in turn may provide potential employers with evidence
of students' analytical ability, intellectual leadership, and capacity for creativity,
productivity, and growth.

   As businesses move to embrace the social environment of the Web as a new
model for professional interaction, the academy must not only follow suit, it
must innovate. As Baker and Green make clear, academic models of learning
continue to hold influence in the workplace. With the scholarly support of
professors and the technical knowledge of students, the social ePortfolio can
become a valuable tool for producing productive members of the business
world--confident in their abilities, experienced in their methods, and posi-
tioned to enter the workforce with intellectual energy and entrepreneurial drive.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

   Many thanks to Jeff Drouin, my colleague at Macaulay Honors College,
CUNY, for his assistance throughout this project, and in particular his com-
ments on the "Cultural Encounters" ePortfolio included in the case study. My
analysis of the site incorporates many of his compelling ideas. Additional thanks

                                                                                                 71
Klein

goes to Joe Ugoretz, Director of Technology and Learning at Macaulay, for his
continued encouragement and support.

WEBSITE LIST

   · WordPress Multi-User: http://mu.wordpress.org
   · BuddyPress: http://buddypress.org
   · The Macaulay ePortfolio Collection: http://macaulay.cuny.edu/

       eportfolios
   · The Macaulay Social Network: http://macaulay.cuny.edu/eportfolios/

       social
   · Childhood-Cultural Encounters: http://macaulay.cuny.edu/eportfolios/

       bernstein08/2008/12/21/childhood/#more-1157
   · Away and Abroad: http://macaulay.cuny.edu/eportfolios/abroad
   · Altermania: http://macaulay.cuny.edu/eportfolios/ty274
   · A Design a Day: http://macaulay.cuny.edu/eportfolios/adesignaday

NOTE

   1. I owe a debt to Jeff Drouin, my colleague at Macaulay Honors College,
for his thoughts on the "Cultural Encounters" ePortfolio. Many of the ideas
included in this analysis derive from our conversations about the site.

REFERENCES

Abrami, P. C., & Barrett, H. (2005). Directions for research and develop-
   ment on electronic portfolio. Canadian Journal of Learning and Technol-
   ogy. Retrieved from http://www.cjlt.ca/index.php/cjlt/rt/printerFriend-
   ly/92/86

Amarian, S., & Flanigan, E. (2006). Create your digital portfolio: The fast track to
   career success. Indianapolis: JIST.

Baker, S., & Green, H. (2008, June 20). Social media will change your busi-
   ness. BusinessWeek. Retrieved from http://www.businessweek.com/bwdaily/
   dnflash/content/feb2008/db20080219_908252.htm

Bianco, J. (2007). Composing and compositing: Integrated digital writing and
   academic pedagogy. Fibreculture 10(3). Retrieved from http://journal.fibre-
   culture.org/issue10/issue10_bianco.html

72
                                                                                       The Social ePortfolio

boyd, d. (2007). Why youth (heart) social network sites: The role of networked
   publics in teenage social life. In D. Buckingham (Ed.), MacArthur Founda-
   tion Series on digital learning--youth, identity, and digital media volume (pp.
   119-142). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

boyd, d., & Ellison, N. (2007, October). Social network sites: Definition, his-
   tory, and scholarship. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 13(1).
   Retrieved from http://jcmc.indiana.edu/vol13/issue1/boyd.ellison.html

Bruffee, K. (1984). Collaborative learning and the "Conversation of Mankind."
   College English, 46(7), 635-652.

Conference on College Composition and Communication. (2004). CCCC
   position statement on teaching, learning, and assessing writing in digital en-
   vironments. Retrieved from http://www.ncte.org/cccc/resources/positions/
   digitalenvironments

Duffy, P. (2008). Engaging the YouTube® Google-eyed generation: Strategies for
   using web 2.0 in teaching and learning. The Electronic Journal of e-Learning,
   6(2), 119-130.

Gardner, H. (2007). Five minds for the future. Boston: Harvard Business School.
Gerben, C. (2009). Putting 2.0 and two together: What web 2.0 can teach

   composition about collaborative learning. Computers and composition online,
   (Fall 2009). Retrieved from http://candcblog.org/Gerben
Giroux, H. (1992). Language, difference, and curriculum theory: Beyond the
   politics of clarity. Theory into Practice, 31(3), 219-227.
Hamel, G. (2009). The Facebook generation vs. the Fortune 500. The Wall
   Street Journal, 2009, March 24. Retrieved from http://blogs.wsj.com/man-
   agement/2009/03/24/the-facebook-generation-vs-the-fortune-500
Haythornthwaite, C. (2005). Social networks and Internet connectivity effects.
   Information, Communication, & Society, 8(2), 125-147.
Jones, S., & Lea, M. R. (2008). Digital literacies in the lives of undergraduate
   students: Exploring personal and curricular spheres of practice. The Elec-
   tronic Journal of e-Learning, 6(3), 207-216.
McLuhan, M. (1964). Understanding media: The extensions of man. Cambridge,
   MA: MIT Press.
Moxley, J., & Meehan, R. (2007). Collaboration, literacy, authorship: Using
   social networking tools to engage the wisdom of teachers. Kairos: A Journal
   of Rhetoric, Technology, and Pedagogy, 12(1). Retrieved from http://kairos.
   technorhetoric.net/12.1/binder.html?praxis/moxley_meehan
Richardson, W. (2006). Blogs, wikis, podcasts, and other powerful web tools for
   classrooms. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin.
Schnurr, S. (2013). Exploring professional communication: Language in action.
   London: Routledge.

                                                                                                 73
Klein

Sweeney, C. (2008, September 10). Twittering from the cradle. The New
   York Times. Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/2008/09/11/
   fashion/11Tots.html?pagewanted=all

Thompson, C. (2009, August 24). Clive Thompson on the new literacy. Wired.
   Retrieved from http://www.wired.com/techbiz/people/magazine/17-09/
   st_thompson

Warner, A. (2009). ePortfolios: Enhancing student self-authorship and student as-
   sessment. Workshop conducted at the AAC & U Integrative Learning: Ad-
   dressing the Complexities Conference in Atlanta, GA.

Yancey, K. (2004). Made not only in words: Composition in a new key. College
   Composition and Communication, 56(2), 297-328.

Zhang, S., Olfman, L., & Rachtham, P. (2007). Designing ePortfolio 2.0:
   Integrating and coordinating web 2.0 services with ePortfolio systems for
   enhancing users' learning. Journal of Information Systems Education, 18(2),
   203-214.

74
SECTION 2: CONSTRUCTING
THE BRIDGE

  [Performance Management] is usually described as the sys-
  tem through which organizations set work goals, determine
  performance standards, assign and evaluate work, provide
  performance feedback, determine training and development
  needs, and distribute rewards.
  --Briscoe & Clause, "Employee Performance Management:
  Policies and Practices in Multinational Enterprises," in
  Varma, Budhwar, & DeNisi's Performance Management
  Systems: A Global Perspective (2008), p. 15

  Brodie, "The Conversation Prism,"
  http://theconversationprism.com
CHAPTER 4.

EPORTS: MAKING THE

PASSAGE FROM ACADEMICS TO

WORKPLACE

Barbara J. D'Angelo
Arizona State University

Barry M. Maid
Arizona State University

The apparently "age old" discussion of whether to teach tools or
rhetorical skills in technical communication courses seems to naturally
come to a head when faced with the creation and assessment of
capstone ePortfolios. This only makes sense when ePorts are viewed
as the passageway from demonstrating proficiencies in meeting
academic program outcomes while also meeting entry skill levels into
the workplace. Technical Communication and other applied programs
are constantly being pressured by different stakeholders, both internal
and external, to teach specific software tools. One of the challenges
Technical Communication program directors have faced is to make
sure we include appropriate and assessable technology outcomes into
our program outcomes; we need to sustain ourselves as an academic
program and yet still meet workplace needs.

         And we are here as on a darkling plain
         Swept with confused alarms of struggle and flight,
         Where ignorant armies clash by night.

                                        --Matthew Arnold, "Dover Beach"

   Though clearly out of context, perhaps this quotation from Matthew Arnold
really does sum up the seemingly ever-present dissonance between academic
and practicing technical communicators. Both groups are somewhat naïve as
to the conditions and needs of the other. As a result, they often almost operate
in the dark with regard to the other. As academics many of us believe that all

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0490.2.04                       77
D'Angelo and Maid

we teach needs to be grounded in good theory that can then be implemented
into best practices. We are concerned with "how" and "why" not with "what"
and "how to." On the other hand, practitioners seem to be (from an academic's
perspective) obsessed with how to get things done and what they need to know.
They are champions of knowing specific tools and creating necessary "bodies of
knowledge."

   Thus, those of us who teach in, design, and administer academic programs
in technical communication are faced with a dilemma. How can we prepare our
students with a solid academic background that is often seen as too theoretical
and out-of-touch with the workplace while still making sure they have the skills
to compete in what is often a very tight job market? For us, in the Technical
Communication (TC) Program at Arizona State University (ASU), the answer
lies in creating a set of program outcomes that can be accepted by both worlds.
We then assess our graduating seniors for their proficiency in those outcomes
by means of an electronic portfolio.

   When we developed the program in Multimedia Writing and Technical
Communication (now just Technical Communication) at ASU, we were pri-
marily concerned with meeting academic-based outcomes. A set of outcomes
appropriate for a technical communication program was built on the Writing
Program Administrators' (WPA) Outcomes Statement (OS). The original state-
ment was revised so that technology outcomes were present. Those outcomes
were then modified to include information outcomes as well. That story has
been told elsewhere (see D'Angelo & Maid, 2004; Maid, 2004).

   Although the original WPA Outcomes Group discussed incorporation of
technology into the WPA OS, debate about the responsibility of first-year com-
position to teach technology outcomes or competencies resulted in the adop-
tion of it without them. However, debate related to inclusion of technology
outcomes continued and a new WPA group met at the 2005 WPA Conference
in Alaska to begin discussion about how technology could be incorporated in
the document (Yancey, 2005). In 2006, the group drafted a revision of the
WPA OS to incorporate both technology and information literacy (IL); a re-
vised draft was presented and adopted at the 2007 WPA Conference in Tempe,
Arizona.

   The revision incorporates outcomes for composing in electronic environ-
ments as a fifth category rather than as outcomes integrated into the original
WPA document so that the existing categories, already accepted and adopted
by both rhetoric and composition and other fields, not be disrupted. The out-
comes included in the new section relate to the use of technology as tools to
compose and for research as well as to rhetorical strategies related to both print
and electronic texts. Thus, technology is incorporated both as tools and within

78
                                                                            From Academics to Workplace

rhetorical contexts while IL is embedded as the use of technology to access
information.

   It is important to understand this context for our integration and use of
technology outcomes as a foundation for our approach. We integrated tech-
nology as a construct for programmatic learning and assessment prior to the
development of the revised WPA OS section (see Albert and Luzzo, 1999, for
more on perceived barriers in career development). Because our approach to
integrating technology was holistic, integrating constructs where appropriate
in each of the original OS's four sections, rather than adding a separate section,
our approach to assessment is also holistic so that students' use and learning of
technology is evaluated as part of a whole rather than as discrete skills. Specifi-
cally, the TC Program at ASU has the following outcomes that can be consid-
ered to be technology outcomes:

   · Understand the role of a variety of technologies/media in accessing, re-
       trieving, managing, and communicating information

   · Use appropriate technologies to organize, present, and communicate in-
       formation to address a range of audiences, purposes, and genres

   · Use appropriate technologies to manage data and information collected
       or generated for future use

   · Understand and apply legal and ethical uses of information and technol-
       ogy including copyright and intellectual property.

   Like all the other program outcomes, we ask students to demonstrate pro-
ficiency with these outcomes in their senior capstone electronic portfolio. See
Hakel & Smith, 2009; and Edwards & Burnham, 2009 for more information
regarding institutional assessment and outcomes-based ePortfolio work. How-
ever, unlike the other outcomes, students will not be able to even complete
an electronic portfolio unless they have a certain level of technical proficiency.
Purposefully, we chose not to use any kind of canned portfolio software where
students can easily dump content into a template. Rather, we expect our stu-
dents to be capable of making choices about the best possible tools to present
their portfolio. Once they've made the choice, we expect they will be proficient
in that tool. We clearly resist the notion that it is the responsibility of an aca-
demic unit to train anyone in software proficiency. While those skills are useful,
and often necessary, we feel it is not the kind of skill one gets academic credit
for mastering.

   On the other hand, we do feel it is important for students to understand
what tools are capable of doing. That means, when given the option, they should
be able to pick the most appropriate and most effective tool. For example, it is
relatively easy to create a brochure using today's word processing software. The
question becomes, however, is that the best tool to create a brochure? The an-

                                                                                                 79
D'Angelo and Maid

swer may not always be the same. We would hope our students would know the
capabilities and the limitations of both word processing and desktop publishing
software to make an informed choice.

   Yet, despite our beliefs, the question of relevance of our outcomes to practi-
tioners remains. Using comment from portfolios and a survey of practitioners
helps us answer this question. In 2006, Scott Crooker, a student enrolled in
the Master of Science of Technology program at ASU, asked how practitioners
viewed our program outcomes. That ended up being the research question for
his master's thesis where he surveyed members of the Phoenix Chapter of the
Society for Technical Communication about the program outcomes (Crooker,
2006). In the light of this research, we began to rethink how our academic
technical communication program prepared students for real jobs by addressing
how our outcomes were perceived by practitioners.

TOOLS OR THEORY

   Those of us who have been teaching writing courses from technical com-
munication to first-year composition have been faced with the "Do you teach
the tools" question for decades. At its most basic level, this question is raised
because the assumption is that students are not capable of using digital tools
unless they are specifically trained to do so. This assumption is reinforced by the
huge software training industry and exacerbated by organizations that refuse to
give employees access to tools necessary for their jobs until they have undergone
prescribed training. And, of course this perspective is reinforced by the numer-
ous certification and assessment tools promoted by the software/technology in-
dustry, ranging from Microsoft certifications to more academically-based tools
such as Educational Testing Services' (ETS) iSkills test.

   While we can certainly understand the desire to make sure people are well-
trained, the reality is that if the same demands were placed on how people
should be trained to write before they are allowed to do corporate writing,
everyone would be trained in endless grammar, punctuation, and mechanics
drills before being allowed to open a new word-processing document. It may be
the only reason Human Resource types aren't demanding that is because of their
faulty assumption that English is fixed and never changes so they don't realize
that English version 1930 is different from English version 2009.

   Though it's easy to try to dismiss the tool-centric people, it is also expe-
dient to try to understand them. We suspect they have a legitimate point of
view, though one that doesn't necessarily align with what most of us see as our
primary mission as technical communication educators. In framing this issue

80
                                                                            From Academics to Workplace

we have chosen to do so as if we were consultants coming into an organization
from the outside. In that scenario, one of our first questions would be, "What
is your core mission?" Looking at academic programs, it seems that our mission
is to prepare our students to have successful careers, writ large, throughout their
entire lives. On the other hand, hiring managers prefer people who will have
successful careers, writ small, within the particular constraints of an organiza-
tion. Both points of view are reasonable, but often conflict.

   Another way to understand these points of view is with a football anal-
ogy. Every spring as professional football teams prepare to draft college players,
endless time and energy is spent on finding which player best fits the needs
of a team. The assumption is usually that in the highly specialized world of
professional football, filling specific needs is the best way to excel. The old Dal-
las Cowboys had a different philosophy. They simply wanted to draft the best
player available--assuming that talented players would find ways to be produc-
tive and successful. In many ways, this is no different than when academics
recruit faculty. In most instances departments look for faculty who can teach
or research in highly defined specialties--instead of just looking for the most
talented candidate available. That's exactly what hiring managers in the industry
are doing when they try to recruit technical communicators and require that
candidates must know SuperSoftware, ver. 7.65.

   The assumption, especially in tight job markets, is that the quicker a new
hire can actually get to work, the more money the company will save. After all,
hiring new people is expensive. In addition, in many workplace cultures, being
perceived as having software skills tends to lend status. Software skills also ap-
pear to be more quantifiable (though this may be completely subjective and il-
lusory) than the other kinds of skills technical communicators must necessarily
possess. As a result, the kind of results "rePorted" by Clinton Lanier (2009) in a
recent issue of Technical Communication should not be unexpected.

   Lanier describes the results of an analysis of 1,399 technical writer job post-
ings for the types of skills and experience required, resulting in the following
categories: experience, technical knowledge (specific computer or markup lan-
guages, subject expertise, or foreign language), technical writing specific knowl-
edge (formats and genres), technologies/tools, several software categories, and
project management skills. Interestingly, he included rhetorical skills such as
audience analysis within the broad category of technology/tool knowledge but
broke out specific types of software knowledge as separate categories. Lanier
found that employers require some type of subject matter experience 33% of
the time. In addition, he found that 16% of ads required proficiency in online
help software, 20% in specialized software tools, 24% in graphics software, and
34% in publishing software. In comparison only 17% required basic technical

                                                                                                 81
D'Angelo and Maid

writing skills (in which Lanier categorizes audience analysis/writing for specific
audiences). He believes his results challenge assumptions that teaching tools is
unimportant. However, he places less emphasis on analyzing the project man-
agement category, which includes communication skills, collaboration, analy-
sis, and others, despite the finding that 32% of postings call for interpersonal
and collaborative skills. Lanier's lack of emphasis on project management seems
to be based on the belief that the communication category is vague and hard
to define or plan within a curriculum (2009). Lanier's findings, however, con-
tradict earlier analysis of survey findings by Rainey, Turner, and Dayton (2005)
in which they found that despite an emphasis on technology skills, managers
were more concerned with employees' ability to be able to adapt and learn new
software quickly. Rainey acknowledges the tension between technical skills and
other "soft" skills such as collaboration and people skills that pervades the field
and the often contradictory evidence gained from industry; this tension clearly
continues as evidenced by Lanier's findings.

   Indeed, the tension between academic and industry perspectives has been
a constant theme within technical communication, with certification acting as
another indicator. Turner and Rainey (2004) review the history of debate sur-
rounding certification. While these authors advocated for a mechanism for cer-
tification to codify bodies of knowledge for technical communicators and to
identify the ethical and professional responsibilities of technical communicators,
certification still remains an object of debate which is constantly revisited in the
literature and within professional and practitioner societies (Hart, 2008; Rosen-
berg, 2008). Clearly this debate and conversation impact on curriculum. There
are a limited number of hours within a degree program, thereby constraining
what can be taught. Some have attempted to address and frame technology skills
by contextualizing them within the literacy debate. In this perspective, technical
or tool literacy becomes one of several literacies advocated for in technical com-
munication education (Breuch, 2002; Cargile Cook, 2002; Nagelhout, 1999).
Lastly, this debate has importance because what is taught and how we teach is
impacted by assessment and the methods we use to evaluate student learning.
Certification, for example, is a type of assessment; yet, it is often correlated with
quantifiable mechanical skills of tool use. For academic programs such as ours,
assessment is more broad-based to incorporate a more holistic range of outcomes.

BRIDGING THE ACADEMIC/WORKPLACE GAP?

   From the beginning, we used ePortfolios to assess whether our students are
meeting program outcomes. Electronic portfolios are a common method of as-

82
                                                                            From Academics to Workplace

sessing student writing, including technical communication. Students enroll in
a capstone course during their semester of graduation in which they review out-
comes and the scoring guide which faculty use to evaluate portfolios and work
together to draft, revise, and finalize portfolios. Students select and use exam-
ples of their work as evidence for claims made in a persuasive cover statement
to demonstrate their learning and growth in the context of program outcomes.

   As mentioned earlier, we do not mandate a specific application or technol-
ogy for students to use to submit their portfolio. Since the portfolio itself is an
artifact, we believe that the students' choice of technology and application is a
demonstration of their achievement of outcomes. Of the 32 portfolios submit-
ted since fall 2006, 27 were websites and 5 were PowerPoint files. The same
criteria and scoring were used to evaluate all portfolios regardless of the applica-
tion used to submit them. Though we do not explicitly address issues related to
technology with evaluators, we expect that they assess the portfolio based on its
achievement of outcomes. Since the portfolio itself is an artifact, we expect rater
scoring is influenced by how the portfolio is constructed and how the student
uses the selected software to present their argument about achieving outcomes.
We would be surprised if the use of an application to present the portfolio did
not influence rater scores since a portfolio which contradicted claims made by
the student would undermine their argument for achieving outcomes, resulting
in lower scores. For the fall 2008 and spring 2009 semester, one of our adjunct
faculty, who is a practitioner, became one of our portfolio evaluators. These
evaluative comments give us an added perspective on our students and cur-
riculum. Part of our scoring process asks evaluators to add formative feedback
for the student. Some of the comments, included below, indicate how students
bridge the academic-workplace in their use of technology:

         I was struck by your comment in your statement conclusion
         where you noted that there is "an ever growing demand for
         communication to bridge the juncture where human interac-
         tion meets technology ... That beautifully describes where we
         are in 2008. And as a Technical Writer in 3G Technologies,
         and as an Instructor at ASU, I am pleased to welcome you
         into this exciting profession."

         Your final project, your group evaluation of projects, was a
         nice evaluation of products. This is what technical writers do!
         ... Your portfolio showcased a nice array of applications.

         Your portfolio is fun and appropriately tells a framed story.

                                                                                                 83
D'Angelo and Maid

         You have a strong voice and your use of technology places
         you in an expert category.

   Not all was well, of course. Other comments included:

         I'm not seeing a wide-range of technologies here. I don't
         see any mention of flash, for example, or other tools. And I
         would have liked to have seen evidence of your web site.

         PowerPoint is a powerful tool. You didn't use any graph-
         ics. The words were not placed on the page with thought to
         design. Your Portfolio did not have a professional look and
         feel. It should be the culminating artifact of your MWTC
         experience.

   Of course, comments to individual students may or may not be representa-
tive of overall student achievement, of their ability to use technology, or of the
relevance of those outcomes to the workplace. However, these comments do
indicate that students are learning technologies and tools and trying to adapt
them for their work to varying degrees. As part of an overall program assess-
ment strategy, since spring 2008 we have asked graduating students to complete
a short survey about the capstone course and about their experiences in the TC
Program. A link to an anonymous online survey is sent to students after gradu-
ation and grades are posted to allow students (now alumni) to provide us with
information they are not able to present in their portfolios.

   Lack of direct instruction in tools or software is the most common nega-
tive comment, with three out of six suggesting that some type of tool learning
be incorporated into the TC Program in some way. For example, one student
recommended that students be required to take an exploratory course to learn
basic software tools or that the TC Program partner with companies to pro-
vide online training or workshops for students. Two other respondents recom-
mended that students be required to take a web- or multi-media design course.
This focus on tools is, perhaps, not surprising from students who are either
currently practitioners or who are searching for a job and faced with meeting
requirements related to specific software applications in job ads. Certainly the
perspective of these students is consistent with that of Lanier. If we take job
ads as guiding criteria for making decisions about curriculum, then teaching
of tools would seem to be paramount (Zhang, Olfman, & Rachtham, 2007).
However, as we have seen in the conversations over certification and literacies,
the evidence for teaching of tools is not consistent (Jones & Lea, 2008).

84
                                                                            From Academics to Workplace

   Another indication of how we are bridging the gap between academic and
workplace needs is an analysis of the results of a master's student survey of
Phoenix Chapter STC members, including students of the TC Program, to
determine the relevance of TC Program outcomes to practitioners as knowledge
areas and skills (Crooker, 2006). Crooker's thesis has provided us one way of
understanding how our outcomes meet practitioner needs. Out of a sample of
167, Crooker analyzed 46 submitted surveys (40 from practitioners, 6 from
ASU students with industry experience). Although he surveyed chapter mem-
bers on all outcomes, we focus here on his results related to technology out-
comes only. Breaking out these outcomes, Crooker found that the majority of
respondents found technology outcomes to be essential for technical communi-
cators. He sums up his results at the end of his thesis by saying:

         This study found that the specific educational outcomes
         designed for the technical writing curriculum at ASU are
         considered up-to-date and are generally regarded as relevant
         to professionals who have current experience in the field of
         technical communication. This means that, according to
         professional technical writers and technical communicators,
         ASU's technical writing program seems to be teaching
         material that is essentially on track with the current
         educational needs of college students. (p. 61)

   In many ways the strongest indictment that Crooker's study had of the pro-
gram was of what he implied was academic jargon in the outcomes. He pointed
out that many of the practitioners were uncomfortable with the word "genre"
and suggests we use language more appropriate for a lay audience in the future
(Crooker, p. 60). In the midst of the discussion about certification and defin-
ing a body of knowledge, we find it strange that practitioners, who we assume
might need certification, if it is ever created, would be uncomfortable with
using the professional language of the field. This appears stranger when we as-
sume that one of the skills that would necessarily be part of any body of knowl-
edge would be identifying the appropriate level of discourse for any particular
audience. Surely, anyone proficient in technical communication would be a
member of the technical communication discourse community. We recognize
the reality that the tools controversy is never going to go away. We also know
that there are many technical communication positions where practitioners will
have to be proficient in specific tools. However, not all technical communica-
tors write help files. If they don't, do they really need to be proficient in Robo-
Help? If they never write a document longer than twenty-five pages, do they

                                                                                                 85
D'Angelo and Maid

really need FrameMaker skills? In fact, it would probably be healthy for the field
if it recognized that technical communicators worked in many industries--not
just software.

   Finally, we have tried working with the local STC chapter that has gracious-
ly allowed students to attend software-training workshops, which they sponsor
at a discounted price. We have also had a program alumnus volunteer to give
software-training workshops. Despite the hue and cry for the training, very few
people used the opportunities. We understand timing and money may be a fac-
tor. We hope to have online modules developed that may help students in the
TC program. In addition, the TC Program requires students to take 12 hours
in related area courses from outside of the TC curriculum. This requirement is
intended to allow students to take courses that match their interests and job-
or career-paths. Many of our students take advantage of tool-centric courses
offered by ASU's College of Technology and Innovation, for example, while
others enroll in courses in other programs to enhance the skills and knowledge
areas that best match their career plans.

   Ultimately, we feel that the tools controversy is more of perception than
reality. The reality is that students preparing for careers as technical communi-
cators do need to possess certain abilities. We feel the outcomes our students
demonstrate in their capstone ePortfolios demonstrate proficiency with those
skills. This same skill-set is confirmed by practicing professionals in Crooker's
thesis. In addition, the fact that our students must submit an electronic portfo-
lio using tools of their choice, tells us that they are capable of learning and uti-
lizing appropriate digital tools. We believe the perception that only people who
are trained in specific software tools can be successful technical communicators
is specious. Yet, our job as technical communication educators is sometimes a
balancing act between that perception and reality.

REFERENCES

Cargile Cook, K. (2002). Layered literacies: A theoretical frame for technical
   communication pedagogy. Technical Communication Quarterly, 11(1), 5-29.

D'Angelo, B. J., & Maid, B. M. (2004). Moving beyond definitions: Imple-
   menting information literacy across the curriculum. Journal of Academic Li-
   brarianship, 30(3), 212-217.

Edwards, T. S., & Burnham, C. (2009). The promise of eportfolios for institu-
   tional assessment. In D. Cambridge, B. Cambridge, & K. B. Yancey (Eds.),
   Electronic portfolios 2.0: Emergent research on implementation and impact (pp.
   87-90). Sterling, VA: Stylus.

86
                                                                            From Academics to Workplace

Hakel, M. D., & Smith, E. N. (2009). Documenting the outcomes of learning.
   In D. Cambridge, B. Cambridge, & K. B. Yancey (Eds.), Electronic portfolios
   2.0: Emergent research on implementation and impact (pp. 133-135). Sterling,
   VA: Stylus.

Hart, G. J. S. (2008). Why certification by STC won't work. Intercom, 55(7),
   11, 13.

Lanier, C. R. (2009). Analysis of the skills called for by technical communi-
   cation employers in recruitment postings. Technical Communication, 56(1),
   51-61.

Maid, B. M. (2004). Using the outcomes statement for technical communica-
   tion. In S. Harrington, K. Rhodes, R. Overman-Fischer, & R. Malenczyk
   (Eds.), The outcomes book: Debate and consensus after the WPA Outcomes State-
   ment (pp. 139-149). Logan, UT: Utah State University Press.

Nagelhout, E. (1999). Pre-professional practices in the technical writing class-
   room: Promoting multiple literacies through research. Technical Communi-
   cation Quarterly, 8(3), 285-299.

Peckham, I. (2006, August 14). Tech outcomes [Online discussion comment].
   Retrieved from http://lists.asu.edu/cgi-bin/wa?HOME

Rainey, K. T., Turner, R. K., & Dayton, D. (2005). Do curricula correspond to
   managerial expectations? Core competencies for technical communicators.
   Technical Communication, 52(3), 323-352.

Rosenberg, N. (2008). Certification: Why we need to begin. Intercom, 55(7),
   11-12.

Turner, R. K., & Rainey, K. T. (2004). Certification in technical communica-
   tion. Technical Communication Quarterly, 13(2), 211-234.

Yancey, K. B. (2005, July 12). Re: The technology and outcomes discussion at
   the WPA. [Electronic mailing list message]. Retrieved from http://lists.asu.
   edu/cgi-bin/wa?A2=ind0507&L=WPA-L&P=R46003&I=-3

Zhang, S., Olfman, L., & Rachtham, P. (2007). Designing ePortfolio 2.0:
   Integrating and coordinating web 2.0 services with ePortfolio systems for
   enhancing users' learning. Journal of Information Systems Education, 18(2),
   203-214.

                                                                                                 87
CHAPTER 5.

WHAT ARE YOU GOING TO
DO WITH THAT MAJOR? AN
EPORTFOLIO AS BRIDGE FROM
UNIVERSITY TO THE WORLD

Karen Ramsay Johnson
Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis

Susan Kahn
Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis

As liberal arts students on a campus where professional programs pre-
dominate, senior English majors at IUPUI are often uncertain of the
value of their degree post-graduation. Creating a culminating reflective
electronic portfolio in the Senior Capstone Seminar in English helps
them develop a sense of accomplishment and take a broader perspective
on their learning. Carefully scaffolded reflection within the ePortfolio
prepares them for the transition to post-graduate life by prompting
them to envision and articulate how they will apply their learning to
new contexts as professionals and citizens in a globalizing world.

   As English majors on a campus dominated by professional programs, our
students are constantly asked the above question by their fellow students, their
friends, and often their parents and other family members. Many are asking
themselves the same thing when they begin the English Senior Capstone Semi-
nar that we team teach. One of our main objectives for the course is to offer
students a sense of the options available to them as English graduates. Equally
important, we want our students to gain confidence in the value of their edu-
cational experiences as liberal arts majors, both for their future careers and for
their lives beyond work.

   The English Capstone at IUPUI is intended as a culminating experience for
English majors that enables them to demonstrate their academic achievements
and supports them as they make the transition to careers or further study. In our
institutional context, these goals present particular challenges. Our mostly first-

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0490.2.05                        89
Johnson and Kahn

generation students enter college largely for the purpose of gaining entrée to the
professional world, and the vast majority choose professional and pre-profession-
al majors. While some of our Capstone students have made a conscious decision
to major in the discipline they are most interested in, regardless of professional
consequences, and others plan to pursue a graduate or post-baccalaureate pro-
fessional degree, most begin the course with some anxiety about the utility of
their degree in English. We have even had students tell us that their parents
actively disapprove of their choice of major. On a predominantly professional,
first-generation campus, we thus face the special challenge of helping humanities
majors construct a bridge between their academic studies and their life beyond
the academy. To meet this challenge, we use IUPUI's electronic portfolio as a site
for students to present and reflect on their educational accomplishments.

CONTEXTS

The University: An Urban Research Institution

   Our institution, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis (IU-
PUI), is an urban research university, with over 30,000 students and some 21
schools. Professional education, particularly in the health and life sciences, is a
strong component of the university's mission; the campus is home to the state's
only medical school and the nation's largest nursing school. Approximately
one third of our students are in graduate/professional programs. Professional
schools dominate at the undergraduate level as well. Among the 15,300 under-
graduate students who had declared a major in 2009, only about 3,550 chose
to pursue studies in traditional liberal arts and sciences disciplines. Indiana has
typically had low educational attainment in comparison to other states and
IUPUI students' family backgrounds reflect this trend: in 2008, only 19 % of
undergraduates reported that both parents had completed college; 55 % came
from families where neither parent had a bachelor's degree. Almost all students
commute to campus.

   While student demographics have changed over the years, with more under-
graduate students entering directly from high school, the average age of students
in the School of Liberal Arts is 26. About 40% are 25 or over, while 33% are
part-time students. English majors offer a slightly more traditional profile, with
44% over the age of 25 and 31 % part-time students. A majority of seniors be-
gan their higher education at another campus and some have transferred more
than once. Many undergraduates already have families of their own and most
work while attending college. With all of these commitments, our students--in

90
                                                                                         ePortfolio as Bridge

contrast to traditional undergraduates--often do not view higher education as
the main focus of their lives. And because so many are transfers who have taken
time off from college and/or changed majors at least once, they may perceive
their undergraduate education as a set of fragmented, unrelated experiences.
Another challenge for us in the Capstone is thus to help students "connect the
dots" among their courses and out-of-class learning experiences, so that they
can see their education as a meaningful and coherent whole.

The Department of English: A Multifaceted Department

   The English Department's Capstone seminar began about ten years ago,
when the department experimented with replacing its tracks with a single Eng-
lish Studies major in which students were required to take a common introduc-
tory course, the Capstone seminar, a range of courses across the tracks, and a set
of electives. Four years ago, in response to a recognition that many students still
wanted to specialize in a track, we reinstated the tracks, while incorporating an
individualized program as a sixth track The department's nearly 300 majors are
now divided primarily into five tracks: Literature, Linguistics, Writing and Lit-
eracy, Film Studies, and Creative Writing. Each track then established its own
introductory course, but we have retained the common Capstone. Students
in each track are still required to take two to four major-level courses in other
tracks, so the Capstone has the secondary purpose of reaffirming the intercon-
nection of the tracks. Currently, Literature and Creative Writing offer students
the option of taking a senior seminar rather than the Capstone Seminar, but
most students continue to choose the Capstone.

THE CAPSTONE COURSE DESIGN

   For the sections of the English Capstone that we team teach, we want stu-
dents to achieve these outcomes:

   · Integrating learning across courses and disciplines (and for many stu-
       dents, across work and academic experiences) and making sense of dis-
       parate experiences, so that their education adds up to more than just a
       set of disconnected courses or requirements completed.

   · Articulating what they have learned and gained from their studies in
       English and the liberal arts in terms meaningful to potential employers
       and other audiences.

   · Using evidence to substantiate claims about the skills and abilities they
       have developed; for example, simply announcing that one is an effective

                                                                                                 91
Johnson and Kahn

       writer and researcher, without pointing to evidence and providing some
       analysis of that evidence, is inadequate.
   · Gaining insight into their own learning processes, so that they feel empow-
       ered to take control over their learning outside formal educational settings.
   · Developing confidence in the value of a liberal arts/English degree. As
       we have noted, for our professionally oriented student population, this
       can be challenging.
   With these outcomes in mind, we have designed the current iteration of
the course around two main components, which we call "Professional Devel-
opment and Career Planning" and "English in the World and Global Citi-
zenship." These components are intended to focus students' reflections on the
future, while encouraging them to consider how they have developed over the
course of a liberal education as potential professionals and as active citizens
at both local and global levels. The structure of the ePortfolio learning matrix
that students develop mirrors these two components, with one major section
devoted to career and a second section to "English in the World" (see Figure 1).
   Both of the main components of the course are scaffolded by assigned read-
ings, guest speakers, and online and in-class discussions. Some readings and
speakers directly address the value of a liberal arts education to the world of
work today. For example, a 2006 New York Times op-ed article by Thomas

Figure 1: English Capstone Matrix.

92
                                                                                         ePortfolio as Bridge

Friedman, "Learning to Keep Learning," argues that the 21st-century workplace
demands professionals who can learn continually, think creatively, work with
ideas and abstractions, and integrate concepts across disciplines--the kinds of
abilities fostered by study in the liberal arts (2006, December 13). Guest speak-
ers include not only School of Liberal Arts career placement staff, but graduates
from the Department of English, often recent students in the course, who dis-
cuss their job search strategies and the ways in which their studies in the liberal
arts generally and English specifically proved relevant to a diverse array of work
experiences. Similarly, for the "English in the World and Global Citizenship"
theme, students read an essay by philosopher Martha Nussbaum that speaks to
the importance of imagination and empathy--capacities closely linked to one
another, in Nussbaum's argument--for effective citizenship and action in the
world (Nussbaum, 2005). Speakers on this theme include senior faculty mem-
bers and administrators from liberal arts fields who are involved with issues of
civic engagement and international affairs.

The Professional Development and Career Planning Component

   For this component of the course and the ePortfolio matrix, students are
asked to collect several pieces of past work, or "artifacts," that exemplify key
career skills they have developed in the course of their education and work
experience and that are related to one of IUPUI's general education outcomes
(called the Principles of Undergraduate Learning or PULs) and an outcome for
their chosen track in the English major. These examples might represent a stu-
dent's best work or might demonstrate the evolution of an ability or skill over
a period of time. Students also create a résumé and cover letter, in consultation
with career professionals in the School of Liberal Arts. Finally, they develop a
career reflection that includes analysis and evaluation of their portfolio artifacts
in relation to their selected PUL and track outcome, as well as discussion of
areas they need to strengthen or continue developing. Students who have iden-
tified a specific career interest write the reflection with an eye to the abilities
and skills needed for success in that career. For the many students who have not
decided on a career path, the artifacts, résumé, and reflection can address the
development of abilities and skills key to effectiveness in any professional field.
We have found that the scaffolding provided by the readings, speakers, online
forums, and discussions helps students to develop a vocabulary for discussing
their learning in terms that are relevant to potential employers. Additional scaf-
folding is supplied by a series of reflection prompts. (See Appendix, Activity 1
for a list of the prompts we used for the Career and Professional Development
reflection in Spring 2010.)

                                                                                                 93
Johnson and Kahn

The English in the World and Global Citizenship Component

   The main assignments for the English in the World and Global Citizenship
component are the Senior Project and the English in the World reflection essay.
The Senior Project includes a project plan, a complete early draft of the project,
an annotated bibliography, and the final project, which the students present
to the whole class at the end of the semester. Because our students come from
all of the tracks in the major, they have their choice of project topics, but each
project must contain a research component. Students can also opt to do a group
senior project, though most choose the individual option. For the reflective es-
say in the ePortfolio, students are then asked to draw on the project, as well as
other portfolio artifacts, to consider how their studies in English and in their
particular tracks have shaped their identities in "the world"--e.g., as members
of a particular community or culture, as global citizens, or as lifelong learners
able to contribute to society in particular ways. (See Light, Chen, and Ittelson,
2012, and Steinberg and Norris, 2011, for more extended discussion of how
ePortfolios can help to advance development of a "civic" identity. A list of the
prompts we used for this section of the portfolio in Spring 2010 can be found
in the Appendix, Activity 2.)

The Capstone Portfolio

   This year, we began using a two-part portfolio process that culminates in a
webfolio. The process is based on the portfolio tools available in our university's
learning management system, Sakai, known as Oncourse at Indiana University.
Beginning in 2005, Kahn and Sharon Hamilton designed and refined a matrix
system, in which students practice a kind of integrative thinking that Kahn
and Hamilton have called "matrix thinking" (Hamilton & Kahn, 2009). In the
current iteration, we use a simple two-cell matrix (see Figure 1), which both
continues the dual focus that is characteristic of matrix thinking and serves as
a training ground to prepare students for what Helen Chen terms "folio think-
ing" (Chen, 2009). Using the Principles of Undergraduate Learning and at
least one goal from those emphasized by their tracks within the English major,
students collect artifacts, save and revise reflective commentary, and create a
storehouse for their potential webfolio materials.

   For the webfolio, students can opt to use a platform within Oncourse or
other web development software of their choice. Each student is required to
include four specific sets of materials: an introductory welcome page, an up-to-
date résumé, the senior capstone project, and their two reflective essays. They
may organize these materials in any configuration that they prefer. They can also

94
                                                                                         ePortfolio as Bridge

add extra pages to highlight specific skills, interests, or causes and organizations
that they support. Some students choose to add their course portfolios to other
websites that they maintain or to which they belong. (The appendix includes
screen shots from webfolios created with Oncourse Presentation Maker.)

STUDENT LEARNING IN THE CAPSTONE
PORTFOLIO EXPERIENCE

Preparing Students to Reflect

   Simply asking students to "reflect" on a piece of work or on an experience is
unlikely to yield results that are meaningful to them or to the faculty members
who read those reflections. We want students' reflections to contribute to their
accomplishments of the outcomes for the course and we gear our preparations
for reflection to those outcomes.

   We begin preparing students to reflect by discussing what we mean by "re-
flection" and what we hope they will achieve as a result of reflecting. A par-
ticularly helpful tool has been a document titled "Development in Reflective
Thinking" (see Appendix, Table 1), originally created as a descriptive rubric at
Alverno College and later adapted by Sharon Hamilton for IUPUI (Hamilton
& Kahn, 2009, p. 96). The document, which we distribute to and discuss with
our students, describes characteristics of "introductory," "intermediate," and
"advanced" reflective writing. For example, in "introductory"-level reflections,
students tend to narrate "what I did" to create a piece of work, to make gen-
eral claims of competence or mastery without evidence, to repeat evaluators'
judgments, and to state assumptions without explaining or questioning them.
"Advanced"-level reflections, by contrast, exhibit characteristics associated with
higher-order thinking skills: analysis of thought processes (i.e., metacognition);
use of evidence to support arguments; questioning of assumptions and aware-
ness that assumptions are shaped by culture and individual experience; ability
to self-assess; high-level conceptual thinking; and synthesis of ideas from mul-
tiple disciplinary and experiential frameworks.

   Keeping in mind that most reflections do not fall neatly into one develop-
mental category, here are two brief reflection excerpts that serve, respective-
ly, to illustrate some of the characteristics of "introductory" and "advanced"
reflection:

         Example 1: Second in this section is my outline for a graphic
         novel titled What Good Men Dream. This was my first at-

                                                                                                 95
Johnson and Kahn

         tempt at writing anything like this. Over the course of the
         semester every student worked on an outline for a story and
         at the end we polished it and presented the full outline with
         a few sample pages. Mine went very well and the teacher was
         pleased with it.

         Example 2: "Afternoon at Grandma's House" was my first
         attempt at writing a form poem. I chose the sestina because of
         its difficulty, and I was very pleased with the way that my piece
         came out. I found that I had a little difficulty keeping the line
         lengths consistent as the piece went along, but I focused on
         keeping my language compact and precise. Wordiness is some-
         thing I struggle with, so this was a real challenge to me.

   After discussing the "Development in Reflective Thinking" document with
the class, we spend part of a class session working in small groups to evalu-
ate several reflections written in past sections of the class. While the students'
conclusions do not always agree with our own, this exercise provides the op-
portunity for students to see several examples of reflections written at varying
levels of intellectual maturity and sophistication and to discuss and defend their
judgments about the effectiveness of each. To avoid giving the students the
impression that there is one "right" way to approach reflection or that we are
looking for writing that adheres to a specific formula, we try to provide more
than one example of "advanced" reflection.

   Now students write a rough draft of their career reflection, using one or
more of the questions or prompts we provide. Thoughtful prompts are essential
to supporting students' reflective writing (Zubizarreta, 2009, pp. 11-13). Our
prompts are derived in part from the course outcomes and in part from the
observations in the "Development in Reflective Thinking" document. In the
next class, we break up into groups of two or three to critique one another's
drafts, using a review form that we created based on "Development in Reflec-
tive Thinking." Each student receives at least one and, ideally, two written and
oral critiques of the first draft. At this point, we ask students to write the "final"
version of their career reflections.

OUTCOMES OF EPORTFOLIO DEVELOPMENT

   Do students achieve the outcomes we seek for the ePortfolio and the class
as a whole? It depends. Kahn notes that in earlier iterations of the class, where

96
                                                                                         ePortfolio as Bridge

students were asked to develop a much more extensive ePortfolio in lieu of the
traditional senior project, they were given more practice in writing reflections
and the reflections showed greater sophistication. At the same time, too much
reflective writing can make reflection seem routine, a rote exercise. We have
yet to find the ideal balance between more traditional class work and portfolio
development--and perhaps this balance is different for each class and even each
student.

   Many students, however, do find the combination of readings, speakers,
consultation with a career placement professional, and development of the eP-
ortfolio helpful in enabling them to articulate more clearly to themselves and
others the value of their English degree, both to the workplace and to life be-
yond the workplace. In particular, reviewing a body of past work created over
time and then reflecting on it can be powerful; students who have kept examples
of early work done in college often note that they had not realized the extent of
their intellectual growth since they were freshmen. One student writes:

         I no longer see what I have to offer as an English job hunter
         in mere terms of degree possessed and years of experience ...
         I look at what I have to offer in a larger context. Beyond the
         essentials in my résumé that I share with all other graduates, I
         now see capacities in critical thinking, communications, and
         multi-project analyses. All these capacities can be supported
         with the creative and scholarly material in my matrix.

   Some students show visible growth in their capacity to reflect on their own
learning and experiences over the course of the semester. A student whose first
reflection in the semester was broadly focused, with only a few references to
professors and courses and brief statements of what she learned in each, had, by
semester's end, developed the ability to connect her years of work (often with
troubled youth) to her own background of growing "up poor even by poor
people's standards," and her English major to her future:

         Beyond my own hunger for the kind of learning that I can
         only get from sitting among a group of other learners and
         hashing issues out, I want to share it. I want to bring that
         opportunity to people in shelters who are just too bone-tired
         to do more than sit in a circle and talk about life and the shit
         it throws at you .... I feel like it's my role in life to be some
         sort of liaison between those who want, and the knowledge
         they want to obtain but don't quite know how to get it.

                                                                                                 97
Johnson and Kahn

   Another student, who had served in the military in Iraq and returned to
school to complete a double major in English and Political Science, makes pow-
erful connections among several liberal arts disciplines as she writes about the
development of her critical thinking skills:

         IslamY107.doc exemplifies my ability to be a critical thinker
         because I had to put forth significant effort to separate my
         emotion from the facts and research. This skill was one of the
         first skills taught to me in college. I believe that objectivity
         and rationality are at the core of every serious student--this
         paper shows me that I can be a serious student. Every class
         that I have taken in political science, English, and philosophy
         has emphasized the importance of looking past the surface
         of things. Additionally, my education in the liberal arts has
         taught me that there is much more to things than what my
         emotions tell me there are. There is an entire world of people
         out there, each person possessing a uniqueness of mind and
         emotional experience. There are several cultures and societies
         that need to be taken into consideration before my own. My
         emotions are only central to my own experiences, and my
         critical thinking skills allow me to leap outside of my own
         experiences.

   Cathy, a middle-aged, middle-class wife and mother, came to IUPUI when
her children reached high school age; as she writes, when she graduated from
high school, she "did not have the parental support to be anything other than a
wife." She credits her Capstone project with clarifying her life's purpose: "After
contemplating my final project, I have discovered that the works I researched
are a direct reflection of who I am and my place within society." Now, she says,
she wants "to help others achieve a college education and experience for them-
selves [a] transformation [like the one that she experienced]."

   As these four students illustrate, the diversity of our student body, especially
in terms of age, class, and life circumstances, guarantees that their experiences
of reflection and of its outcomes will also be different. Another common cat-
egory of student at our university is the one who begins at a traditional liberal
arts college or university and becomes disillusioned. Ted, who is from a well-
educated family on the west coast, dropped out of a liberal arts college to work
for Americorps and for several non-profit ventures. Perhaps the most sophisti-
cated thinker in our sections of the Capstone, he began the class with the sense

98
                                                                                         ePortfolio as Bridge

that his education would give him nothing more than a necessary credential.
Yet even he acknowledges in his final reflection that his training has come to
shape his thinking. After a semester of reading, reflecting, and interacting with
guest speakers and students, Ted had arrived at a somewhat better place; talking
with guest speakers and fellow students about work that might advance his ide-
als, he became more active in class discussion and in on-line forums and e-mail
exchanges. His second reflection supplements the theme of work learning and
focuses on a series of obviously successful course experiences; for example, he
integrates his English training with his work in a computer science course:

         Even when I tried to study other disciplines I found myself
         still thinking within the Liberal Arts mindset. The clearest
         example of this was a paper I wrote about Charles Babbage
         during my Fundamental Computer Science Concepts course.
         While looking at the history of computing, as it is commonly
         taught, I noticed some interesting narrative gaps and ac-
         cepted assumptions. My paper focused only on assumptions
         made by present historians looking back at Babbage, but the
         impulse for the paper was some fundamental errors I noticed
         in the way the history of computing is told. As I mentioned,
         there are many assumptions made about what Charles
         Babbage intended to produce (given that he produced very
         little), but even worse the entire narrative stems from an idea
         of technological determinism--that is technology advanced
         the way it did and when it did because it was bound to.
         While a common way of viewing any topic within history
         (e.g., WWII was inevitable because of WWI) it is only one
         view, and completely ignores the idea of contingency--that
         is just because something has occurred does not mean that it
         was certain to occur.

ISSUES EMERGING THROUGH ASSESSMENT

   While we are gratified when students make visible progress in their think-
ing and integrative skills or arrive at important insights over the course of their
Capstone experience, some issues have been difficult for us to resolve:

   · It is difficult to devise instructions and prompts that work for a wide
       range of students. While the diversity of our student body is, in most

                                                                                                 99
Johnson and Kahn

       respects, one of IUPUI's greatest strengths, it can be hard to address all
       levels of preparedness at the same time. For example, while weak stu-
       dents cannot begin to reflect without very precise instructions and inse-
       cure students need the reassurance that such instructions provide, strong
       students tend to find them limiting. In one section particularly, while
       discussing the reflection prompts and examples, the stronger students
       pointed out that it is easy to see what is "right" to say. They viewed the
       "good" sample reflection as one in which the writer was saying what he
       or she knew the instructor wanted to hear, parroting the language of the
       PULs and the rubric, and engaging in what they saw as a relatively mind-
       less exercise of finding examples. Although the bad example was visibly
       poorly written and lacking in any serious thought, even the strongest
       students viewed this writer as "honest," because he or she was not trying
       to please the instructor. To a great extent, this resistance diminished as
       the semester progressed, but we would prefer to have a range of prompts
       that can be geared to individual needs.
   · Because many of our students have significant work experience (often
       full-time work), they can experience a bifurcation of identity, in which
       their student selves seem distanced from their identities in the work
       place. Thus, unlike traditional students, they need to see a direct con-
       nection not only between their work and their courses, but also between
       academic and professional reflection. A vivid example of this need ap-
       pears in the reflections of our recent student, Jay. Jay dropped out of
       his first college to take a full-time job with a web-based company; he
       has had enormous success in his job, including being selected as the
       company's "first ever employee of the month, standing out beyond oth-
       ers as a hard-working, ambitious employee always ready to take on new
       challenges." Thus, he has become convinced that "most of my skills for
       the `real-world' have been honed in the real world." For Jay, integration
       of his academic and workplace learning was not a meaningful goal, and
       Jay is not alone. Some of our students continue to view education purely
       as a credential, either because, like him, they have been successful with-
       out it or because they have "learned," either from poor teachers or from
       parents, that the main goal is to have the diploma. Thus, they tend to
       undervalue reflection in an academic setting, because they view it specifi-
       cally as an academic process.
   · On the other hand, for other students, inflated ideas about the value of a
       baccalaureate degree can inhibit the reflection process. As we have noted,
       a large percentage of our students are first-generation college students,
       and they often have an unrealistic view of what a college education

100
                                                                                         ePortfolio as Bridge

       means. They rightly view college graduation as a major accomplishment,
       but, because they have known very few college graduates as they grew
       up, they may believe that the degree credential itself will enable them to
       move directly into the job of their choice. They also, however, continue
       to underrate their own accomplishments. They need to recognize that,
       valuable though their college experience is, their earlier experience must
       also figure into their examined life, as Plato called it; they must learn to
       see how their pasts inform their presents and their futures.

ADDRESSING THE ISSUES

   The most immediate issues that we need to address stem from some stu-
dents' lack of familiarity with the process of writing reflective essays; we have
noticed over time that almost all of the second essays are far better than the first
ones. Accordingly, we have reformatted the reflection process to allow for more
specific reflections and more individual input. Our next iteration of the course
will follow this process:

   · Have students do a reflection early in the semester, to be revised and
       expanded near the end of the semester.

   · On the first or second day (or first day after drop/add), have students
       explain what they think reflection means and how they think that one
       should go about writing a reflective essay on one's education as an Eng-
       lish major.

   · First artifact: Write a short (2-3) page reflection specifically on that piece,
       using PUL and track goal.

   · Second artifact: Write a short (2-3) page reflection specifically on that
       piece, using PUL and track goal.

   · First Reflection: Write a 4-5 page reflective essay referring to those arti-
       facts and reflections.

   · Students will then make a list of the main points in that essay in a word
       processing program or in a blog; as the semester progresses, they will
       keep notes (checked periodically) on what new ideas they have about
       those points or on others that they add to the list: a reflective journal.
       For students who have trouble doing this, we will offer specific journal
       topics related to readings, guest speakers, and the individual student's
       track and career goals.

   · Students will create a skills résumé (can be in addition to a standard
       résumé).

   · Students will write a short reflective essay for the Senior Project.

                                                                                                101
Johnson and Kahn

   · Second Reflection (revision of Reflection 1): As the last assignment,
       students will revise the first reflective essay, adding new ideas from the
       journal and referring to the skills résumé, senior project, and project
       reflection for more ideas (7-10 pages).

   We also want to address the issues specific to students who have difficulty
integrating the academic and work aspects of their lives, but we believe that all
of our students will benefit from understanding that electronic portfolios, with
their central component of reflection, are increasingly important not only to
higher education, but also to employers. Thus, we are in the process of identify-
ing two or three companies in Indianapolis that use electronic portfolios and
requesting information on the purposes for which they are used, the guidelines
that are given to employees preparing them, and samples of exemplary portfo-
lios. If possible, we will also have a company representative who is involved in
the process visit our class.

CONCLUSIONS

   As the above discussion suggests, our versions of the English Capstone Sem-
inar and the Capstone portfolio remain works-in-progress, particularly when it
comes to helping students reflect in more meaningful ways. In the most recent
iteration of the course and portfolio, however, our meshing of the matrix for-
mat developed by Kahn and Hamilton with the webfolio proved largely suc-
cessful, in our opinion. The matrix continues to be enormously helpful to the
students because of the scaffolding it enables us to provide, but they are, not
surprisingly, more engaged and stimulated by the experience of creating Web
pages. This holds true even for students who are not normally frequent technol-
ogy users. An added benefit is that they are easily able to envision a potential
employer visiting their webfolios; many students say that they expect to main-
tain and update their webfolios regularly. While the materials included in the
webfolio are still informed by matrix thinking, the webfolio adds new levels
of integration and provides students, professors, and other site visitors with a
highly individualized, immediately engaging, and visually exciting representa-
tion of student work and reflection.

   We are immensely grateful to our students who, over the years, have shared
their time, work and thoughts with us; we especially thank those who have al-
lowed us to share their work with our readers. The English Capstone has been
at least as powerful a reflection experience for us as it has for them. Indeed, our
experience of reflection has reaffirmed for us the vanity of "conclusions." Even
in the process of writing this essay, we found ourselves entertaining new ideas

102
                                                                                         ePortfolio as Bridge

about how we might refine the course, and we welcome any comments or sug-
gestions that our readers may offer.

REFERENCES

Barrett, H. (2004). Electronic portfolios as digital stories of deep learning:
   Emerging digital tools to support reflection in learner-centered portfolios.
   Retrieved from http://electronicportfolios.org/digistory/epstory.html

Batson, T. (2010). ePortfolios, Finally! Campus Technology. Retrieved from
   http://campustechnology.com/Articles/2010/04/07/ePortfolios-Finally.
   aspx?Page=1

Cambridge, D., Cambridge, B., & Yancey, K. (Eds.). (2009). Electronic port-
   folios 2.0: Emergent research on implementation and impact. Sterling, VA:
   Stylus.

Chen, H. L. (2009). Using eportfolios to support lifelong and lifewide learning.
   In D. Cambridge, B. Cambridge, & K. B. Yancey (Eds.), Electronic portfolios
   2.0: Emergent research on implementation and impact (pp. 29-35). Sterling,
   VA: Stylus.

Cohn, E. R., & Hibbitts, B. J. (2004). Beyond the electronic portfolio: A
   lifetime personal web space. Educause Quarterly, 27(4). Retrieved from
   http://www.educause.edu/EDUCAUSE+Quarterly/EDUCAUSEQuarter-
   lyMagazineVolum/BeyondtheElectronicPortfolioAL/157310

Friedman, T. (2006, December 13). Learning to keep learning. Retrieved from
   http://select.nytimes.com/2006/12/13/opinion/13friedman.html?_r=2

Heinrich, E., Bhattacharya, M., & Rayudu, R. (2007). Preparation for lifelong
   learning using ePortfolios. European Journal of Engineering Education, 32(6),
   653-663.

Jones, S., & Lea, M. R. (2008). Digital literacies in the lives of undergraduate
   students: Exploring personal and curricular spheres of practice. The Elec-
   tronic Journal of e-Learning, 6(3), 207-216.

Kahn, S., & Hamilton, S. J. (2009). Demonstrating intellectual growth and
   development: The IUPUI ePort. In D. Cambridge, B. Cambridge, & K. B.
   Yancey (Eds.), Electronic portfolios 2.0: Emergent research on implementation
   and impact (pp. 91-96). Sterling, VA: Stylus.

Light, T. P., Chen, H. L., & Ittelson, J. (2012). Documenting learning with ep-
   ortfolios: A guide for college instructors. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Nussbaum, M. (2004). Liberal education & global community. Liberal Edu-
   cation 90(1). Retrieved from http://www.aacu.org/liberaleducation/le-wi04/
   le-wi04feature4.cfm

                                                                                                103
Johnson and Kahn

Siemens, G. (2004). ePortfolios. Elearnspace: Everthing elearning. Retrieved
   from http://www.elearnspace.org/Articles/eportfolios.htm

Steinberg, K.S., & Norris, K.E. (2011). Assessing civic mindedness. Diversity
   & Democracy: Civic Learning for Shared Futures, 14(3), 12-14

Yancey, K. B. (2009). Reflection and electronic portfolios: Inventing the self
   and reinventing the university. In D. Cambridge, B. Cambridge, & K. B.
   Yancey (Eds.), Electronic portfolios 2.0: Emergent research on implementation
   and impact (pp. 5-16). Sterling, VA: Stylus.

Zubizaretta, J. (2009). The learning portfolio: Reflective practice for improving
   student learning (2nd ed.). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

APPENDIX A

Activity 1: Prompts for Career and Professional Development Reflection

   As you write your reflection, please focus your thinking on one of IUPUI's
Principles of Undergraduate Learning and one of the outcomes for your track
within the English major. You might consider some (but probably not all) of
the following questions:

   · How is your classroom learning of your selected PUL and English out-
       come related to work and career issues? How have these learning experi-
       ences contributed to your development as a professional?

   · How do your chosen artifacts demonstrate your ability to apply your
       selected PUL and English outcome to your professional work? (Or how
       did creating these artifacts contribute to your professional development?)
       Do they show a trajectory of professional development? If so, how?

   · If you have selected a career, how does your choice of major specifically
       relate to the requirements of this profession?

   · In what ways do you need to improve to prepare further for your career?
   · Be sure to provide a well-supported critical analysis of your selected arti-

       facts in the context of PUL and English outcome and to use the artifacts
       to exemplify your insights.
   · Also be sure to specify which PUL and track outcomes you're addressing
       and to use the examples as evidence for your claims.
   You might find it helpful to think of your reflection as either an extended
argument (with your work samples as evidence) or as a narrative about your
learning over time (again citing your work examples or specific aspects of them
as evidence).

104
                                                                                         ePortfolio as Bridge

Activity 2: Prompts for English in the World and Global Citizenship
Reflection

   Your "English in the World" matrix cell should demonstrate the ways in
which your studies in English and in your particular track have shaped your
identity in "the world"--e.g., as a member of a particular community or cul-
ture, as a global citizen, as a lifelong learner able to contribute to society in
particular ways, or in relation to some other aspect of the world beyond your
college education. If they're relevant, please also consider courses in other dis-
ciplines and work or intern experiences. Think of our capstone seminar as a
bridge between your education and your life in "the world." As you select exam-
ples of past work to upload, consider how the skills and values you've acquired
from your studies in English and other disciplines will influence and support
you as an individual, family and community member, and citizen of and in the
world. Questions to think about when you write your reflection (remember you
shouldn't try to respond to all of these--pick one or several and organize your
reflection around those):

   · In what ways do your artifacts/work examples and senior capstone proj-
       ect demonstrate your ability to identify and question assumptions (your
       own and others)?

   · In what ways do your artifacts and senior capstone project demonstrate
       awareness of who you are as a citizen of a local culture and global society?

   · What else do your artifacts and senior capstone project demonstrate
       about your strongest skills as you move from your education (or this
       stage of it) to the rest of your life?

   · Can you identify specific aspects of your major that have shaped your
       self-concept and aspirations? For example, has your major (or track) in-
       fluenced how you see yourself as a local and global citizen? In what ways
       are these influences reflected in your artifacts and senior capstone proj-
       ect? (If you're a double major, you may consider both majors.)

   · Do your artifacts, culminating in your senior capstone project, show a
       trajectory of development as a learner in relation to your PUL and track
       outcome? As a citizen? If so, how?

   · How is your choice of major related to the abilities necessary for lifelong
       learning? How do you need to improve those abilities? Cite evidence
       from your artifacts and senior capstone project.

   Be sure to provide a well-supported critical analysis of your selected artifacts,
including your senior capstone project, in the context of PUL and English out-
comes and to use the artifacts to exemplify your insights.

                                                                                                105
Johnson and Kahn

Table 1: Development in Reflective Thinking

Areas of                Introductory             Intermediate            Advanced
Development
                        · global judgments       · applies disciplin-    · observes inten-
Ability to self-assess     w/o evidence             ary constructs          tional changes as
                                                                            a basis for higher
· observing own         · sees performance       · demonstrates             learning
   performance             same as assign-          deeper under-
                           ment (did what           standing of          · probes own work
· using feedback &         was told)                concept                 and understanding
   evidence
                        · repeats judgments      · uses feedback         · uses multiple and
· finding & analyz-        of evaluators            to expand               interdisciplinary
   ing patterns                                     understanding           frameworks to
                        · sees feedback as                                  understand
· making judgments         affirmation and       · recognizes connec-
                           evidence                 tions, links, and    · makes connec-
                                                    relationships, such     tions, applications,
                        · narrates process          as cause & effect       and uses to move
                           (did this; did that)                             forward
                                                 · makes inferences
                        · observes rather           (relates judgments
                           than infers              to evidence)

Awareness of how        · limits concept         · sees feedback         · integrates feed-
one learns                 development to           as a means to           back and past
                           the terms given in       understanding           performance to
· concepts and             the assignment           links between           construct future
    misconceptions                                  current and future      learning plans
                        · sees feedback as          performance
· knowledge                external and not                              · uses growing
    Construction           subject to analysis   · notes changes in         awareness of
                                                    own patters of          knowledge struc-
· metacognition         · sees knowledge            performance;            tures to envision
                           construction only                                future learning
                           within terms of       · sees knowledge
                           the assignment           construction         · understands own
                                                    as integrating          performance as
                        · employs personal          known and new           a learner and
                           theories largely         knowledge               transfers learning
                           without explana-                                 strategies to mul-
                           tion or analysis      · applies theories or      tiple contexts
                                                    broader frame-
                                                    works to discus-
                                                    sion of learning

106
                                                                           ePortfolio as Bridge

· Developing life-       · confuses perfor-       · self-identifies as a   · sees own identify
   long learning skills     mance and feed-          learner, construct-      as a learner, em-
                            back with identity       ing meaning              ploying internal-
· developing iden-          as a learner             within experience,       ized construction
   tity as a learner                                 now and in the           of effectiveness
                         · uses generalized          future
· transferring              notions of success                             · questions assump-
   learning to other        or effectiveness as   · questions personal        tions to construct
   contexts                 basis for reflection     assumptions and          intellectual com-
                                                     recognizes mul-          mitments, aware
· understands learn-     · global self-evalu-        tiple perspectives       of multiple
   ing as a lifelong        ations minimize                                   perspectives
   process                  connections           · identifies chal-
                            between per-             lenges, demon-        · situates personal
                            formance and             strating positive        narrative in larger
                            reflecting on            attitude and             intellectual/profes-
                            performance              confidence, using        sional frameworks,
                                                     self-assessment as a     transferring
                                                     basis to improve         learning to new
                                                                              situations

Derived from a model of "Developmental Perspectives on Reflective Learning"
Alverno College 2004. Sharon J. Hamilton 2005. Reprinted with permission.

APPENDIX B. WEBFOLIO SCREEN SHOTS

Figure 2. Webfolio Screen Shot 1.
                                                                                                107
Johnson and Kahn

Figure 3. Webfolio Screen Shot 2.
108
CHAPTER 6.

CAREER EPORTFOLIOS:
RECOGNIZING AND
PROMOTING EMPLOYABLE
SKILLS

Karen Bonsignore
New York City College of Technology

New York City College of Technology "City Tech," which is part of the
City University of New York (CUNY), began its ePortfolio Project
with Title V grant funding in 2001. The project was institutionalized
when grant funding ended in 2006. Since it began, the City Tech
ePortfolio project has provided well over 5,000 students from many
departments within the college the opportunity to prepare a Career
ePortfolio to be used to showcase their professional development and
academic skills in the form of a digital résumé. The Career ePortfolio
enables students to store their work, document what they have learned
in college, and demonstrate how college has prepared them for a career.

CAREER EPORTFOLIO DEFINED

   A Career ePortfolio is a specific type of portfolio that is created by students
to showcase their best academic work and unique attributes that may not be
demonstrated on a traditional résumé or during an interview. A Career ePortfo-
lio may include artifacts such as an introduction or homepage, various academic
examples, a statement of professional goals, work experience, internships, and a
résumé. The Career ePortfolio is a dynamic document that can be viewed from
any Internet-enabled computer or stored on other digital storage devices. An
ePortfolio website address can easily be sent to multiple prospective employers
both locally and around the world. In the case of a graduate applying for a job,
detailed information about the student is not always easily added to a pen and
paper résumé, but may be included effectively in an ePortfolio. For example, a
student can post actual examples of their papers, artwork, engineering designs,

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0490.2.06                       109
Bonsignore

budgets, reports, architectural drawings, advertising brochures, and PowerPoint
presentations to demonstrate their skills (Zhang, Olfman, & Rachtham, 2007).
They can also emphasize skills that are relevant to their career objectives.

   In addition to creating a dynamic document for employment and graduate
school, students write a brief reflective statement about their professional goals.
The professional goals statement may be short term such as when they graduate
or long term, 5 to 10 years after graduation and they have gained experience,
or it can be a combination of the two. Goals also may include pursuing an
advanced degree or gaining additional experience in related fields or a desire
to move into management or their own business. Students are encouraged to
demonstrate how they intend to contribute to their chosen field.

   Students producing a Career ePortfolio are encouraged to be creative, but
choose design elements such as colors, backgrounds, graphics, and fonts that
show their work at its best. Discussion regarding principle elements of design,
as well as rhetoric and purpose, is critical in such portfolio design. The goal
of a Career ePortfolio is to present professional and academic information in
addition to presenting a professional and creative image, demonstrating func-
tionally literate skill sets. This is the type of development called for by scholars,
recently, like Shepherd and Goggin (2012) in "Reclaiming `Old' Literacies in
the New Literacy Information Age: The Functional Literacies of the Mediated
Workstation."

Using Technology to Its Greatest Advantage

   The City Tech Career ePortfolio project allows students to work with state of
the art multimedia technology as they explore their career paths and profession-
al development opportunities. This generation of students has been plugged
into technology since the day they were born. They grew up with educational
games, sophisticated software programs and the internet. They are comfortable
communicating with computers, cell phones and through social networking.
Creating a Career ePortfolio demonstrates that a student is able to use technol-
ogy creatively and in a professional manner. The Career ePortfolio is an excel-
lent way for students to "showcase" their best work to prospective employers,
internships, and colleges. The Career ePortfolio allows students to build and
share a dynamic résumé in a multimedia format. Students can share their Ca-
reer ePortfolio with anyone connected to the internet anywhere in the world
with a simple click of a mouse. Creating a Career ePortfolio allows students to
take advantage of the 21st-century technology skills they are comfortable using.
Students enjoy working with technology because they are comfortable with it.
Although creating a Career ePortfolio may be new to most students, the learn-

110
                                                                                           Career ePortfolios

ing curve required to create one is generally short because of students' previous
technology and computer experiences.

Student Buy-In

   Because students feel that the Career ePortfolio project is meaningful to
their future when they graduate, as evidenced by many reflective statements,
most enjoy working on their ePortfolios. Students understand that an ePort-
folio is a way to help them stand out in a crowd of sometimes more than a
hundred applicants applying for the same job. By including a professional goals
statement as part of their ePortfolio, students are encouraged to think early in
their academic career about their course work, graduate school, career path
and professional development. Working with technology to create the ePort-
folio is another plus that keeps students interested. The template system used
at City Tech allows all students, from those who have only novice computer
skills to students with the most advanced skills, the ability to create, update and
maintain their ePortfolios. See the online version of this book for examples. All
City Tech student ePortfolios are stored and maintained for no charge on the
college server. This allows students to update their ePortfolio after graduation
and provides storage of their documents. Many students take advantage of this
feature by updating their ePortfolios after they have graduated and earned some
work experience. Alumni ePortfolios remain on the server for five years after
graduation.

Who Owns the Career ePortfolio?

   A Career ePortfolio is the individual work of the student. Although it is
stored on the college server, only the student may make changes to or delete his/
her work. Collectively, the ePortfolios may be used for a single course, program
or college-wide assessment purposes. Assessment will be discussed later in this
chapter but it is important to note that the purpose of a Career ePortfolio is
that it is student-owned for highlighting the student's best work and marketing
his/her academic and career skills. Administration reserves the right to remove
ePortfolios with questionable content. Any ePortfolio that is deemed inappro-
priate for posting on the Internet can be blocked from viewing until the student
has been contacted and the ePortfolio has been revised. All students participat-
ing in ePortfolio program must sign a CUNY Computer User Contract. When
students first start the ePortfolio project at City Tech, they sign a contract with
a disclosure that their website may be seen by anyone with internet access. They
are informed of the purpose of a professional "Career" ePortfolio and the reper-

                                                                                                111
Bonsignore

cussions of posting off-topic content. Students are encouraged not to post per-
sonal contact information because of the online aspect of the ePortfolio. Each
student uses campus email instead of a personal email as contact information.
The way ePortfolios are stored on the college server they are not easily found by
search engines. The student generally must give their ITP web address to visi-
tors or add it to a cover letter or résumé. Students are cautioned to always keep
their ePortfolio updated and professional and follow the general rules of safety
that apply to sharing information over the Internet.

   Most Career ePortfolios are created as part of a single class project or a pro-
gram including multiple courses. A Career ePortfolio may also be part of an aca-
demic club or society. In each cohort, a faculty member works with the students
to mentor the online content. Students are encouraged to submit drafts to their
professor before posting the final project. Similar to paper based assignments,
ePortfolios may contain spelling and grammatical errors, which can be caught
early if drafts are reviewed. Faculty often include the ePortfolio course require-
ments in the syllabus to guide students to produce a professional ePortfolio.
Peer competition among the students in a class is a good way for the students to
see other ePortfolios and improve their own work.

   Generally, most students enjoy working on their ePortfolios. Today, stu-
dents are more comfortable with online technology and want more computer
enhanced learning assignments in their classes. This is no surprise since the cur-
rent generation of students that have grown up with computers in their homes
and communicate predominately through social networking. Being able to ap-
ply for a job or graduate school on-line seems natural to today's students. They
embrace the technology as well as the purpose behind the ePortfolio.

   Below is sample selection of students' comments on what they liked about
creating their ePortfolio:

         Creating my ePortfolio allowed me to display my accom-
         plishments on the web.

         It was something new to me and I enjoyed the challenge.

         My work can be posted online, so employers can see it.

         Once it's finished, I can forward the address to any employer,
         friend, or person of my choice. Also, I would have a chance
         to express myself in full and employers can learn more about
         me!

112
                                                                                           Career ePortfolios

         It gave me a chance to organize my skills and put them to use
         in a professional and technical way.

         People can see my work around the world.

         My ePortfolio helped me to organize my thoughts.

         I realized that I want to continue with my career and I want
         to go on for my Master's degree.

         The process itself (of creating the portfolio). I've never done
         anything like that before so it was fun.

         It's already over, but we are lucky to have access to it in order
         to update.

         This experience provided me with a chance to write about
         my thoughts, experiences and express my talents openly for
         others to share. It offered me a chance to allow people to see
         the real me.

         I enjoyed creating my eVideo for my ePortfolio.

         I was able to think about my long term goals.

         I learned more about my industry and have a clearer
         understanding about where I want to be.

         The ePortfolio project helped me think in depth about what
         I want to pursue as my career. It also made me analyze what I
         have accomplished and what I still need to accomplish.

Role of Faculty

   Faculty are encouraged to develop clear learning objectives for the course/
program and involve the implementation of the ePortfolio project into the
course/program and the department's overarching assessment plan. Faculty are
responsible for grading ePortfolios and using an electronic roster to view the

                                                                                                113
Bonsignore

student Career ePortfolios. When faculty are surveyed, they overwhelmingly
responded that 1) they enjoy participating in the ePortfolio project, and 2) the
ePortfolio project provides them with an additional way to assess their students'
skills. Faculty new to the Career ePortfolio project should be supported with
course preparation time, technology training and training in online pedagogy
with details on the objectives of student Career ePortfolios.

   If publishing a Career ePortfolio online so students can present themselves
to employers is the main purpose, then the role of faculty is to partner with
the students to help them develop their ePortfolio in a professional style. The
process starts with clear instructions laid out in the syllabus so that the students
know what will be expected and when assignment deadlines are due. Faculty
should guide students to use professional backgrounds, colors, fonts, pictures
and graphics. The style of the ePortfolio as well as the number and type of aca-
demic examples that are placed in the Career ePortfolio are important. Faculty
who provide feedback throughout the process and ask for drafts before the final
posting will receive a higher quality of work submitted. Generally, participa-
tion in the ePortfolio project is not "more work" for a faculty member, it is
just different since they are grading the students' work or academic examples
posted online rather than in paper formats. The same coursework or academic
examples that were required before the ePortfolio are still a required part of the
course, however, now the assignment has an online component. To simplify the
grading process, many faculty use a Grading Rubric to score projects (Fox &
DeLorenzo, 2009). A copy of an ePortfolio Rubric is included in the assessment
section of this chapter. Faculty teaching ePortfolio content become facilitators
in the learning process thereby fostering a transformation of the students from
passive to active learners. Online and technology enhanced education is learner
centered.

   Creating an ePortfolio is a very creative process. Communication between
faculty and students is paramount. Today, students want and expect faculty to
be proficient with technology and incorporate it into their teaching. At the very
least, students expect to be able to communicate with faculty via email, access
online resources, have access to the Internet activities, and discussion boards.
Electronic SMART classrooms are becoming more commonplace. The multiple
uses of technology for teaching and learning are evolving and ePortfolio is a part
of the advancement. The hands-on training of the ePortfolio creation is usually
obtained in an ePortfolio computer lab with technology mentors not faculty.
Since the creation of templates and online commercial products has made the
technical part of creating the website easier, the website creation is secondary
and the role of the faculty is to train the students regarding the content they
place on their ePortfolio. Faculty are responsible for guiding the students and

114
                                                                                           Career ePortfolios

grading the ePortfolios. As for the grade given for the ePortfolio project, which
is determined by the individual faculty member--the higher the grade value of
the project, the more time the students will spend on their ePortfolio.

   Selected faculty comments on what they liked about the ePortfolio project
include:

         The ePortfolio project supported those students who may
         have never used a computer or attempted to access the in-
         ternet. For those who had, it increased their computer skills.
         Many of my students were creative in their presentation
         of the ePortfolio. Some used sound, movement and other
         sophisticated graphics.

         In terms of the content, it challenged the students to per-
         fect their writing skills since it is viewed in a public forum.
         The choice of content also encouraged them to make their
         decisions in terms of confidentiality and explanation of their
         career for the lay person to understand.

         For those who had yet to design a résumé, many students
         completed this ePortfolio exercise in their second year of col-
         lege. Grammatical preciseness, attention to detail, layout and
         presentation were paramount for this type of assignment.

         When starting this project, I didn't see how the Career
         ePortfolio could be really useful for all students. But after the
         very first semester, I was excited to see how this project took
         to an absolutely new level the presentation of students. The
         projects and assignments of the course were presented in a
         structured and organized way, and were easy to read and ana-
         lyze. Having ePortfolios to review together allowed us to have
         class discussions about the projects. The ePortfolio added a
         "human touch" to my courses: viewing and discussing port-
         folios with short biographies of the students, their goals and
         dreams was very moving, and allowed all of us to learn more
         about each other.

   Students are educated for roles in industry and often seek recognition for
their efforts from the eyes of "others"--clients, professors and/or peers. This
makes perfect sense for their professional development but has a drawback, if,

                                                                                                115
Bonsignore

in the course of their education, they lose sight of the relationship between what
they are learning and the value of their own creativity and critical thinking in
choosing and developing content.

   I cannot emphasize enough the insight and self-knowledge gained by these
students in creating their ePortfolios. It was a new and valuable experience for
them to consider a presentation in terms of WHO they are, WHERE they are
on their journey, and WHAT they hope for. The project created self-awareness,
and a new, healthy self-consciousness about their development over time and its
validity as an achievement. In addition, the ePortfolio project gave my students
the opportunity to hone their writing skills.

Allocation of Resources/Support from Administration

   Projects that use technology are usually costly. Students do not live in a 9
to 5 world. They expect access to technology all the time. They function in an
international world with full access through the internet, and they want and
expect services where technology works the way it is supposed to work. Ad-
ministration not only must find ways to fund the growing need for technology
on-campus and access off-campus, but also support student and faculty train-
ing. Faculty participating in ePortfolio projects must be supported with course
preparation time/release time/reimbursement, technology training and sup-
port, professional development opportunities and technical resources. Training
workshops for students and faculty as well as a dedicated ePortfolio computer
lab are common things that are part of ePortfolio projects.

ASSESSMENT AND CAREER EPORTFOLIOS

   ePortfolios allow faculty to assess work products and artifacts that are not
easily graded or assessed with traditional methods. Assessment of student's eP-
ortfolios will allow faculty to look at the larger picture. Regional accreditation
agencies and the majority of professional program accreditation bodies now
emphasize student-learning outcomes as the standards to be met. Accountability
to funding sources and public use of data to inform decision-making guide the
faculty. As the popularity of ePortfolio use grows, so does its use in assessment.
See Barrett and Knezek (2003) for more infomration on issues related to assess-
ment and accountability. Examples of types of assessment that can be done via
ePortfolio projects include: 1) usage statistics, 2) rubric grades, 3) faculty sur-
veys, 4) student surveys, and 5) student-learning outcomes. A common rubric
can be used to assess student-learning outcomes and can be custom tailored

116
                                                                                 Career ePortfolios

for a course, department/program or the university. Using a grading rubric for
ePortfolio is useful for individual courses as well as programmatic and college-
wide assessment. Data collected over time will tell if students are improving
in key areas. Additionally, weak areas can be identified and addressed. Com-
parative data is helpful to demonstrate trends among courses and departments
within the institution (Goldsmith, 2007).

   Table 1 below is a sample ePortfolio grading rubric. Students should be
given a copy of the rubric with the syllabus. It is also helpful to have students
grade their own or each other's ePortfolio using the rubric a few weeks before
the final project is due as a form of self- and peer- assessment.

Table 1. ePortfolio Rubric

                Exceptional      Effective     Acceptable        Unsatisfactory  Non-Submit   Score
                                 ___ points                                      0 points
Response to     ___ points       Followed      ___ points        ___ points      Did not
ePortfolio                       most of the                                     com-
Assignment      Followed         professor's   Did not           Disregarded     plete the
                all of the       directions;   follow            professor's     ePortfolio
Creative Use    professor's      com-          most of the       directions      assignment.
of Technology   directions;      pleted the    professor's       and failed to
                completed        assignment.   directions        complete a      Did not
Attractiveness  the as-                        or failed to      significant     com-
                signment;        Several       complete          part of the     plete the
Professional    added extra      resourceful   part of the       assignment.     ePortfolio
Image           material.        sounds,       assignment.                       assignment.
                                 graphics,                       No evidence
                Excellent use    and links     A number          of inde-        Did not
                of graph-        used.         of uses of        pendent         com-
                ics, sounds,                   sounds,           resources:      plete the
                e-mail, links,   Graphics,     graphics          monotonous      ePortfolio
                additional       colors,       and links.        presentation.   assignment.
                software         font size
                and Internet     appropriate.  Graphics,         Graphics,       Did not
                resources.                     colors, font      colors, font    com-
                                 ePortfolio    size distract-    size dis-       plete the
                Graphics,        presents an   ing or adds       tracting and    ePortfolio
                colors, font     overall good  little to the     difficult to    assignment.
                size attractive  professional  portfolio.        read: detracts
                and easy         image.                          from the
                to read:                       ePortfolio pre-   portfolio.
                enhanced                       sents an overall
                portfolio.                     acceptable        ePortfolio
                                               professional      presents
                ePortfolio                     image.            an overall
                presents a                                       non-profes-
                excellent                                        sional image.
                professional
                image.

                                                                                              117
Bonsignore

Grammar and  Flawless       Very few     Some gram-   Several         Did not
Punctuation  grammar and    gram-        mar and      grammar and     com-
             punctuation.   mar and      punctuation  punctuation     plete the
Personal                    punctuation  errors.      errors.         ePortfolio
Reflection   Excellent      errors.                                   assignment.
             personal                    Some         Little person-
             reflection     Truthful     personal     al reflection   Did not
             demonstrated.  personal     reflection   demonstrat-     com-
                            reflection   demonstrat-  ed.             plete the
                            demonstrat-  ed.                          ePortfolio
                            ed.                                       assignment.

                                                                      Total:       ____

   Professional accreditation agencies recognize ePortfolios as a way to mea-
sure student performance. The Career ePortfolio is similar to other types of
electronic portfolios, that is, reflective, course, and personal ePortfolios. How-
ever, the Career ePortfolio emphasizes the artifacts posted will be for a spe-
cific audience and the ePortfolio when finished will become public or will be
published online. Career ePortfolios are an excellent way to measure student-
learning outcomes. See Kenny et al. 2003, for more on perceived barriers to
documenting outcomes with validity and reliability. A faculty member or a
team of faculty, when measuring large number of student portfolios, can easily
grade ePortfolio rubrics via a course roster (list of students) set-up in a simple
word processing or Excel document. A roster cuts down on the time it takes to
view portfolios. If a large sample is to be evaluated, the assessment team may
grade every tenth or fiftieth portfolio rather than every ePortfolio. Taking a
sample from a large cohort to measure English grammar and punctuation only,
may be an accurate and quick way to use computer technology to measure the
student-learning outcomes of students that have completed ePortfolios. The
entire ePortfolio can be assessed or only a sample of features depending on the
information needed.

OBTAINING JOBS USING CAREER EPORTFOLIO

   Tracking the use of Career ePortfolios once students graduate from the insti-
tution has proved difficult for many programs offering ePortfolios. Like gradu-
ate surveys, it is extremely difficult to obtain hard data from alumni once they
leave campus and enter the job market. We know of some individual success
stories from students who used their Career ePortfolio with success to obtain

118
                                                                                           Career ePortfolios

both interviews and jobs by sending the link to their ePortfolio website to po-
tential employers.

   An ordered way to keep in touch with the students who become Alumni of
the university is to transfer the Career ePortfolio over to either the Alumni As-
sociation or the Career and Transfer offices within the university to follow-up
and store the ePortfolios on a server after students graduate.

SUMMARY

   A major advantage of the Career ePortfolio is that students are able to mar-
ket themselves to employers and graduate schools in a professional format that
may give them an advantage over other candidates. The digital format of Career
ePortfolios makes large assessment projects easier.

   Sharing a Career ePortfolio is a way of sharing best practices or an individual's
talent. Technology is used in such a way that both the students and faculty see the
benefits of creating a Career ePortfolio. Since the Portfolio is in a digital form, it
is easy to add artifacts that can personalize the website and make it easy to share.
Creating a Career ePortfolio early allows students to identify professional goals
and explore career options, which can help them focus their professional develop-
ment while preparing them for the next phase in their professional career.

REFERENCES

Barrett, H., & Knezek, D. (2003). E-portfolios: Issues in assessment, ac-
   countability, and preservice teacher preparation. Retrieved from
   h t t p : / / w w w. e r i c . e d . g o v / E R I C We b Po r t a l / s e a r c h / d e t a i l m i n i . j s p ? _
   nfpb=true&_&ERICExtSearch_SearchValue_0=ED476185&ERICExtSear
   ch_SearchType_0=no&accno=ED476185

Fox, R., & DeLorenzo, M. (2009). Developing a professional teaching portfolio: A
   guide to success (3rd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.

Goldsmith, D. J. (2007). Enhancing learning and assessment through e-port-
   folios: A collaborative effort in Connecticut. New Directions for Student Ser-
   vices, 119, 31-42. doi:10.1002/ss247

Kenny, M., Blustein, K., Chaves, A., Grossman, J., & Gallagher, L. (2003).
   The role of perceived barriers and relational support in the educational and
   vocational lives of urban high school students. Journal of Counseling Psychol-
   ogy, 50, 142-155.

                                                                                                119
Bonsignore

Shepherd, R., & Goggin, P. (2012). Reclaiming `old' literacies in the new lit-
   eracy information age: The functional literacies of the mediated workstation.
   Composition Studies, 40(2), 66-91.

Zhang, S., Olfman, L., & Rachtham, P. (2007). Designing ePortfolio 2.0:
   Integrating and coordinating web 2.0 services with ePortfolio systems for
   enhancing users' learning. Journal of Information Systems Education, 18(2),
   203-214.

120
SECTION 3: PRESENTING
INTERACTIVE DESIGNS

  As a thought experiment, we might consider how the concept
  of knowledge spaces fits in with or informs the academy.
  Thinking in terms of knowledge spaces and the academy
  as one, we can see the knowledge spaces of the academy in
  dialogue with other knowledge spaces outside the academy.
  --Cambridge, Cambridge, & Yancey, "Moving Into The
  Future," in Cambridge, Cambridge, & Yancey, Electronic
  Portfolios 2.0: Emergent Research on Implementation and
  Impact (2008), p. 15

  Bri Lance, "Beautiful Interfaces,"
  http://www.bri-lance.net/category/personal
CHAPTER 7.

SHOWCASE HYBRIDITY: A
ROLE FOR BLOGFOLIOS

Geoffrey Middlebrook
University of Southern California

Jerry Chih-Yuan Sun
National Chiao Tung University

Whether its origins are homegrown, open source, commercial, or
common tool, defining an ePortfolio as a "digitized collection of
artifacts, including demonstrations, resources, and accomplishments
that represent an individual" (Lorenzo & Ittelson, 2005) has most often
resulted in static Web pages or modified content management systems.
Yet as new Web technologies emerge, there also arise new opportunities
for ePortfolios to become much more dynamic. In particular, merging
social media feature sets such as blogging into ePortfolios can help
college students enhance their literacy skills, share information, build
their reputations, and have an outlet for personal expression within a
scholarly and professional online environment.

   Even a cursory examination of the EDUCAUSE archives indicates there
has been much work done on the opportunities and challenges that result from
digital or Web-based portfolios in academe. It is known, for instance, that col-
leges and universities seeking to establish a student ePortfolio platform that
demonstrates knowledge, abilities, and learning for a range of audiences and
purposes, including impressing potential employers, are likely to face many
of the implementation issues identified by George Lorenzo and John Ittelson
(2005): hardware and software, support and scalability, security and privacy,
ownership and intellectual property, assessment, acceptance, and long-term vi-
ability. Those campuses also confront the question of which ePortfolio vessel to
utilize: homegrown, open source, commercial, or common tool. Such matters
assume added significance if we heed Kathleen Yancey, Barbara Cambridge, and
Darren Cambridge (2009), who assert that "eportfolios may be the most likely
vehicle to help us make the transition to an academy of the future that is both
relevant and authoritative."

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0490.2.07                        123
Middlebrook and Chih-Yuan Sun

   We accept this potential for ePortfolios and so consider it encouraging that,
according to the Campus Computing Project, over the past five years there has
been a tripling of American institutions using them (Bass & Eynon, 2009).
Nevertheless, for reasons that we will go on to argue, it is simultaneously dis-
heartening to discover that most ePortfolios remain static Web pages or modi-
fied content management systems. But as new Web technologies appear, there
are simultaneously new openings for ePortfolios to become significantly more
vibrant. Particularly, joining social media feature sets such as blogging with
ePortfolios can help students enhance their literacy skills and advance their
scholarly and professional agendas online. However, the means for developing
an ePortfolio system that permits student blogging and is, as Ali Jafari (2004)
put it, "`sticky,' ... and is adopted by users" when it moves from concept to
working system (p. 38), have thus far not been thoroughly addressed in the
higher education literature. To help fill that deficit we discuss a project at the
University of Southern California (USC) to implement a blog-based ePort-
folio, or "blogfolio." Through an examination of educational blogging and
blogfolios, followed by an assessment of challenges and outcomes, we take
the position that if wisely put into effect, hybrid platforms represent a rich
and flexible resource waiting to be wielded for the personal, intellectual, and
vocational benefit of students.

THE DOMAIN OF EDUCATIONAL BLOGGING

   As prelude to our argument for blogfolios, we first wish to make a case on be-
half of blogging. It is obvious that the blogosphere is a flourishing cyber-realm,
and while the many emphases of blogs not surprisingly differ, data from the Pew
Internet & American Life Project (Lenhart & Fox, 2006) reveal that the most
popular blogging topic, at least here in the United States, is one's own life and
experiences. A self-referential use of weblogs certainly has merit; however, for
those who are charged with guiding university students deeply into their majors
and toward their careers, we are not convinced that an expressivist ambit, with
the blog as personal journal, is where we ought to invest our pedagogical ener-
gies. Students are, in our estimation, better served if blogging is employed as
a venue for developing their writing, critical thinking, and technology skills in
conjunction with their disciplinary and professional identity. The New Media
Consortium's Horizon Report (2008) declares that the "academy is faced with a
need to provide formal instruction in ... how to create meaningful content with
today's tools" (p. 6), and as we hope to demonstrate, this instruction can take
place with blogs.

124
                                                                                       A Role for Blogfolios

   Jan Schmidt (2007) was undoubtedly correct when he observed that people
utilize the blog format in a variety of contexts, and as such one "can speak
about `the blog' only in a very general sense" (p. 1410). Given this diversity, we
would like to define our terms and establish the claims for what has come to be
known as educational blogging. Aggregating the assertions of Stephen Downes
(2004), Rebecca Blood (2002), the EDUCAUSE Learning Initiative (2005), the
Support Blogging! site and other resources, our position, reinforced by years
of classroom application at USC, is that educational blogging: helps students
to find a voice and develop interests in a medium that appears to have life and
longevity; motivates student engagement in conversations about their ideas and
positions; provides students with an opportunity to consider the tenets of re-
sponsible writing, since there is at least in potential a wide and authentic audi-
ence; empowers students and stimulates the initiative to write; and engenders
information sharing, reputation building, and personal expression. Evidence
exists to bolster at least some of these declarations, as Amanda Lenhart (2008)
and her co-authors discovered that pre-university teens who blog are "prolific
writers online and offline" and recognize that writing is essential to their success
in later life (p. v).

   Given its promise, an increasing number of academicians understand the
opportunities afforded by an educative use of the blog apparatus. For instance,
Edward Maloney (2007) speaks of the "stars of the second-generation Web,"
among them blogs, which are consonant with "student-centered and active-
learning models" (p. B26). In a related stance, Jean Burgess (2006) is convinced
that blogs have the capacity to "contribute to a reconceptualization of students
as critical, collaborative, and creative participants in the social construction of
knowledge" (p. 105), and may moreover assist them in "developing literacies
and competencies that are appropriate for the technological and social envi-
ronments in which we all now work" (p. 106). To reinforce that point, Henry
Jenkins (2006) and his colleagues see blogs as an important component in what
they call "participatory culture," where access and mastery help to determine
who will succeed or be left behind in school and employment (p. 3). The Jen-
kins team does not, in our estimation, exaggerate but rather captures the aca-
demic and career implications of social media (Jones & Lea, 2008).

A CALL FOR BLOGFOLIOS

   Considering our position on educational blogging it is to be expected that
we advocate embedding this dimension into an ePortfolio, with the outcome
being a blogfolio, which Marco Antonio Mendoza Calderón and Joaquín

                                                                                                125
Middlebrook and Chih-Yuan Sun

Ramírez Buentello (2006) define as a union with "the customization power of
the weblog and the evidence showroom of an ePortfolio" (p. 495). Calderón
and Buentello, though, are not alone in recognizing the potential of this ag-
gregate resource. Lorraine Stefani, Robin Mason, and Chris Pegler (2007), for
example, believe that combining blogs with ePortfolios "could be truly trans-
formative for students" (p. 140), whereas Ittelson (2008) holds the view that
"Web 2.0 applications and tools, such as blogs ... residing within ePortfolios ...
is the basis of the next generation" (pp. 33-34). See also Gerben, 2009. These
claims aside, before accepting that blogfolios do indeed represent a next gen-
eration, most readers would understandably like to see an instance of their de-
ployment in a higher education setting. For this we turn to a joint endeavor at
USC involving its Web Services, Center for Scholarly Technology, and Writing
Program, using the Movable Type package and operating in part with funding
from external and internal grants.

   In the USC project, called "myPortfolio," undergraduate juniors and seniors
enrolled in participating advanced writing courses are each provisioned a uni-
versity branded and hosted blogfolio. James Farmer (2006) notes the impor-
tance of blogs as an indicator of digital identity, in part because bloggers "are
not simply able to represent themselves through the content of their postings
but also present much about themselves through aesthetic design, choice of
media" (p. 98), and more. If one of the aims of the USC blogfolio is to help
students manifest their higher-register selves, to establish and project a scholarly
and professional persona online, then a simple but elegant interface possessing
the institution's imprimatur is of no small consequence. That this matters has
been shown in studies, reported by Barbara Warnick (2004), which divulge visi-
tors to a site determine its credibility largely based on variables beyond the iden-
tity, affiliation, or aspiration of the author (p. 257), and are more influenced by
"professionalism of design, usability, ... and other factors that operate as signs of
trustworthiness" (p. 262).

   Performing in this USC designed template, at the start of the semester each
student decides on a distinctive area of inquiry that is a subset of his or her
academic major or future profession, which will constitute the thematic param-
eters of their work in the course, and this information is stated in the student's
sidebar profile. Before they begin to post, students are introduced to an array
of award-winning blogs as well as to Schmidt's (2007) "selection, publication,
and networking" rules (p. 1412). Students also receive orientation to a variety
of Web search tools and techniques that offer the means to become a skilled and
discriminating online researcher. Within their sites students publish hypertex-
tual and multimodal posts on current and consequential phenomena in their
fields and of their choosing that are interesting, important, and not obvious

126
                                                                                       A Role for Blogfolios

or already known. The entries fall into two categories: one where they initiate
arguments with reference to and use of multiple online sources, and another
where they locate and leave comments on blog posts, preferably written by
people of stature, in their domain of inquiry. Along with publishing entries,
students assemble a collection of sites and blogs, items of the highest quality in
and greatest relevance to their areas, which they find and add as a sidebar link-
roll, with the goal of making their own sites not just a repository of posts but
also a resource for others.

   As the above discussion indicates, USC is profoundly interested in having
students assume a seat at the cyber-table and become active participants in the
public conversations of their fields. This motive is found in Johndan Johnson-
Eilola's (2004) observation on effective blogs as a professionalizing occasion:
"They exist [in] complex rhetorical situations .... They make concrete intertex-
tual connections and analyses. They provide interaction among multiple au-
thors in a community" (p. 214), and they "require authors to read other texts,
to analyze those texts, and to respond to those texts in writing" (p. 215). As
Schnurr (2013) points out, "genres do not stand alone but tend to interact
with other genres [creating] intertextuality and interdiscursivity" (p. 45). The
blog stream, to be sure, is complemented in the USC template with a showcase
ePortfolio component that is located in the sidebar of the site. Here students
are offered two sections into which they may place their assets, academic work
and extra-curricular experience. These artifacts, contextualized by an explana-
tory and reflective paragraph, may be text, audio, video, or image files intended
to represent the aptitudes and aspirations of the students who produced them.

CHALLENGES AND OUTCOMES

   While we hold that blogfolios have a powerful role to play in higher educa-
tion, it is nevertheless necessary to address the challenges they face. Insofar as
classroom blogging is concerned, obstacles include the provision of adequate
training for teachers, the assessment of students' blogs, the creation of mean-
ingful assignments, and the handling of potential information overload for stu-
dents and faculty alike (Penrod, 2007, pp. 154-160). Taking these hindrances
into account, we acknowledge that the objectives of developing students' lit-
eracy skills and nurturing their disciplinary and professional personae on a blog
platform will be met incompletely. Pertaining to the part that the Internet plays
in the construction of contemporary identities, Charles Ess (2005) argues that
computer-mediated communication has caused neither a McLuhanesque "elec-
tronic global village" (p. 162), nor "its complete absence in the celebrated post-

                                                                                                127
Middlebrook and Chih-Yuan Sun

modern fragmentation and decentering" (p. 166). Instead the outcome is an
agglomeration of what Ess refers to as "partial publics," a concept derived from
Jurgen Habermas' notion of Teilöffentlichkeiten (p. 163); included among these
partial publics, according to Ess, are scholarly and professional bodies, some of
which conduct their Web-based interlocutions through blogs. Yet the research
of Susan Herring and her co-authors (2005) indicates that though there is an
"A-list" of blogs to which many link, refer to, and comment on, most blogs
link to one another sparsely or not at all, with the implication being that the
"blogosphere is [only] sporadically conversational" (p. 1).

   Herring et al.'s (2005) findings notwithstanding, we maintain that educa-
tional blogging can produce at the very least an incipient sense of self in the dis-
courses of one's field. Alexander Halavais (2006) is, we believe, accurate when
he says that even bloggers who "might be classified as `mumblers'--without
obvious comments or readers ... are seeking a way of conversing with the world"
(p. 118), and of enjoying the "intrinsic reputational rewards" that one may reap
from blogging (p. 123). These rewards were observed by Jenkins (2007), who
discovered that his students at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology "were
making valuable professional contacts; some had developed real visibility ...;
and a few received high-level job offers based on the professional connections
they made on their blogs" (p. B9). A caution, however, must be sounded, as
there are some in academe and the professional world who view blogs skepti-
cally. The primary objections center on the consequences of an ill-conceived or
intemperate post, which as Daniel Drezner (2006) phrased it, could become
a "black mark that is difficult to erase" (p. B7). We acknowledge the conse-
quences of careless entries, but such risks do not constitute, in our estimation,
a sufficient case against the use of blogs for educative purposes.

   With regard to ePortfolios, the potential difficulties are numerous. To put
them in context, we evoke Jafari's (2004) steps to be followed in the devel-
opment of an ePortfolio system: conceptual design, which involves functional
and technical requirements; software design, where the concern is human and
computer aspects; and implementation plan, comprised of business plan, daily
operation, and software upgrade (p. 40). See also Shepherd and Goggin (2012).
Along this path the needs and concerns of a variety of stakeholders, includ-
ing students, faculty, administrators, and technologists must be addressed. That
these steps are not always coordinated nor stakeholders always consulted is suc-
cinctly critiqued by among others Javier Ayala (2006), who points to the pau-
city of research on "integrating student voices into the dialogue of electronic
portfolios" (p. 12). David Tosh, Tracy Penny Light, Kele Flemming, and Jeff
Haywood (2005) explored the high cost of marginalizing the student voice, and
concluded that unless students accept ePortfolios as "useful and worthwhile,"

128
                                                                                       A Role for Blogfolios

these tools would be seen as simply "another hoop to jump through." As with
our concession to the criticisms of educational blogging, we here allow that a
successful ePortfolio is no easy undertaking. Nonetheless, if colleges and uni-
versities can convince students that growing numbers of prospective employers
examine social networks like blogs to screen applicants (Wortham, 2009), and
more than half of employers surveyed indicated an intention to use ePortfolios
in the initial screening stage (Ward & Moser, 2008), then commitment would
in all likelihood ensue.

   Challenges assuredly exist, yet outcomes from the USC project are promis-
ing. One of our aims is for students to cultivate, as Teresa Acosta and Youmei
Liu (2006) put it, "social capital" and "bridge the divide between the academy
and society" (p. 23). Based on quantitative and qualitative data derived from
course evaluations, student surveys, and student focus groups, it is evident that
we have met with a high degree of success. Students indicate that their writing
skills improve, and in apparent contrast with Gartner's "hype cycles," do not
initially experience the importance and easiness of the blogfolio with over-en-
thusiasm followed by subsequent disappointment. Regarding the tool's useful-
ness, students express great willingness to share their work outside of the course,
and many use their sites for applications to graduate and professional schools,
jobs, and study-abroad programs (Martin-Kniep, 1999). One student captured
it this way, "I had an interview for an internship and they asked about writing
experience. I showed them my blogfolio and I got offered the job." It should in
addition be remarked that our students are not working in a vacuum; Google
Analytics logs disclose that almost half of the domestic visitors to the students'
sites are from outside of California, and almost one-quarter of all visitors are
from outside the United States.

CONCLUSION

   It ought to come as no surprise that for students, who ostensibly belong to
what Diana Oblinger (2003) and others have called the "millennial" or "net
gen" or "digital native" population, "technology is assumed to be a natural part
of the environment" (p. 38). However what may be surprising, and we think
positive, are the results from an EDUCAUSE Study of Undergraduates and In-
formation Technology (Salaway, Caruso, & Nelson, 2007). This research found
that students have discretion and recognize "[t]echnology is an enabler of learn-
ing when [used] effectively" (p. 13), while "[p]oor use of technology ... detracts
from the learning experience" (p. 14). We hope that our argument on behalf of
blogfolios manifests the former as it affirmatively answers the question posed

                                                                                                129
Middlebrook and Chih-Yuan Sun

by Helen Chen: "Can we take advantage of some of these Web 2.0 technologies
to create ... ePortfolio-related activities and reflective thinking" (Waters, 2007)?
The advantage to which Chen refers resides at least partly in the recognition
that blogfolios have the potential to stimulate students' enthusiasm, and facili-
tate the possibility of authentic and transactional participation in what Henry
Farrell (2005) calls the blogospheric "carnival of ideas," where "the established,
the up-and-comers, and the amateurs rub shoulders on a more or less equal
footing" (p. B14).

   At least one other study reinforced our findings that ePortfolios help students
to "formulate career choices, facilitate entry into the workplace, facilitate entry
into post-baccalaureate education, describe preferred career paths, [and] identify
and develop skills and experiences relevant to achieving selected career goals"
(Stephens & Moore, 2006, p. 527). When hybridized with educational blogging
to create a showcase platform, the literature and our experiences at the University
of Southern California lead to the conclusion that blogfolios can deliver signifi-
cant personal, intellectual, and vocational benefits to students. Utilized in the
manner here described, these digitized collections of artifacts not only serve as
a valuable pedagogical tool, they may also contribute to the establishment of a
deeper and perhaps durable scholarly and professional identity, or what Ittelson
(2001) calls an "e-dentity" (p. 45), in the students who create them. Through the
transferability of innovation, other institutions might at least want to consider
this approach to technology in the service of mission-critical goals.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

   We would like to thank Candace Borland, Otto Khera, John Holland, and
Kim Rothwell for their invaluable contributions to this project.

REFERENCES

Acosta, T., & Liu, Y. (2006). ePortfolios: Beyond assessment. In A. Jafari, & C.
   Kaufman (Eds.), Handbook of research on ePortfolios (pp. 15-23). Hershey,
   PA: Idea Group Reference.

Ayala, J. I. (2006). Electronic portfolios for whom? EDUCAUSE Quarterly,
   29(1), 12-13.

Bass, R., & Bernstein, D. (2008). The middle of open spaces: Generating
   knowledge about learning through multiple layers of open teaching com-
   munities. In T. Iiyoshi, & M. S. V. Kumar (Eds.), Opening up education: The

130
                                                                                       A Role for Blogfolios

   collective advancement of education through open technology, open content, and
   open knowledge (pp. 303-318). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bass, R., & Eynon, B. (2009, March 18). Electronic portfolios: A path to
   the future of learning. The Chronicle of Higher Education. Retrieved from
   http://chronicle.com/blogPost/Electronic-Portfolios-a-Path/4582
Blood, R. (2002). The weblog handbook: Practical advice on creating and main-
   taining your blog. Cambridge, MA: Perseus.
Burgess, J. (2006). Blogging to learn, learning to blog. In A. Bruns, & J. Jacobs
   (Eds.), Uses of blogs (pp. 105-114). New York: Peter Lang.
Calderón, M. A. M., & Buentello, J. R. (2006). Facilitating reflection through
   ePortfolios at technológico de Monterrey. In A. Jafari, & C. Kaufman (Eds.),
   Handbook of research on ePortfolios (pp. 486-495). Hershey, PA: Idea Group
   Reference.
Downes, S. (2004). Educational blogging. EDUCAUSE Review, 39(5), 50-70.
Drezner, D. W. (2006). The trouble with blogs. The Chronicle of Higher Educa-
   tion, 52(47), B7.
Educational Blogging. (2009). "Support Blogging!" Retrieved from http://sup-
   portblogging.com/Educational+Blogging
EDUCAUSE Learning Initiative. (n.d.). 7 Things You Should Know About ...
   Blogs. Retrieved from http://connect.educause.edu/Library/ELI/7ThingsYo
   uShouldKnowAbout/39383
Ess, C. (2005). Moral Imperatives for life in an intercultural global village. In
   R. J. Cavalier (Ed.), The Impact of the Internet on Our Moral Lives (pp. 161-
   193). Albany, NY: SUNY.
Farrell, H. (2005). The blogosphere as a carnival of ideas. The Chronicle of High-
   er Education, 52(7), B14.
Farmer, J. (2006). Blogging to basics: How blogs are bringing online education
   back from the brink. In A. Bruns, & J. Jacobs (Eds.), Uses of blogs (pp. 91-
   103). New York: Peter Lang.
Gerben, C. (2009). Putting 2.0 and two together: What web 2.0 can teach
   composition about collaborative learning. Computers and Composition On-
   line, (Fall 2009). Retrieved from http://www.bgsu.edu/cconline/theory.htm
Halavais, A. (2006). Scholarly blogging: Moving toward the visible college. In
   A. Bruns, & J. Jacobs (Eds.), Uses of blogs (pp. 117-126). New York: Peter
   Lang.
Herring, S. C., Kouper, I., Paolillo, J. C., Scheidt, L. A., Tyworth, M., Wel-
   sch, P., ... Ning Yu. (2005). Conversations in the blogosphere: An analysis
   "From the bottom up." Proceedings of the thirty-eighth Hawai'i international
   conference on system sciences (HICSS-38) (pp. 1-11). Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE.
   doi: 0.1109/HICSS.2005.167

                                                                                                131
Middlebrook and Chih-Yuan Sun

Ittelson, J. (2001). Building an E-dentity for each student. EDUCAUSE Quar-
   terly, 24(4), 43-45.

Ittelson, J. (2008). Know your ePortfolio. Converge Magazine, (Summer 2008),
   32-35.

Jafari, A. (2000). The "Sticky" ePortfolio system: Tackling challenges and iden-
   tifying attributes. EDUCAUSE Review, 39(4), 38-49.

Jenkins, H., Katie Clinton, C., Purushotma, R., Robison, A. J., & Weigel, M.
   (2006). Confronting the challenges of participatory culture: Media education
   for the 21st-century. The John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation.
   Retrieved from http://digitallearning.macfound.org/site/c.enJLKQNlFiG/
   b.2029291/k.97E5/Occasional_Papers.htm

Jenkins, H. (2005). From YouTube® to youuniversity. The Chronicle of Higher
   Education, 53(24), B9.

Johnson-Eilola, J. (2005). The database and the essay: Understanding composi-
   tion as articulation." In A. F. Wysocki, J. J. Johnson-Eilola, C. L. Selfe, & G.
   Sirc (Eds.), Writing new media: Theory and applications for expanding the teach-
   ing of composition (pp. 199-235). Logan, UT: Utah State University Press.

Jones, S., & Lea, M. R. (2008). Digital literacies in the lives of undergraduate
   students: Exploring personal and curricular spheres of practice. The Elec-
   tronic Journal of e-Learning, 6(3), 207-216.

Lenhart, A., & Fox, F. (2006). Bloggers: A portrait of the Internet's new
   storytellers. Pew Internet & American Life Project. Retrieved from
   http://www.pewinternet.org/PPF/r/186/report_display.asp

Lenhart, A., Arafeh, S. , Smith, A., & Macgill, A. R. (2008). Writing, tech-
   nology and teens. Pew Internet & American life project. Retrieved from
   http://www.pewinternet.org/PPF/r/247/report_display.asp

Lorenzo, G., & Ittelson, J. (2005). An overview of institutional e-portfo-
   lios. EDUCAUSE Learning Initiative, 2005. ELI Paper 1. Retrieved from
   http://www.educause.edu/ir/library/pdf/ELI3001.pdf

Maloney, E. J. (2007). What web 2.0 can teach us about learning. The Chronicle
   of Higher Education, 53(1), B26.

Martin-Kniep, G. (1999). Capturing the wisdom of practice: Professional portfolios for edu-
   cators. Alexandria, VA: Association of Supervision and Curriculum Development.

The New Media Consortium and the EDUCAUSE Learning Initiative. (2008).
   The Horizon Report. Retrieved from http://connect.educause.edu/Library/
   ELI/2008HorizonReport/45926

Oblinger, D. G. (2003). Boomers, gen-xers, and millennials: Understanding
   the "new students." EDUCAUSE Review, 38(4), 37-47.

Penrod, D. (2007). Using blogs to enhance literacy: The next powerful step in 21st-
   century learning. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Education.

132
                                                                                       A Role for Blogfolios

Salaway, G., Caruso, J. B., & Nelson, M. R. (9/12/2007). The ECAR study of
   undergraduates and information technology. Research Study from the EDU-
   CAUSE Center for Applied Research, 6. Retrieved from http://www.edu-
   cause.edu/library/resources/ecar-study-undergraduate-students-and-infor-
   mation-technology-2007

Schmidt, J. (2007). Blogging practices: An analytical framework. Journal of
   Computer-Mediated Communication, 12(4), 1409-1427.

Schnurr, S. (2013). Exploring professional communication: Language in action.
   London: Routledge.

Shepherd, R., & Goggin, P. (2012). Reclaiming "old" literacies in the new lit-
   eracy information age: The functional literacies of the mediated workstation.
   Composition Studies, 40(2), 66-91.

Stefani, L., Mason, R., & Pegler, C. (Eds.), (2007). The educational potential of
   e-Portfolios: Supporting personal development and reflective learning (Connect-
   ing With E-Learning). New York: Routledge.

Stephens, B. R., & Moore, D. (2006). Psychology ePortfolios enhance learn-
   ing, assessment, and career development. In A. Jafari, & C. Kaufman (Eds.),
   Handbook of research on ePortfolios (pp. 520-531). Hershey, PA: Idea Group
   Reference.

Tosh, D., Light, T. P., Flemming, K., & Haywood, J. (2005). Engagement with
   electronic portfolios: Challenges from the student perspective. Canadian
   Journal of Learning and Technology/La revue canadienne de l'apprentissage et
   de la technologie, 31(3). Retrieved from http://www.cjlt.ca/index.php/cjlt/
   article/view/97/91

Ward, C., & Moser, C. (2008). E-portfolios as a hiring tool: Do employers re-
   ally care? EDUCAUSE Quarterly, 31(4), 13-14.

Warnick, B. (2004). Online ethos: Source credibility in an "authorless" environ-
   ment. American Behavioral Scientist, 48(2), 256-265.

Waters, J. K. (2007, October 1). ePortfolios meet social software. Campus
   Technology, Retrieved from http://www.campustechnology.com/Arti-
   cles/2007/10/ePortfolios-Meet-Social-Software.aspx

Wortham, J. (2009, August 30). More employers use social networks to check
   out applicants. New York Times, Retrieved from http://bits.blogs.nytimes.
   com/2009/08/20/more-employers-use-social-networks-to-check-out-appli-
   cants

Yancey, K. B., Cambridge, B., & Cambridge, D. (2009, January 7). Making
   common cause: Electronic portfolios, learning, and the power of communi-
   ty. Academic Commons, Retrieved from http://www.academiccommons.org/
   commons/essay/making-common-cause-electronic-portfolios

                                                                                                133
CHAPTER 8.

ACCESSIBLE EPORTFOLIOS

FOR VISUALLY-IMPAIRED

USERS: INTERFACES, DESIGNS,

AND INFRASTRUCTURES

Sushil K. Oswal
University of Washington, Tacoma

This chapter conceptualizes the design and pedagogy of an accessible,
online ePortfolio and the content it might house from the perspective
of universal design for users with visual disabilities in particular
and other disabilities generally. While enrolled disabled students are
demanding universities meet their special learning needs, the U.S.
Department of Justice and U.S. courts are pressuring these institutions
to live up to their legal and ethical obligations under the Americans
with Disabilities Act, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act as well
as the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act. Likewise, the
Department of Justice, the Access Board, and Congressional reports
assert that institutions of higher learning need to be ready for students
with disabilities at all times, and required accommodations for
student success at school, whether in face-to-face, blended, or in online
environments, is both their legal and ethical responsibility.

THE DISABILITY TECHNOLOGICAL LITERACY DIVIDE

   Many academic researchers have expressed reservations about how well digi-
tal technologies live up to their promise for disabled populations. Seymour and
Lupton (2004), for instance, warn that digital technologies might actually in-
crease the divide between people with and people without disabilities because of
the industry's tendency to design educational environments mainly for the able-
bodied. They see an intrinsic tension between designers' efforts at forging inter-
esting and engaging, media-rich e-learning environments for average students
and addressing the usually more technologically-intensive functional needs of

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0490.2.08                         135
Oswal

disabled students. An instance of such a divide is obvious in how universities
employ electronic technologies in existing structures--libraries, classrooms, ad-
ministrative systems--without carefully studying their impact on already un-
derrepresented disabled members of educational communities. And the absence
of research on such digitalization of campus learning spaces itself does not bode
well for the disabled. Most of the research about multimodal digital spaces fo-
cuses on visual interfaces, for instance, although scattered references to sound
can be found in the review of the literature. For example, abundant research has
been published on concept map-based visual interfaces where other modalities
are mentioned, but multimodal digital spaces for the disabled have not yet been
sufficiently worked into these models (Alpert & Grueneberg, 2001; Cicognani,
2000; Kim, 2006; Kinchin, 1998; Novak, 1998).

   Researchers like Stefani et al., however, claim that "e-portfolios could be an
advantage for students who need to maintain a record of their learning over an
interrupted programme of study, perhaps spanning several years and several
institutions," even though they concede that such benefits can only be reaped if
portfolio designers and facilitators invest in principles of inclusivity and acces-
sibility (p. 107). While enrolled disabled students are demanding universities
meet their special learning needs, the U.S. Department of Justice and U.S.
courts are pressuring these institutions to live up to their legal and ethical obli-
gations under the Americans with Disabilities Act, Section 504 of the Rehabili-
tation Act as well as the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act. Likewise,
the Department of Justice, the Access Board, and Congressional reports assert
that institutions of higher learning need to be ready for students with disabili-
ties at all times, and required accommodations for student success at school,
whether in face-to-face, blended, or in online environments, is both their legal
and ethical responsibility. An accessible design for electronic portfolios is within
our reach because accessible user interfaces, inclusive web design guidelines for
building such systems, and adequate machine and human resources for testing
these systems already exist. I argue for integration of accessibility features in the
design and pedagogy of electronic portfolios so that disabled instructors, stu-
dents, and workers could avail of the benefits of these portfolios as well.

   Before I expand on the accessibility of ePortfolios for the visually disabled
users, both inside and outside the academy, a few definitions of technical terms
are in order for the sake of specificity and clarity. The Americans with Dis-
abilities Act (ADA) defines disability as "a physical or mental impairment that
substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of such individual"
(U.S. Department of Justice, 2008). This definition of disability can be inter-
preted in many ways, but for the purposes of this chapter it delineates the legal
parameters within which institutions of higher education must provide accom-

136
                                                                                       Accessible ePortfolios

modations to students and offer equal learning opportunities to all. By visual
impairment, I mean the limited ability to see which nevertheless restricts one's
ability to function in print or digital environments without adaptive technolo-
gies such as magnifying lenses, screen readers, or Braille displays. By blindness, I
imply total or near total loss of sight where the user must depend upon alternate
means for accessing print or digital information.

   An ADA-based legal definition of accessibility is also important in the con-
text of higher education because nearly all colleges receive some Federal fund-
ing directly or indirectly and are held legally responsible for implementing all
U.S. disability laws. Speaking in systemic terms, ADA states that "An accessible
information technology system is one that can be operated in a variety of ways
and does not rely on a single sense or ability of the user. For example, a system
that provides output only in visual format may not be accessible to people with
visual impairments and a system that provides output only in audio format
may not be accessible to people who are deaf or hard of hearing" (U.S. Depart-
ment of Justice, 2009). In Maximum Accessibility, Slatin and Rush (2003) also
offer a formal definition of accessibility which is straightforward and represents
the perspective of Disability Studies closely. They write, "web sites are acces-
sible when individuals with disabilities can access and use them as effectively as
people who don't have disabilities" (p. 3). Here, we need to note that Slatin and
Rush expand the concept of accessibility to include usability. They argue that in
certain contexts a website can be both accessible yet unusable. Such a phenom-
enon has become common with many commercial websites where owners are
trying to meet Section 508 or Web Content Accessibility Guidelines primarily
to fulfill requirements for obtaining government contracts.

   In academia, this phenomenon is on display almost with every online aca-
demic space, and a few management systems are documenting both accessibil-
ity and usability well. For example, the popular course management system,
Canvas, offers the copy of a completed accessibility checklist, known as the
"Canvas Voluntary Product Accessibility Template," on its website which would
suggest two things to a casual reader: 1) Canvas is voluntarily doing this acces-
sibility work, and 2) it follows all guidelines included in this list and therefore
it is an accessible system for people with disabilities. In the second half of this
chapter I present a firsthand report on the state of accessibility of the Canvas
ePortfolio tool to demonstrate the effectiveness and how Canvas can be a useful
model for other ePortfolio performance support systems.

   Inside and outside the academy, ePortfolios are becoming sites of power
display while enhancing each creator's virtual caché in the digital space. For
instance, the president of Westminster College in Utah maintains a complete
ePortfolio of his life and his life work to attract not only visitors from his own

                                                                                                137
Oswal

campus but also web surfers from all over the world. As the editors of this col-
lection state, ePortfolios are quite distinct from paper portfolios. They collect,
develop, exhibit and enhance the cumulative work of the creator, but they also
can easily spread their limbs to other spaces through social networking tools. A
Twitter® hash tag, a link on a friend's Facebook® wall, a link in a blog or even a
Word or PowerPoint document, or a casual illusion in a second life performance
can move an ePortfolio from a narrowly framed space for collecting and display-
ing to a network of presences in multiple sites. Other chapters in these collec-
tions examine such models, in fact. And these networks go beyond expanding
the reach of the creator's work because they recontextualize the original content
and open it to new interpretation by transforming the meaning of what had
been exhibited in the authorial frame. As Lauren F. Klein points out elsewhere
in this collection, ePortfolios in association with social network sites can form
additional bridges between the academic and the work world. However, the
shifting nature of such networks and their very idiosyncratic choices for struc-
turing and managing their spaces pose a virtual nightmare for those accessing
the web through adaptive devices such as screen readers, magnifiers, and speech
recognition systems. The free and self-regulating nature of the World Wide Web
has so far rendered all attempts at enforcing any web accessibility standards
across the board useless. While Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI), a voluntary
organization consisting of members worldwide and one of the four domains of
the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), has released Web Content Acces-
sibility Guidelines Version 2.0 (WCAG 2.0) just recently in fall 2012; however,
a large majority of websites in the United States do not yet meet standards set
by WCAG 1.0 in 1999.

   Though technical communication scholars do not agree on whether specific
tools and software ought to be taught to undergraduates, the application of
these tools in developing ePortfolios raises other questions, particularly ques-
tions about access. Do universities have the responsibility to choose and teach
only accessible tools and software? While supporters of workplace-centered cur-
ricula might object to such a suggestion because most of the digital infrastruc-
ture remains off-limits to blind workers, the idea of such a choice opens up a
new space for negotiating access for people who are disabled. If our graduates
have learned and achieved proficiency in tools and software for building acces-
sible capstone projects and ePortfolios, they are more likely to advocate for the
use of such accessible systems in the workplace. While their accessible projects
themselves can serve as emblems of a shift toward integrated accessibility, in
terms of technology transfer, these graduates can reformulate the functional-
ity and purpose of these academic electronic portfolios to restructure and re-
form the circulation of ideas, information, and often closely held departmen-

138
                                                                                       Accessible ePortfolios

tal intellectual capital in the workplace. Whereas working groups in business
are utilizing bulletin boards, LISTSERVs, and social networks for exchange
of ideas, these exchanges often have the qualities of transient communities.
Because many of these discussion groups are formed around specific projects
and problems, the end of such projects can also result in a sudden demise of
these virtual communities (see Rice, 2013). Electronic portfolios can be orga-
nized around similar purposes, but if they are anchored in a particular unit of
the organization and if the portfolio manager is permitted to retain a degree of
autonomy and control, they can avoid the fate of a typical virtual community.
Since ePortfolios are no longer static entities restricted to a solitary presence on
a single E-server, they can become broader interactive spaces for construction of
information, ideas, and knowledge networks.

   Equipped with new tools for presenting, archiving, and transporting, eP-
ortfolios now cultivate important technical skills, employ digital formats that
allow sharing across institutions and platforms, and remain relevant technolo-
gies beyond school for graduated professionals in many fields (Gatlin & Jacob,
2002; Gibson & Barrett, 2002, 2004; Heath, 2002). Further, ePortfolios are
effective means for proving certification requirements, exhibiting the perti-
nence of the candidate's skills for a specific job description, and demonstrating
one's professional development in an existing career for advancement (Jafari &
Greenberg, 2003).

   The discrete skills of textual writing, graphic design and imaging, and vid-
eo or audio composing are now being taught in Technical Communication
courses as multimodal projects, and ePortfolios admirably lend to a holistic
and seamless representation of such student work. Beyond the academy, such
multimodal composing is finding a foothold in all sorts of organizations rang-
ing from the ones who are in the business of producing digital consumer wares
and are obviously a part of the emergent digital economy to the ones who were
erstwhile considered manufacturers of consumer goods of the other kind but
have now transformed themselves into an economy residing on the Internet and
capable of transacting significant portions of its business in these digital spaces.

   ePortfolio proponents are now creating bridges between the academic and
workplace portfolios. This is a topic expounded on by many writers in this
collection, and while educational ePortfolios are attributed to a three-phase
cycle of independent learning--planning of goals, review of individual prog-
ress, and reflection for future improvement (Chau & Cheng, 2010; Mason,
Pegler, & Weller, 2004; Stefani, Mason, & Pegler, 2007)--it is the additional
fourth post-graduation phase where ePortfolios can best benefit the graduates
with disabilities. With up to 70% unemployment rate among visually impaired
working age adults (American Community Survey, 2009), a professionally pro-

                                                                                                139
Oswal

duced ePortfolio can showcase a job candidate's competence better than any
well-crafted résumé or a perfectly executed interview. In discussing recent trend
toward lifelong and workplace portfolios, researchers in our field have not paid
attention close enough to the extended benefits of electronic tools for disabled
workers whose physical attributes can often act as barriers between their profes-
sional abilities and the employers (Cambridge, 2008; Willis & Wilkie, 2009).

   Researchers in the United Kingdom have researched the accessibility of
standardized assessment ePortfolios for disabled students (Ball, 2007; Heath &
Giorgini, 2007). However, it is apparent that we need more research on work-
place and lifelong ePortfolios (see Cambridge, 2010). It also needs to be stressed
that we require pedagogical guidance on how to support disabled students in
developing skills for managing and using ePortfolio tools and creating accessible
content for themselves and others.

   Workplace studies from other disciplines also indicate that employers of-
ten do not understand the nature of disabilities, are not familiar with disabled
candidates' abilities, and fail to see how they can contribute to the workplace
(Hendren & Sacher, 1992). For example, to counteract the deep-seated hu-
man prejudice toward blindness, a visually-impaired candidate can employ a
multimodal ePortfolio to substantiate her capabilities, skills, and achievements
not only at the time of hiring but also later to exhibit, clarify, and quantify her
achievements to co-workers and supervisors. However, to construct such a work
portfolio, the disabled college student today must fully participate in ePortfolio
construction, presentation, and assessment work in their classes. They must
acquire necessary technical and professional skills for accomplishing portfolio
goals, learn to design spaces for presenting their work, create relevant content
to attain their career goals, and develop strong presentational and design skills
to showcase this content. These are all valuable rhetorical skills.

   More than a decade ago, web accessibility scholar, John Slatin (2002),
pointed out that "Accessibility is fundamentally a rhetorical issue, a matter
of fleshing out (literally) our conception of audience to include an awareness
that there are people with disabilities in that audience and developing effec-
tive skills and strategies for addressing the entire audience" (p. 37). What John
Slatin wanted to stress by placing "accessibility" in the "rhetorical" category is
that we can't place it in some additional or separate category; rather, it ought to
be included in our original conception of audience and remain an integral fact
throughout the development of the document, the project, or the website just
the way disability is an essential fact of life. Slatin's discussion of accessibility
is also more meaningful to the context of accessibility of ePortfolios because it
applies both to the system and its content--the container and the contained.

140
                                                                                       Accessible ePortfolios

Likewise, Sean Zdenek (2009) reminds us that "Students with disabilities are
in danger of being either excluded from the new media revolution or accom-
modated as after-thoughts of pedagogies that fail to anticipate their needs."
At the breakneck pace new digital technologies have been adopted in higher
education in this century, and if the various accessibility-related complaints
against several universities during the past three years can be seen as indicative
of the state of accessibility at other colleges, these dangers of being left out are
certainly real (see the Pennsylvania State University Agreement with National
Federation of the Blind or NFB; see also the ADA Settlement Agreement by
the Arizona State University, 2010). Ellis and Kent (2011) further warn us
that we must counter the "dangerous trend in digital design where socially
constructed features from the analog world are migrated to the digital envi-
ronment" (p. 39). Whereas visually impaired writers were largely dependent
on others for putting together their paper portfolios in the past, digital tools
today have the potential of endowing complete independence on them if these
users could receive adequate instruction for designing accessible ePortfolios.
Disabled users also have a unique opportunity to participate in electronic port-
folios culture as readers, workers, and evaluators if the field of ePortfolio design
follows principles of accessibility.

   Universal Design for Learning (UDL) is an educational philosophy which
pairs well with accessible and flexible ePortfolio construction. Developed by
The Center for Applied Special Technology (2004), it has begun to gain trac-
tion in our schools and will most likely begin to receive serious consideration
in higher education as we admit increasing numbers of disabled students to our
programs (Burgstahler, 2008; Dolmage, 2009; Dunn & De Mers, 2002; Oswal
& Hewett, 2013). Based on Principles of Universal Design in Architecture orig-
inally developed by Ronald Mace in the 1970s, the UDL framework promotes
a process that works with flexible goals, adopts divergent teaching methods, and
advocates for assessment tools which accommodate learner differences. Its tenets
for designing curriculum and pedagogy ask for multiple means of representa-
tion, of action and expression, and for engagement. If ePortfolio infrastructure
and pedagogy remain flexible and do not become what Kathleen Yancey warns
as a system of "two composers, (1) a student and (2) the system, with the sys-
tem's override capability exerting greater authority " (p. 745), they are a perfect
example of progressive practical theory. While commercially-grown ePortfolio
systems may or may not adhere to a set of accessibility standards, probably an
open-source, nonprofit system like the kind of Open Source Portfolio Initiative
(OSPI) in the long run has the potential of delivering a sustainable, accessible
platform for constructing UDL-driven ePortfolios.

                                                                                                141
Oswal

ACCESSIBLE EPORTFOLIO DESIGN AT PRESENT

   The question remains: where do we presently stand with design and infra-
structure of ePortfolios as far as their accessibility to the blind in particular
and visually impaired in general is concerned? I will organize this discus-
sion around a user experience report on the electronic portfolio space offered
by Instructure, the company behind the learning management system called
Canvas. I have elected to give a significant room in this chapter to one practi-
cal example of accessibility problems to provide relevant, detailed examples.
The accessibility of campus technology has largely been left to those who
need it for survival in academia. Even when disabled students assert their
legal rights to access, the conversation about the accessibility problems expe-
rienced seldom goes beyond the instructor and the Disability Services office,
in my experience. Corporations behind these learning management systems
are equally evasive about accessibility unless a complaint is brought against
their product through a lawsuit or through an inquiry by the Justice Depart-
ment. For example, the much-cited accessible course management system,
Blackboard, was made accessible after several years of complaints by blind
students and faculty. To the dismay of blind faculty, only the student side
of Blackboard Version 9.1 was made accessible and faculty still continue to
experience many accessibility problems. Likewise, relative newcomers on the
ePortfolio market like Canvas have not invested in accessibility of their system
from as early as the design planning stage as much as is needed. Since new
companies do not have the baggage of old, inaccessible developer tools, they
can integrate accessibility in their products from the early stages of choosing
a platform and designing interfaces for the new products. Further on, since
ePortfolios are often viewed as electronic shells or containers for displaying
and storing user-generated content, in most people's views, these course man-
agement and portfolio software companies do not have the responsibility of
making the content accessible. Considering the easy employability of ready-
made digital tools for Web pages, content creators with little knowledge of
accessibility are populating the digital spaces with inaccessible content. No
reliable filters or content checkers have yet been built into the electronic port-
folio systems I have researched which would alert the composer about the
accessibility issues in their work.

   To attain the goals of an accessible system, emerging approaches to digital
design of ePortfolios can be employed offering multiple user interfaces from a
single-source using differing modalities. For instance, Parallel User Interface
Rendering (PUIR) is based on a "single consistent conceptual model," which
can render a user interface simultaneously in multiple modalities and thus be

142
                                                                                       Accessible ePortfolios

accessible to people with differing sensory and usability needs simultaneously
(Van Hees & Engelen, 2012). These versatile interfaces and electronic perfor-
mance support systems also have the potential for communicating more ef-
ficiently and efficaciously with specialized adaptive devices necessary for certain
people with disabilities.

   Cooper and Heath's (2009) approach to personalizing interfaces for users
with disparate needs, an approach they label as "a standardized intermediate
representation," works to develop interface work with popular consumer de-
vices and educational software presently on the market. For example, they ex-
amine able-bodied users' abilities to individualize the look and feel of their
cellular phones and tablets to accommodate greater accessibility needs. Just as
students and instructors can subscribe or unsubscribe to services of their inter-
est or disinterest in a course management system, disabled users should be able
to add features and services which enhance their abilities to function in digital
environments and remove features which distract or obstruct from effective in-
teraction. This approach has been implemented in some Google and Microsoft
and Apple products where users can turn on a built-in screen reader, magnifier,
or speech recognition system without additional adaptive technology. Whereas
such devices at this time only add extra modalities without paying close atten-
tion to usability, Cooper and Heath foresee a future where accessibility stan-
dards would be integrated as norm for digital usability. Thus, disabled users
won't remain an after-thought for developers and designers. Instead, designers
would have a vision for interfaces requiring no retrofitting--interface designs
which would represent all users, would allow personalization of content, and
would have the scope for individualized interfaces (Cooper & Heath, 2009; p.
1140). Some of the approaches within the Web Content Accessibility Guide-
lines 2.0 also aim at building such flexibility in initial digital environment de-
sign and can be implemented in ePortfolio building and pedagogy for users
with a variety of sensory and learning disabilities to provide improved access to
multimodal content as well as portfolio management systems themselves. An
examination of one such ePortfolio system, Canvas, helps substantiate claims
about accessibility and usability problems for visually impaired and blind users.

   An ePortfolio can include any online multimodal document management
tool with a set of specific display and management characteristics. Such sys-
tems collectively define the shared space between the creator and its imagined
readers. Providing a complete survey of ePortfolio models or the tools various
ePortfolios offer is beyond the scope of this discussion (see Kimball, 2006 for
a fairly recent list). Rather, the primary goal here is to delineate some of the
chronic accessibility issues these ePortfolio performance support systems pres-
ently suffer from in order to help illustrate how the lack of inclusivity in the

                                                                                                143
Oswal

design of these tools can adversely affect visually impaired students' abilities to
effectively participate in portfolio development in academia and the workplace.
The availability of an accessible ePortfolio tool can have subtle, hard-to-detect
yet immensely significant implications for students in their educational and
workplace careers. If the portfolio tool is inaccessible or unusable in any way in
school, it is very likely that the user will also lack necessary expertise to use simi-
lar technologies in the workplace. Again, the following description of Canvas
Portfolio tool is not aimed to analyze or evaluate all product features.

ACCESSIBLE USER EXPERIENCE WITH
THE CANVAS PORTFOLIO TOOL

   Let's examine the Canvas Portfolio tool from the point of entry into the
portfolio page to the place where users can add and edit sections. There are user
experience accessibility problems for users with screen readers. The blind tester
is an expert JAWS-for-Windows screen reader user, Version 13. A sighted uni-
versity technician in charge of the management of Canvas participated as an ob-
server. We replicated our earlier test with Canvas Portfolio six months later. Our
results were almost identical. This is what we found. And note that since blind
users cannot point to a mouse target, they navigate the screen with the help of
the tab and arrow keys while JAWS reads the information from the cursor loca-
tion. JAWS also has many sophisticated commands to permit faster navigation
by expert users but nothing works unless Web pages have been coded accurately
in accordance with the screen reader accessibility standards.

   Once the user enters Canvas Portfolio, the first item JAWS reads is the Orga-
nize/Manage Pages area in the right navigation menu as garbage code "36,941.
Reorder entries." After being serenaded by these random numbers and phrases
from the underlying Web code by my favorite JAWS voice, Reed, we decided to
test first things first and launched the Getting Started wizard. The wizard start-
ed okay, but once "introduction" or "portfolio sections" were selected within
the wizard, a pop-up box came up with instructions and "show me" links, and
JAWS did not read anything to the user to indicate that the box was displaying
information. Upon being prompted by the sighted observer, the blind user was
able to get the content by employing the "find" command in JAWS. The point
here is that without a prompt from a sighted observer, the blind user would not
even know about the existence of the text box.

   At this point, the tester decided to explore this page further to understand
its actual layout in comparison with the order in which JAWS was reading the

144
                                                                                       Accessible ePortfolios

page. This is what JAWS saw and read; the sighted observer filled in the invisible
items unread by JAWS:

         complementary landmark
         wizard link
         panic level 2 home
         organize pages
         heading for pages for this section
         ePortfolio
         12,465 number garbage (all not visible)
         welcome
         times (all not visible)
         add another page (all not visible)
         694- reoder entery garbage (all not visible)
         edit page

   At this point, we tried to create a portfolio page using the "ADD" button.
When we tried to save the page, JAWS provided no response. Again, you can
see how this would be impossible for a blind user to navigate without much
assistance.

   The next test we tried was for adding sections within the portfolio. When
clicked on, the "done editing" window popped up but the "add section" button
was not read. Once we clicked on it, the cursor moved in the box to enter a
section name, but it was not verbalized by JAWS. After adding a section with
sighted help, the last step to get the new section to show in the list of sections
again did not read, and there was no way for the blind user to know that it is
the last step before this added section will show in the navigation.

   Further on, once a section was created, the next text box for creating another
section came up but was not read. Instead JAWS read garbage after informing
the user about a Twitter® link at the bottom of the page. At this stage, we de-
cided to perform the next logical action: to edit the page with the new section.
Again, using the "find" function in JAWS, the blind user located the added
sections, but just by using the arrows or tab keys JAWS could not read them.
Similarly, when editing a section page, the tab key did not take the user to the
"add content" menu on the right, where the user needed to go. Employing the
arrow keys, the user eventually reached that section, but again the tab key did
not land the user on the menu.

   The last test we performed was on uploading files from the user's PC into
this newly created portfolio section. Interesting enough, here we found that

                                                                                                145
Oswal

when browsing for a file to upload, the "BROWSE" button on the page is
voiced if the user moved the cursor backwards. But the button was not voiced
when the user read forward and down the page, which is the norm. Likewise,
"uploading a file" gave no verbal indication initially that the software was up-
loading until the user moved the arrow up.

   To summarize this user experience, most of the accessibility problems re-
corded during this session are solvable. They would fall under four categories:
the user getting lost in information organization, confusing navigation menus,
invisible information, and not providing enough control to users. A separate
but common accessibility/usability issue repeatedly confronted during this test-
ing pertained to the positioning of keyboard focus when a feature was opened
or closed. The system often moved the screen reader cursor back to the start of
the page requiring the blind user to track back to the place where he had initi-
ated the earlier action.

   Further, an overall page design which caters to visual users, employs re-
petitive navigation menus with inadequate labeling, and codes various page
elements poorly cannot serve disabled users. If we view questions of accessibility
and usability as two interrelated phenomena, as Petrie and Kheir (2007) in their
study of blind and sighted Web users have shown, many of accessibility prob-
lems confronted by blind users overlapped with usability issues experienced by
the nondisabled. Addressing one group's needs can benefit the other. Attention
to Section 508 or Web Content Accessibility Guidelines could have taken care
of all the technical issues in this case, although it would have been a monumen-
tal undertaking.

CONCLUSIONS

   As it has been substantiated by this brief user experience report, in spite of
major leaps in ePortfolio technologies, accessibility for disabled students and
faculty rarely comes with these new digital tools. Campus administrators ac-
quiring ePortfolios systems, and the instructors adopting them in their courses,
must raise some difficult questions before selecting and implementing such
systems for all users, both legally and ethically but also in order to adequately
prepare students with functional technological literacies.

   As Lawrence A. Scadden of the National Science Foundation writes, "[E]
ducation professionals can be considered the gatekeepers to the future for many
students with disabilities because education controls the boundaries of partici-
pation in our society. With a solid education (mediated by the essential adapted
computer technology), multiple career options will be open to them, permit-

146
                                                                                       Accessible ePortfolios

ting them to flourish independently in the twenty-first century. (VIII) the col-
leges can hardly ignore the needs of their disabled students and faculty today in
light of the U.S. Justice Department's recent interventions in the Kindle cases
in Arizona, Wisconsin, and Pennsylvania to protect the rights of this popula-
tion in the higher education institutions" (Dear Colleagues Letter from DOJ,
2011). By overlooking accessibility aspects of ePortfolios we might also end up
squandering precious institutional resources in providing band aid solutions
in the form of able-bodied assistants to disabled students and retrofitting these
ePortfolios with accessibility if the tools are home grown.

   The adoption of such inaccessible ePortfolio tools happens under an range
of circumstances--lack of a clear accessibility clause in the school's purchasing
policies, the senior technology executives' knowledge of accessible technologies
and accessibility laws, these executives' general attitudes toward disability, the
admission departments' success in keeping the percentage of disabled students
on campus low, and often these students' own unawareness about their educa-
tional rights. As far as cost is concerned, accessible ePortfolios should not cost
a single extra penny to colleges in most cases since they are third-party com-
mercial products. As it is apparent from the Kindle eReader cases in Arizona,
Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin, any institutions of higher education receiving di-
rect or indirect funding from the U.S. Government are obligated to purchasing
accessible technologies for all users. Besides adopting accessible an ePortfolio
system, we also need to ask other accessibility-related questions before ePortfo-
lios performance support system implementation:

   · What are the teaching and learning goals associated with the technologi-
       cal aspects of ePortfolios? Are these goals also achievable by disabled stu-
       dents considering the current state of ePortfolios technology? Is it pos-
       sible for us to deliver our portfolios curriculum equitably to all students?

   · What are the pedagogical benefits of ePortfolios to students? Will dis-
       abled students also receive comparable benefits with or without accom-
       modations? How are these benefits assessed for students? Is the same
       methodology applied in the case of disabled students?

   · Since various multimodal technologies integrated in ePortfolios create
       both opportunities and barriers for students with sensory disabilities,
       what content standards should be applied across the board to provide
       a level playing ground to all students? How do we build institutional
       capacity for training faculty and students in the use of technologies so
       that all the portfolios content generated is accessible to all as a matter of
       routine?

   · What are the technical issues with the accessibility of ePortfolios in
       higher education which go beyond the question of meeting general Web

                                                                                                147
Oswal

       standards? Which academic or professional organization should take a
       leadership role for sorting out these technical problems? What commit-
       ment for integrating accessibility should be expected from the third-par-
       ty vendors of ePortfolios?

RECOMMENDATIONS

   These recommendations provide some suggestions for instructors to bring
accessibility to their ePortfolio pedagogy so that it could be inclusive of their
disabled students. While automated accessibility testing tools such as WAVE
for Internet Explorer and Fangs for Firefox can highlight some key accessibility
problems disabled users will experience with an ePortfolio system, a hands-on
accessibility testing session can provide a visceral view of how disabled users
interact with electronic pages. WCAG 2.0 lists 38 success criteria or check-
points for achieving Web accessibility. Twelve of these checkpoints can be veri-
fied manually and can make instructors aware of the state of accessibility of a
particular Web page.

   Perform a manual test on all Web pages/screens of your ePortfolio tool three
times and learn firsthand how your students with disabilities will interact with
the system and will or will not experience accessibility problems with the vari-
ous menus, links, buttons, mouse-overs, and other navigation. Conduct one test
for learning about visually impaired users with a screen reader such as JAWS-
for-Windows (see http://www.freedomscientific.com) or NonVisual Desktop
Access (NVDA) (see http://www.nvda-project.org ) for speech output and a
keyboard for input but no mouse; another for speech and hearing impaired us-
ers without a speaker or microphone; and yet another without a keyboard and
mouse but through a speech input software such as Dragon NaturallySpeaking
(see http://www.nuance.com/dragon) for users unable to operate other input
devices. When the ePortfolio homepage one tests fails to make links visible to
the user using a screen reader, one realizes that access to this information is not
really that easy. Similarly, when one's screen reader informs that the page has
several links but they cannot be clicked without a mouse, a problem is clearly
identified. Very suddenly the wonderful World Wide Web begins to appear not
so wonderful.

   Here are some disability-centered general guidelines to improve accessibility
and usability performance of ePortfolios through an accessible pedagogy. Be-
cause manufacturers of ePortfolio tools primarily test their systems with nondis-
abled users, disabled users always face more technical problems. Consequently,

148
                                                                                       Accessible ePortfolios

they require strong technical support on campus for troubleshooting. Another
central accessibility issue relates to the need for a smooth interfacing of the elec-
tronic portfolio tools with other learning management system tools used by the
instructor. Equally crucial is a functional interface with other university digital
systems such as library Web pages, campus storage drives where instructors and
students park materials, and any other university websites housing materials
related to portfolio work.

Emphasis on Accessible Content Generation

   Besides ensuring the accessibility of the ePortfolio system, making use of
only accessible tools for content development is central to disabled students'
success with their portfolio projects. We often forget to check whether our own
Web pages follow WCAG 2.0 guidelines. We may not remember that our vid-
eos often lack descriptive transcripts of visual elements for the blind and text
transcripts of audio elements for the deaf and other users with audio processing
disorders. The same rules apply to plug-ins and other third-party links. Last,
information overload, or general confusion, is a major issue in multimodal pre-
sentations for users with a range of disabilities.

Multimodal Assignments

   We can develop assignments that utilize disabled students' differing capa-
bilities and skills just the way we design assignments for able-bodied students'
diverse capabilities and skills. We also cannot expect all students to accomplish
the same level of competency in each area/goal of the assignment when we take
into account how no two human bodies are alike. By no means do I suggest that
we should not expect our disabled students to employ more than one modal-
ity or learning approaches. For example, blind students might be interested in
exploring the possibilities of video whereas deaf students might be interested
in soundscapes. Stefani et al. (2007) emphasize that for optimal accessibility
an ePortfolio's content must be useable in more than one medium. They sug-
gest that students create multimodal portfolios that could be experienced with
"audio turned off, with screen-readable text to supplement or replace graphics,
with captioning of digital video, with descriptions to accompany flash anima-
tions" (p. 114). This is a post-process pedagogy of divergency. As workplaces
happen to be collaborative, and this mode of learning has become acceptable in
higher education, use of collaborative assignments can permit students to apply
their diverse capabilities and skills without instituting new power hierarchies.

                                                                                                149
Oswal

Activities Surrounding ePortfolio Content Development

   Again, when developing content for ePortfolios, at least the instructor-
directed activities must draw on different abilities and skill-levels of disabled
and non-disabled students. The rule of thumb for inclusive pedagogy is that
we incorporate a range of activities in ePortfolio design, content development,
and eventual portfolio management so that every student has an opportunity
to shine in some of them rather than getting penalized for failing to perform
an overwhelming number of activities beyond their bodily ability. In the same
vein, involvement of disabled students in evaluating the effectiveness of assign-
ments and activities from their vantage point as disabled designers and learners
is crucial. Last, making the purpose of such activities and interactions obvi-
ous to all students is important, and presenting this information in more than
one modality is even more important. In our own assessment and feedback,
we must become introspective in choosing our methods for evaluating student
work. We must devise methods that do not favor student work in a certain
modality and penalize another. Further, experiments in providing feedback in
diverse modalities can be constructive in specific student circumstances and dis-
abilities; however, instructors ought to remember to offer more than one option
for receiving this feedback because "not one size fits all" adage can be true even
within a single disability category (Thompson & Lee, 2012). Last, spreading
grade distribution broadly and keeping the weight of individual assignments
low enough that failing one assignment does not affect final grade adversely is
fair and helpful to all students.

REFERENCES

Alpert, S., & Grueneberg, K. (2001). Multimedia in concept maps: A design
   rationale and web-based application. In C. Montgomerie, & J. Viteli (Eds.),
   Proceedings of world conference on educational multimedia, hypermedia and
   telecommunications 2001, (pp. 31-36). Chesapeake, VA: AACE.

Ball, S. (2009). Accessibility in e-assessment. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher
   Education, 34(3), 293-303.

Burgstahler, S. A. (2008). Universal design in higher education. In S. R. Burg-
   stahler & R. Cory (Eds.), Universal design in higher education from principles
   to practice (pp. 3-20). Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education Press.

Cambridge, D. (2008). Audience, integrity, and the living document: eFolio
   Minnesota and lifelong and lifewide learning with ePortfolios. Computers &
   Education, 51(3), 1227-1246.

150
                                                                                       Accessible ePortfolios

Cambridge, D. (2010). Eportfolios for lifelong learning and deliberative assess-
   ment. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Canvas voluntary product accessibility template. Canvas by instructure. Re-
   trieved from http://www.instructure.com/canvas_vpat

Center for Applied Special Technology. (2004). Universal design for learning.
   Retrieved from http://www.cast.org.

Chau, J., & Cheng, G. (2010). Towards understanding the potential of e-port-
   folios for independent learning: A qualitative study. Australasian Journal of
   Educational Technology, 26(7), 932-950.

Cicognani, A. (2000). Concept mapping as a collaborative tool for enhanced
   online learning. Educational Technology & Society, 3(3), 150-158.

Cooper, M., & Heath, A. (2009). Access for all to eLearning. In A. Méndez-
   Vilas, M. Solano, J. A. Mesa Gonzalez, & J. Mesa Gonzalez. (Eds.), Inte-
   grating ICT in education (pp. 1139-1143). Retrieved from http://oro.open.
   ac.uk/24796

Dolmage, J. (2009). Disability, usability, universal design. In S. K. Miller-Co-
   chran & R. L. Rodrigo (Eds.), Rhetorically rethinking usability: Theories, prac-
   tices, and methodologies (pp. 167-190). New York: Hampton.

Dunn, P. A., & De Mers, K. D. (2002). Reversing notions of disability and
   accommodation: Embracing universal design in writing pedagogy and web
   space. Kairos: A Journal of Rhetoric, Technology, and Pedagogy, 7(1). Retrieved
   from http://www.technorhetoric.net/7.1/coverweb/dunn_demers

Ellis, K., & Kent, M. (2011). Disability and new media. New York: Routledge.
Gatlin, L., & Jacob, S. (2002). Standards-based digital portfolios: A component

   of authentic assessment for preservice teachers. Action in Teacher Education,
   23(4), 35-42.
Gibson, D., & Barrett, H. (2002). Directions in electronic portfolio develop-
   ment [Paper presented in an online forum of ITForum]. ITFORUM Paper
   #66. Retrieved from http://it.coe.uga.edu/itforum/paper66.htm
Gibson, D., & Barrett, H. (2004). Directions in electronic portfolio develop-
   ment. Contemporary Issues in Technology and Teacher Education, 2(4), 556-573.
Hendren, G., & Sacher, J. (1992). Employer agreement with the Americans
   with Disabilities Act of 1990: Implication for rehabilitation counseling. The
   Journal of Rehabilitation, 58, 481-408.
Jafari, A., & Greenberg, G. (Eds.) (2003, November 3). Electronic portfolio
   white paper: Version 1.0. Retrieved from http://www.immagic.com/eLi-
   brary/ARCHIVES/GENERAL/EPORT/E031103J.pdf
Kim, P. (2006). Perspectives on a visual map-based electronic portfolio system.
   In A. Jafari & C. Kaufman (Eds.), Handbook of research on ePortfolios (pp.
   44-53). Hershey, PA: IDEA Group Reference.

                                                                                                151
Oswal

Kimball, M. (2006). Database e-portfolio systems: A critical appraisal. Comput-
   ers and Composition, 22, 434-458.

Kinchin, I. M. (1998, August). Constructivism in the classroom: Mapping your
   way through. Paper presented at the Annual Student conference of the Brit-
   ish Educational Research Association Annual Student Conference in The
   Queen's University, Belfast.

Mason, R., Pegler, C., & Weller, M. (2004). E-portfolios: An assessment tool
   for online courses. British Journal of Educational Technology, 35(6),
   717-727. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8535.2004.00429.x

Novak, J. D. (1998). Creating, and using knowledge: Concept maps as facili-
   tative tools in schools and corporations. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Oswal, S. & Hewett, B. (2013). Accessibility challenges for visually impaired
   students and their online writing instructors. In L. Meloncon (Ed.), Rhetori-
   cal accessibility: At the intersection of technical communication and disability
   studies. Amityville, NY: Baywood.

Petrie, H., & Kheir, O. (2007, April-May). The relationship between accessibil-
   ity and usability of websites. Paper presented at the Conference on Human
   Factors in Computing Systems, San Jose, CA.

Reese, M., & Levy, R. (2009). Assessing the future: E-portfolio trends, uses,
   and options in higher education. Research Bulletin, 4. Boulder, CO: EDU-
   CAUSE Center for Applied Research. Retrieved from https://jscholarship.
   library.jhu.edu/bitstream/handle/1774.2/33329/ECAR-RB_Eportfolios.pdf

Rice, R. (2013). Constructing new mediated knowledge in the process of writ-
   ing for life. In G. Desai (Ed.), The virtual transformation of the public sphere:
   Knowledge, politics, identity (pp. 246-257). New Delhi, India: Routledge.

Scadden, L. A. (1997). In C. Cunningham & N. Coombs, Information access
   and adaptive technology (Foreword). Phoenix, AZ: Oryx.

Seymour, W., & Lupton, D. (2004). Holding the line online: Exploring wired
   relationships for people with disabilities. Disability & Society, 19(4), 291-
   305.

Slatin, J. M. (2002). The imagination gap: Making web-based instructional
   resources accessible to students and colleagues with disabilities. Currents in
   Electronic Literacy, (Spring 6). Retrieved from http://currents.cwrl.utexas.
   edu/spring02/slatin.html

Slatin, J. M., & Rush, S. (2003). Maximum accessibility: Making your web
   site more usable for everyone. Boston: Addison-Wesley.

Stefani, L., Mason, R., & Pegler, C. (Eds.), (2007). The educational potential of
   e-Portfolios: Supporting personal development and reflective learning (Connect-
   ing With E-Learning). New York: Routledge.

152
                                                                                       Accessible ePortfolios

Thompson, R., & Lee, M. J. (2012). Talking with students through
   screencasting: Experimentations with video feedback to improve student
   learning. The Journal of Interactive Technology and Pedagogy, 1(1). Retrieved
   from http://jitp.commons.gc.cuny.edu/talking-with-students-through-scre-
   encasting-experimentations-with-video-feedback-to-improve-student-learn-
   ing

U.S. Census Bureau. (2009). American Community Survey. U.S. Census Bu-
   reau. Retrieved from http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/in-
   dex.xhtml

U.S. Department of Education and U.S. Department of Justice (2010). Elec-
   tronic book reader dear colleague letter: Questions and answers about
   the law, the technology, and the population affected. Retrieved from
   http://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/docs/504-qa-20100629.html

U.S. Department of Justice. (2009). A Guide to disability rights laws: Sec-
   tion 508. U.S. Department of Justice. Retrieved from http://www.ada.gov/
   cguide.htm#anchor65610

Walters, S. (2010). Toward an accessible pedagogy: Dis/ability, multimodality,
   and universal design in the Technical Communication classroom. Technical
   Communication Quarterly, 19(4), 427-454.

Van Hees, K., & Engelen, J. (2012). Equivalent representations of multimodal
   user interfaces. Universal access in the information society, 1-30. doi:10.1007/
   s10209-012-0282-z

Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG 2.0). Retrieved from
   http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20

Willis, L. & Wilkie, L. (2009). Digital career portfolios: Expanding institu-
   tional opportunities. Journal of Employment Counseling, 46(2), 73.

Yancey, K. B. (2004). Postmodernism, palimpsest, and portfolios: Theoretical
   issues in the representation of student work. College Composition and Com-
   munication, 55(4), 738-761.

Zdenek, S. (2009). Accessible podcasting: College students on the margins in
   the new media classroom. Computers and Composition Online, 1-21.

                                                                                                153
CHAPTER 9.

FROM METAPHOR TO

ANALOGY: HOW THE

NATIONAL MUSEUM OF

THE AMERICAN INDIAN

CAN INFORM THE AUGUSTA

COMMUNITY PORTFOLIO

Darren Cambridge
American Institutes for Research

The museum metaphor captures some of the more obvious affordances
of the digital, networked environment in which ePortfolios are
composed and used. Museums feature multiple media working in
concert and offer their visitors a choice of multiple ways of navigating
their collections. Many ePortfolio scholars emphasize the importance
of individual, rather than institutional, ownership of ePortfolios and
the capability of the ePortfolio genre to create a highly personalized
representation of individual learning and identity. The chapter
proposes an extended analogy between the National Museum of the
American Indian (NMAI) and the Augusta Community Portfolio to
map to key debates about ePortfolio practice.

MUSEUM AS METAPHOR

   Metaphor has long been a powerful tool for thinking about portfolios (see
Barrett, 2009). Metaphors help teachers and learners envision purposes for
portfolios, most famously through the three offered by Mary Dietz (1996): the
mirror (portfolio as reflection of the past and the self ), the map (portfolio as
plan for the future), and the sonnet (portfolio as form that helps identify what
is most significant). Metaphors have also been used to think critically about is-
sues of ownership and motivation, such as through Helen Barrett and Joanna
Carney's (2005) juxtaposition of ePortfolio as test and ePortfolio as story. Meta-

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0490.2.09                        155
Cambridge

phor has played a central role in the design of portfolios as well. Students are
often encouraged to choose personal metaphors for their ePortfolios to guide
their visual design (Kimball, 2002). At the institutional level, metaphors can
also provide scaffolding for reflection, such as the metaphor of a journey of an
outrigger canoe used at Kapi'olani Community College (Kirkpatrick, Renner,
Kanae, & Goya, 2009). ePortfolio metaphors proliferate: a page on Barrett's
website lists at least 25, and I can think of dozens more that have been em-
ployed in conversations about ePortfolio practice in which I've participated over
the last ten years (Barrett, 2009).

   Of the many possibilities, the ePortfolio as museum has proven powerful
for my own thinking. While I do not know who was first to suggest it, Kath-
leen Yancey (2004) often refers in her work to items within a portfolio, most
commonly called artifacts, as "exhibits," implicitly evoking the museum. Both
museums and portfolios work by taking artifacts out of their original contexts
and recontextualizing them within new and purposeful interpretive structures.
The museum metaphor captures some of the more obvious affordances of the
digital, networked environment in which ePortfolios are composed and used.
Museums feature multiple media working in concert and offer their visitors a
choice of multiple ways of navigating their collections. Up and beyond these
features, a museum is fundamentally a space, not just a text. Populated by both
objects and people, it is made more powerful through the interactions that
happen within, and are elicited by, that space. Adding to the affordances of
interlinked Web pages, the interactivity offered by ePortfolio systems and social
software, ePortfolios are becoming simultaneously text and space. Authors who
design their ePortfolios to capitalize on this dual character are likely to reflect
more deeply and connect more fruitfully to the audiences they value.

   Many ePortfolio scholars emphasize the importance of individual, rather
than institutional, ownership of ePortfolios and the capability of the ePortfo-
lio genre to create a highly personalized representation of individual learning
and identity. The museum metaphor also appeals to me because it complicates
those orthodoxies. Through the sponsorship of institutions with cultural capital
and high production values made possible through that sponsorship, museums'
messages are socially validated. Similarly, although ePortfolios are tradition-
ally highly individualized, the additional persuasiveness offered to authors by
institutional endorsement and the mediation of technology that viewers per-
ceive as professional and cutting edge should not be discounted. Museums are
also fundamentally collaborative creations, the product and site of the work of
teams of experts with a range of areas of expertise. Because they reflect not only
their primary author's ideas and achievements but also the design decisions of
technology developers, the feedback of peers and instructors, the responses of

156
                                                                               From Metaphor to Analogy

other audiences, and, often, shared conceptual frameworks for understanding
learning and performance, all contemporary ePortfolios are in some sense col-
laborative efforts.

   For several years, I have been interested in the possibility of the ePortfolio
genre as more explicitly collaborative, representing the achievement, reflec-
tions, goals, and plans of groups and organizations as well as individuals. The
Urban Universities Portfolio Project, sponsored by the American Association
for Higher Education in the late 1990s, demonstrated the power of electronic
portfolios to represent the work of an entire higher education institution to
multiple audiences, both on campus and in the larger community the institu-
tion serves (Kahn, 2001, 2002). Some of these institutional portfolios, such
as those of Indiana University Purdue University Indianapolis and Portland
State University, have played a key role in presenting evidence of institutional
performance to regional accreditors, and the Western Association of Colleges
and Schools now encourages such portfolios as part of their review process
(Western Association of Schools & Colleges, 2002). A growing number of
regional ePortfolio projects, in the US and particularly in Canada, the UK,
and Europe, seek to link individual ePortfolios to collaborative portals to ser-
vices offered to citizens to support their learning and civic participation by a
range of organizations (le Carpentier, Groot, & Wasko, 2008; Hartnell-Young,
Smallwood, Kingston, & Harley, 2006; Slade, 2008). Synthesizing the collec-
tive representation function of the university institutional portfolios and the
portal to services focus of the regional initiatives, Serge Ravet (2005) has pro-
posed an "ePortfolio city" in which a single ePortfolio represents and helps to
enact the capabilities, activities, aspirations, and plans of an entire community.
This call echoes the vision of a community ePortfolio with which individuals
and their individual self-representations can interact as envisioned by Barbara
Cambridge and me (2003).

AUGUSTA COMMUNITY PORTFOLIO

   It was with this vision in mind that Barbara, Kathleen Yancey, and I, in
our roles as leaders of the Inter/National Coalition for Electronic Portfolio Re-
search, jumped at the opportunity to work with David Joliffe, of the University
of Arkansas, and community leaders in Augusta, Arkansas to build and study
the Augusta Community Portfolio (ACP). Still in its early stages, we intend the
ACP to represent the capabilities, history, and desired future directions of the
town as a whole through exhibits featuring the products of residents' literate
activity and their individual and collective reflections upon them.

                                                                                                157
Cambridge

   The ACP builds on two years of the work of the Augusta Community
Literacy Advocacy Initiative. The Initiative has achieved impressive results in
a relatively short time. Based out of the White River Rural Health clinic, with
which many of the potential literacy activity participants already have a val-
ued relationship, the Initiative has worked extensively with local schools, the
county library, and several churches, work coordinated by Joy Lynn Bowen,
a retired teacher with seemingly limitless energy and deep roots in the com-
munity. Through the partnerships the Initiative has engaged students in oral
history work that has produced plays and poems, improved the reading skills
of new mothers alongside their children, paired younger members with elders
to write about the meaning of church life, help community members compose
stories and gather documentation of the experiences of WWII-era veterans,
and raised awareness of the centrality of reading and writing in community
life through distributing books and information in doctor's and dentists' of-
fice and in many other businesses throughout Augusta. Public celebrations
of achievement feature prominently into many of these initiatives, reflecting
such events' central role in building community identity in rural communities
(Procter, 2005). In choosing this distributed approach, the Initiative builds on
recent research that shows that multiple sponsors, not just schools and families
but a wide range of institutions and cultural traditions, shape the development
of literacy over the course of a lifetime (Brandt, 2001). Engaging multiple
sponsors of literacy has led to measurable results. In two years, the number
of graduating seniors at Augusta High School admitted into college rose from
three to 33.

   To date, most of the Initiative's work has focused on print-based literacies.
An eventual goal of the ACP project is engaging residents of Augusta in culti-
vating their digital literacies as well, combining audio, video, hyperlinks, and
interactivity with text to effectively communicate with their audiences. An ex-
hibit within the ACP, Augusta@College, is a first step in this direction. Students
from Augusta in their first year of college are blogging about their experiences,
including posting videos they have made using cameras provided by the project.
By reading and commenting on their peers' posts, the students support each
other as they transition into college life. The blog provides residents of Augusta,
particularly high school students, with the opportunity to learn about the reali-
ties of college life, perhaps making the prospect of enrolling after graduation
less intimidating. It is one thing to get more students admitted into college and
universities; it is another to get them to go and then to graduate. While help-
ing students and residents work with multiple media and interact online and
develop important digital literacy skills, we hope Augusta@College also helps
address this larger challenge.

158
                                                                               From Metaphor to Analogy

   Primarily because I was the person involved in the project with the most
appropriate media and coding skills, I designed the first version of the ACP in
consultation with leaders of the various existing literacy projects, drawing on
artifacts produced by participants. In addition to Augusta@College, three ad-
ditional exhibits focus, respectively, on the Delta Oral History Project, through
which advanced high school students researched local history and produced
creative works based on their research; the Soundtracks of My Life project,
which asked younger students to create and annotate selections of music that
expressed their identities; and the Augusta Veterans' Stories project, which in-
volved a diverse group of residents in composing stories and gathering artifacts
to represent the experiences of veterans from Woodruff County. Each exhibit
is an interactive Flash movie in which selected documents, such as the vet-
erans' stories, and complementary images, such as the cover artwork of the
Soundtracks, are combined with video clips. In the videos project participants
reflect on the processes of composing the texts, their meaning, and what they
have to say about the present and future of Augusta. The ACP also links to
pieces of writing contributed by individual Augusta residents to the National
Council of Teachers of English's National Gallery of Writing. Rather than be-
ing natively digital creations, most of the initial exhibits remediate the print
based activity and artifacts into an attractive and usable digital form (Bolter &
Grusin, 1999).

   The video sections of the exhibits are one form of reflection within the port-
folio, focusing on the interpretations of participants in the literacy projects.
Readers can join the site, adding their photos to those of other members on
the ePortfolio's main page, comment on exhibits, respond to the comments of
other members, and link to other websites that provide additional perspectives.
The connections between the physical space that defines the community and
the new virtual space created by the ePortfolio is emphasized through having
the primary entry point to the exhibits be an interactive map that displays the
geographical locations of the literacy work across the county. This map-based
interface was suggested and enthusiastically received by Initiative participants.

   The expert-produced exhibit media and visual interface, the tightly inte-
grated and customized interactive social software functionality, and the map
combine to give the ACP a professional, technically sophisticated feel. To a
reasonable extent, it seems to be on par with what many Web sites residents
see as high profile and cutting edge, particularly when compared with other
representations of Augusta found online. In the contemporary culture of the
US, representation in media is a powerful means of validating knowledge and
identity (Miller & Shepherd, 2004). See also Shepherd and Goggin (2012).
Towns like Augusta--indeed, much of rural and lower class America--are al-

                                                                                                159
Cambridge

most invisible on the Web. In its design, the ACP makes the implicit argument
that the experiences and achievements of all Augusta residents are on par with
those of communities and individuals with greater access to the Internet, which
shapes what many see as real and valuable.

A DIFFERENT KIND OF MUSEUM

   The use of "exhibits" throughout this brief description of the initial itera-
tion of the ACP points to the importance the museum metaphor has played in
our thinking so far. David Joliffe first suggested it on our first trip to Augusta
to introduce the concept of a community ePortfolio to participants in the lit-
eracy initiative. As discussed in the opening section, making public, validating,
and enabling reflection about the products of activity is also at the heart of
ePortfolio practice, so the conceptual jump from museum to ePortfolio appears
straightforward.

   However, one of the challenges of employing the museum metaphor to help
residents of Augusta understand the idea of a community ePortfolio is the prob-
lem of ownership. Traditionally, historical and anthropological museums have
been designed and curated by academic experts from outside of the culture
being represented (Archuleta, 2008; Griffin, 2007; Isaac, 2008). In contrast,
portfolios have traditionally been designed and composed primarily by the peo-
ple who are also their subjects, and the author's ownership of the portfolio is
generally considered a central principle of good practice, both from ethical and
pragmatic standpoints (Joint Information Systems Committee, 2009; Yancey,
2004). While a museum is designed about you, you design an ePortfolio about
yourself. Although the initial version of the ACP was largely expert-designed,
we want it to become increasingly the product of community members' reflec-
tion, deliberation, and composition, for the residents to feel that they them-
selves are the designers and owners of the ePortfolio.

   In order to encourage residents to begin making this conceptual shift, at
the launch of the ACP at the Woodruff County Educational Forum in August
2009, I used an analogy to the National Museum of the American Indian to
suggest that a different kind "museum" was possible for Augusta. The National
Museum of the American Indian (NMAI) opened in September 2004, occu-
pying the last remaining spot on the National Mall in Washington, DC. The
mission and design of the museum was the product of extensive consultations
with Native leaders and community members from throughout the Americas.
Rather than presenting primarily what expert anthropologists or art historians
believe is important about American Indian culture and notable in the mu-

160
                                                                               From Metaphor to Analogy

seum's extensive collection of artifacts, the NMAI seeks to offer a genuinely
indigenous perspective (Archuleta, 2008; C. Smith, 2005). Beyond just con-
sultations in the planning stages, the NMAI embraced a community curation
model in which groups of community members from the nations profiled in
the museum's exhibits collaborated with NMAI staff throughout the design
process, choosing the stories and objects to be featured, deciding how they are
arranged, and offering their interpretations through written labels and video
commentary (Lamar, 2008; P. C. Smith, 2008). In addition, members of the
native communities serve as cultural interpreters at the museum itself, interact-
ing with visitors through guiding tours and conducting other programming.
While certainly not the first museum to adopt the community curation model,
the NMAI is unique in its scale and international visibility (Lonetree, 2008).

   Analogously, we hope that future exhibits within the ACP will be curated
by teams of participants in the Augusta Community Literacy Initiative's proj-
ects. While experts on portfolios, media production, and Web development
will certainly continue to play a role in building the portfolio, we hope that
our job will be to facilitate reflection that catalyzes the groups' visions for their
contributions to the portfolio and to provide technical assistance as needed to
translate those visions into compelling digital texts.

Analogous Tensions

   In the five years since its opening, the NMAI has produced an outpouring of
popular and scholarly commentary, including numerous newspaper and maga-
zine reviews, scholarly articles in multiple disciplines, special issues of several
journals, and an edited collection. These critical perspectives run the gamut
from highly celebratory to flatly dismissive. The tensions scholars have identi-
fied in their analyses of the NMAI also warrant consideration as we continue
the development of the ACP. In fact, these tensions map to key debates about
ePortfolio practice more generally. While the analogy to the NMAI cannot offer
resolutions, it can help to identify key questions we must consider as we move
forward.

Heritage versus History

         Much of the critical commentary on the NMAI focuses on the respec-
tive roles and responsibilities of the American Indian curators representing their
communities and the professional curators employed by the Smithsonian with
whom they collaborated. While sections of each exhibit are curated by profes-
sionals, most exhibits include sections that are curated by groups of members

                                                                                                161
Cambridge

of the communities on which they focus. For example, the Our People exhibit,
which presents a historical perspective on American Indian culture, includes a
central display that frames the exhibit as a whole, surrounded by installations
focusing on eight different native Nations. These installations were designed
in close collaboration between the staff and the community curators, and the
community members made the final decisions about what to include and what
to foreground. Many critics, particularly in the popular press, saw the exhibits
as "unscholarly" or even "random," failing to provide a single, authoritative
curatorial voice that would enable viewers to "judge" the perspectives offered
by community members and as neglecting items from the collection that they
deemed more objectively important than those chosen by community members
(Fisher, 2004; Richard, 2004; Rothstein, 2004). The exhibits do indeed differ
from the conventions of traditional museums in presenting multiple voices and
styles of presentation, many unfamiliar, and in choosing not to judge which are
more truthful or significant.

   In addition, critics saw most of the community-curated exhibits not as hon-
est reflections about the history and current cultural state of the native nations
but as purely celebratory "sales booths" within a museum-wide "trade show"
that failed to represent the very real problems facing the communities and gloss-
ing over the conflicts within them to present a falsely unified voice (Fisher,
2004). To some extent, the reflections of NMAI staff curators working on
the exhibits support this interpretation. For example, Cynthia Chavez Lamar
(2008, pp. 147-148) reports that the design process of a number of the nations'
contributions led to candid discussions about restrictive gender roles and con-
cerns about youth engagement, but "these frank, difficult representations of the
communities proved prohibitive to include in the exhibit for various reasons.
Considered sensitive topics by some of the co-currators, they felt the inclusion
might be perceived as `airing dirty laundry.'" Because of the hard-won trust she
had established, she did not feel it was "within [her] authority or conscience to
include sensitive information" the community curators did not wish to become
public, even if it would have made for a more engaging exhibit.

   Views on the appropriate balance of power of making decisions about the
museum's content and design reflect different understandings of the purpose of
a museum and the source interpretive authority. Stephen Conn (2006, p. 72)
quotes the historian David Lowenthal to distinguish between history and heri-
tage: "History tells all who will listen what has happened and how things came
to be as they are. Heritage passes on exclusive myths of origin and continuance,
endowing a select group with prestige and common purpose." Conn argues that
what the NMAI is really doing is cultivating American Indian heritage while

162
                                                                               From Metaphor to Analogy

trying to pass that off as history. In foregrounding Native voices, Conn is cer-
tainly right that part of the NMAI's mission is to support a sense of pride and
agency on the part of American Indians.

   However, his assumptions that doing so is necessarily at odds with history
and that heritage is intended only for insiders and not an appropriate focus of
a museum are problematic. Like many of the other critics, Conn does not see
the non-academic community members who co-curated the exhibits as true
authorities on their own history and culture. Exhibits produced through com-
munity consensus are presumed to lack objectivity. However, many supporters
of the museum see its message as an important corrective to how the Americas'
indigenous people have been represented in Western history and anthropology,
particularly through museums that have often cast them as frozen in their an-
cient culture and passive victims of inevitable historical forces of colonization.
Much of the museum is centered on Gerald Vizenor's concept of "survivance,"
highlighting the ways in which Indians have embraced change and continued
to develop their cultural heritage within the settler society while also resisting
their displacement, assimilation, and extermination. While this narrative theme
does indeed celebrate continuance and cultivate a sense of common identity
and purpose, it is also an important corrective to an inaccurate Western histori-
cal tradition (Atalay, 2008; Lonetree, 2008). The NMAI is hardly unique in
advancing both heritage and history through a museum. Although more com-
monly local on focus, many of the numerous "heritage museums" throughout
the United States attempt to present historical narratives both grounded in evi-
dence and foregrounding the achievements and shared identity of a community
(Katriel, 1993; Procter, 2005).

   Conn objects not only on behalf of his understanding of historical accuracy
but also on aesthetic grounds. The absence of accounts of controversy within
communities is particularly troublesome to him because this "is the only thing
that is interesting in the first place" to a non-native audience (Conn, 2006, p.
72). A museum needs to tell a good, as well as truthful, story, and doing so re-
quires the narrative skill of a professional curator. Supporters of the museum, in
contrast, explain its distinctively indigenous style of storytelling. Invoking Les-
lie Marmon Silko's account of Pueblo storytelling, Elizabeth Archuletta (2008,
p. 190) suggests that, rather than offering a single, linear path, "museum cura-
tors structured their displays like `many little threads' of a spider's web, each
strand adding to the larger picture, radiating out from the center that is the
NMAI." Properly understood, this alternative narrative structure can be power-
ful for both native and non-native audiences. However, it does ask more from
the viewer than a traditional museum, an issue to which I will return.

                                                                                                163
Cambridge

FAILURE, AUTHENTICITY, AND
MULTIPLICITY IN EPORTFOLIOS

   In charting the future directions of the ACP, we are faced with analogous is-
sues. Like many of the community curators of the NMAI, residents and leaders
of Augusta are likely to be reluctant to foreground conflicts and controversies
within the community in the ePortfolio, to "air dirty laundry." Some of those
already investing their energy in its development see it primarily as a celebra-
tion of the successes of the literacy work and as a means to demonstrate that
Augusta has an educated workforce to businesses that might choose to set up
shop there. At present, the ACP focuses overwhelmingly on the most compel-
ling outputs of the Augusta Community Literacy Advocacy Initiative, and the
reflections of participants are almost uniformly positive. As in some parts of the
NMAI, failures and setbacks--such as the difficulty in locating funding for the
planned Woodruff County Veteran's Memorial, with which the unveiling of the
Veteran's Stories project's publication was originally conceived to coincide--are
glossed over if they are mentioned at all.

   Should a community portfolio be primarily a showcase of achievements, or
should it try to offer a broader perspective on community activity, including
conflict, controversies, and deficits? In order for the ACP to be successful, all of
us engaging in developing it--academic experts, community leaders, residents,
and, perhaps, even visitors to the portfolio from beyond the community--will
need to deliberate about what is most desirable and appropriate in the local
context. Participants in the Urban University Portfolio Project developing in-
stitutional portfolios for colleges and universities faced a similar dilemma to
the one we face with ACP. A common topic of discussions during early meet-
ings was the degree to which the portfolios should include evidence of and
reflections on things the institutions were not currently doing well. Numerous
potential audience members, such as accreditors, members of the media, and
policy makers, advised the project participants that their ePortfolios were un-
likely to be taken seriously unless they included accounts of deficits as well as
strengths. In the end, some institutions chose to present only their successes,
while others used their portfolios to also reflect on areas in which they saw the
potential for improvement. The institutional portfolios of two of the schools
that chose the latter, Indiana University Purdue University Indianapolis and
Portland State University, have proved the most successful of those coming out
of the project, their development having been sustained over a decade and play-
ing an important role in accreditation (Hamilton, 2002; Kahn, 2001, 2002;
Ketcheson, 2001, 2009).

164
                                                                               From Metaphor to Analogy

   Barbara Cambridge (2001, p. 8) argues that the portfolio genre, whether
individually or collectively authored, has the potential to help individuals and
institutions develop a more productive relationship to failure. When used well,
portfolios can help turn perceived deficiencies into catalysts for innovation,
challenging the systems within the academy that punish failure rather than pro-
ductively address it:

         We all fail sometimes. Even with carefully established goals
         and conscientiously executed work, we do not meet the
         goals because of any number of circumstances. Yet we set
         up systems that condemn students, faculty members, and
         institutions for not meeting goals. Portfolios can be part
         of such systems if we choose to include in them only those
         pieces of evidence that bear good news .... Although we know
         that learning can and often does occur at times of dissonance
         or moments of difficulty, we look there not for the learning
         but for the problems.

   Cambridge goes on to suggest that portfolios that do incorporate evidence
of lack of success can do so in ways that promote individual and institutional
learning through providing context. First, in portfolios, it is possible to provide
explanations that help authors and audiences to understand what factors are re-
sponsible and to imagine ways in which they might transform them to prepare
for future success. Second, because good portfolios include multiple and het-
erogeneous sources of evidence collected over time, less successful performances
can be presented in relationship to more successful ones. By acknowledging
the reality of imperfection and contextualizing failure within a structure that
celebrates success, that affirmative message becomes both more useful and more
convincing.

   Some of the work featured in the initial version of the ACP does begin to
employ these strategies. While a number of Augusta students allude to hardships
they have experienced in the "liner notes" that accompany their Soundtracks,
such as difficult relationships with multiple foster parents and the challenges of
living in poverty, these are framed in terms of their success in overcoming them.
These are stories of a kind of survivance that are powerful in large part because
they provide the context to understand what the students have survived. In
planning future activities focused on such texts, we should consider ways to
help students reflect critically about how the stories they wish to tell for public
consumption match the concrete reality of their current situations and future

                                                                                                165
Cambridge

prospects. Whether such reflections should become part of the portfolio itself is
another question that I return to below.

   A second, related issue that the ACP shares with NMAI is the degree to
which the artifacts chosen by community members curating exhibits within the
portfolios and the reflective narratives they compose about them are authorita-
tive accounts of the literate activity the exhibits are intended to represent. Do
the community members' self-representations need to be validated by some ex-
ternal authority to be credible? Will their self-assessments bear weight? In what
sense can we expect their writing and reflecting to speak for itself without the
need for expert commentary? Many of the answers may hinge on whether the
purpose of the portfolio is to celebrate the heritage and contemporary achieve-
ments of the community or present a more academic account of the commu-
nity's history and level of literacy.

   The scholarship on the NMAI surveyed above suggests that we may not
need to pick one over the other. While the primary purpose of the portfolio
may be to highlight accomplishments, showcase notable texts, and give voice
to community experiences, making such evidence of literate activity in Augusta
visible online in a compelling fashion may also contribute to providing a more
accurate assessment of the town's fortunes and potential than is currently avail-
able to the audiences the community hopes to reach, such as potential new
business owners, political leaders, philanthropic foundation officers, and resi-
dents themselves.

   The tradition of ePortfolios in education also supports the validity of com-
munity members' own selections and interpretations. Yancey (1998) suggests
that portfolio pedagogy and assessment is fundamentally grounded in the
premise that "students are authoritative informants about their own learning."
Some of the most important aspects of learning and identity development can
only be made visible to the learners themselves. As Ross' (2006) review demon-
strates, that self-assessment can be both accurate and contribute to strengthen-
ing learning, engagement, and motivation has been shown in numerous studies.
As Barbara Cambridge (2001) argues, portfolios can be more convincing and
more accurate because they allow for context, providing reflective explanations
and juxtaposing multiple, heterogeneous evidence of differing levels of quality
to present an account of progress that does not discount challenges and mis-
steps along the way.

   In my own work, I show that much of contemporary ePortfolio practice is
grounded in the cultural ideal of authenticity--the idea that each person, and
perhaps each community, may have distinctive ways of knowing and taking ac-
tion that are most appropriate to themselves and that knowledge making and
decision making ought to be shaped by that distinctiveness (D. Cambridge,

166
                                                                               From Metaphor to Analogy

2010). While this ideal, prominent in Western culture since Romanticism, has
been criticized for its apparent solipsism, I argue, following contemporary phi-
losophers such as Charles Taylor, Bernard Williams, and Charles Guignon, that
authenticity can be reconceived as firmly grounded in social relationships and
commitments (Guignon, 2004; Taylor, 1989, 1991; Williams, 2002). When
the ideal of authenticity is extended from individual to collective identity and
action, this social dimension becomes inescapable. Procter (2005, p. 147) sug-
gests that one key form of community building in rural communities is "the
rhetoric of grace," which appeals to the distinctiveness of community identity
and the opportunities that present themselves at the moment of collective re-
flection. The development of the ACP presents a powerful opportunity to capi-
talize on and further develop a social understanding of authenticity's power to
chart the course of a community.

   The ACP also shares with the NMAI the lack of a master narrative. Even
more so than in the museum, portfolio visitors face the choice of what to view,
in what order, and are not offered an expert voice that tells them how to in-
terpret what they are experiencing. As is often the case of with personalized
individual ePortfolios, and more so than in other self-representations such as
résumé or transcripts, the audience needs to play an active role in making mean-
ing from the exhibits (Hartnell-Young et al., 2006). While in individual ePort-
folios, coherence is often achieved through the consistency of the author's voice
throughout, a community portfolio such as the ACP includes a multiplicity
of voices. Like the NMAI, the ACP does not judge which of these multiple
perspectives is most truthful or authoritative. Unlike in the NMAI, this mul-
tivocal structure does not originate in the indigenous ways of knowing of the
community; rather, it is a characteristic of the ePortfolio genre introduced by
the experts working with community members on the design.

   While the hypertextual organization of ePortfolios, and the corresponding
role of audience choice in reading, is a central characteristic of the genre, many
ePortfolios do include a central narrative that helps the reader make sense of
its contents (Yancey, 2001). For example, many ePortfolios created for writing
assessment include a "cover letter" that reflects on and explains the relation-
ships between the different samples of writing incorporated (Hamp-Lyons &
Condon, 2000). Many institutional portfolios, such as those discussed above,
include text that summarizes the portfolio's content and purpose and guides the
reader through it (Kahn, 2001).

   Therefore, another question for the future of the ACP is whether we need a
guiding narrative and to what extent it should make judgments about the mul-
tiple texts and perspectives the ePortfolio encompasses. If such a master narra-
tive is necessary, how can it be composed in a way that honors the community's

                                                                                                167
Cambridge

ownership of the ePortfolio? What kind of deliberative process is needed to
determine which voices and artifacts are privileged and which are questioned?
The answers may depend on what we decide is the most appropriate relation-
ship to the ACP's audiences, an issue discussed below.

CELEBRATION VERSUS CRITICAL REFLECTION

   In contrast to the popular critiques of the NMAI, many scholars of Ameri-
can Indian history and culture are sympathetic to some of the alterative pro-
cesses and formats embraced by the museum, seeing their roots in native ways
of knowing. However, some these more appreciative researchers criticize the
NMAI for what they see as a significant failure of those processes and formats
to deliver on the goal of representing American Indian survivance. The museum
fails to present a clear account of the history and contemporary consequences of
colonialism (Atalay, 2008; Carpio, 2008; Lonetree, 2006, 2008). Without such
an account, there is insufficient historical context for visitors to truly appreciate
the fierce American Indian resistance to colonialism.

   For example, while the Our Peoples exhibit seeks to frame the historical nar-
ratives of the native nations it profiles in terms of an overarching story of the
impacts of contact, visually it does so primarily through abstraction (Lonetree,
2008). It offers display cases of numerous guns, gold artifacts, bibles, and treaties,
representing the impact of violence on native communities, the immense trans-
fer for wealth to Europeans, the influence of Christianity on the education and
spiritual lives of American Indians, and the role of legal agreements in curtailing
but also to some extent protecting Indian rights. Unlike the National Holocaust
Museum, which one of the exhibit's curators cites as an inspiration, there are
no literal displays of this impact, such as photographs of slaughtered Indians or
blankets laced with smallpox (P. C. Smith, 2008). While some of the labels that
accompany the cases of artifacts do cite dramatic decreases in native population,
the damage to Native religious traditions wrought by enforced Christianity, and
specific instances of violence and broken treaties, they are unlikely to make clear
to visitors that these negative consequences stemmed from explicit policies of
the governments of Western nations, particularly the United States, to displace,
disinherit, and either assimilate or annihilate the Native peoples of the Americas.
Outright resistance, as opposed to negotiation, is marginalized. For example, the
American Indian Movement, a powerful adversarial force for change through
much of the 1960s and 1970s, receives only a single, passing reference.

   In other words, according to the critics, while the NMAI to some extent
represents the negative impacts of colonization, it treats it as disembodied and

168
                                                                               From Metaphor to Analogy

inevitable, something that must be dealt with rather than rejected. In trying to
portray American Indians as active shapers of their history, rather than victims
of oppression, it actually renders them subjects of fate (Brady, 2008). This is an
empty sort of agency, one that does little to help empower visitors to challenge
the legacies of colonialism at the root of many of the problems facing Native
people today. Some fear that the museum offers a shallow kind of reconciliation
between settler society and indigenous people, pushing for historical closure
through official recognition of the value of contemporary Native culture with-
out assuming responsibility for substantively addressing the negative legacies of
colonialism (Wakeham, 2008).

   The ACP faces a similar dilemma. The ePortfolio makes visible and cel-
ebrates the creative responses of the Augusta community to low levels of lit-
eracy of many residents. Rather than simply accepting the lack of an educated
workforce or their state as underdeveloped readers and writers, residents and
community leaders have made impressive strides toward increasing the quan-
tity and sophistication of literate activity throughout the town. In many cases,
evidence of this reading and writing is accompanied in the portfolio by moving
reflections on the experience of participating in this collective act of cultivating
learning. However, there is little as yet in the ACP that explores the root causes
of the situation that drove the Augustans into action. That situation arguably is
the result, for example, of several decades of neo-liberal policies of globalization
and corporate welfare that led to the decline of the Arkansas Delta's agricultural
economy and the current focus on attracting non-unionized factories, for which
an "educated workforce" is presumably necessary. The state of the educational
system also likely reflects the legacy of segregation. Portfolio contributors testify
to their impressive efforts to cope with change, but they do not yet question
the inevitability of that change. That the ACP does not take a critical stance is
typical of events and spaces in rural America intended to cultivate community.
Because of their institutional sponsorship, they are generally conservative in na-
ture, reifying existing power structures (Procter, 2005, p. 144). Whether or not
residents reflecting on their community in the ACP should be questioning the
sources of the structural inequalities with which they are coping, and, if so, how
to encourage them do so while also honoring their ownership of the portfolio,
remain open questions for me.

   The distinction between the largely celebratory reflection currently evident
in the ACP and the kind it, and the NMAI, currently lack is similar to the dis-
tinction between reflection in general and critical reflection made by prominent
scholars of adult education (Brookfield, 1986, 1995; Freire, 1970; Mezirow,
1990). While learners are often encouraged to reflect on how well their per-
formance matches measures of quality established by institutional authority or

                                                                                                169
Cambridge

traditional practice within a discipline or domain, or to make connections be-
tween concepts they are asked to learn and their personal experience, critical
reflection goes further to question the assumptions underlying the choice of
measures and concepts. Through critical reflection learners question the justifi-
cations of the power relationships they uncover, and ask whether and how they
could be transformed.

   Many experts see critical reflection as the ideal for reflection within ePort-
folios, albeit an ideal that often gets left behind in actual practice (Delandshere
& Arens, 2003). Particularly in professional education and in relationship to
learning beyond the classroom, projects at institutions such as the University of
Wolverhampton, Virginia Tech, and the University of Michigan have developed
pedagogies that are proving successful in moving learners toward genuinely criti-
cal reflection (Hughes, 2009; Peet, 2005; Young, 2009). For example, at Michi-
gan, students learn "generative interviewing," a technique for helping them make
their tacit knowledge of how social systems work explicit through dialog in order
to envision avenues for change their abilities position them to take.

   However, some research on reflection also suggests that the ability to ef-
fectively reflect critically may be a developmental, requiring preexisting skill at
other, simpler forms of reflection (Broadbank & McGill, 2007). It may be that
critical reflection should indeed be a goal of the ACP, but one that requires a
level of readiness that the community needs to develop through reflective prac-
tice over time (Pitts & Ruggierillo, 2012). Expecting ePortfolio contributors to
immediately jump into critical reflection may be a mistake. At the same time,
any postponement must be planned carefully so as to not offer at ACP, or even
the Literacy Advocacy Initiative more generally, as a celebratory false reconcili-
ation, as a substitute for government policy reforms to address the problems of
the town and the region. The ideal goals of the work should be transformative
rather than therapeutic.

TEXT, ACTIVITY, AND AUDIENCE

   The success of the ACP in reaching its goals will in large part be determined
by how effectively the portfolio engages its audience. Issues of audience engage-
ment constitute a final theme in the critical conversation about the NMAI.
Defenders of the museum accuse its detractors of failing to appreciate the ways
in which the museum is designed to facilitate audience experiences differently
than traditional museums.

   A first difference is that activities beyond simply viewing the exhibits are
central to the museum's intended function. Douglas Evelyn (2006, p. 54), past

170
                                                                               From Metaphor to Analogy

associate director of the NMAI, points to the activities that the museum medi-
ates as equal in importance to the static content of its exhibits. The museum
maintains an intensive, ongoing relationship with numerous indigenous na-
tions, hosts large-scale events attended by both Indians and non-Indians, and
features numerous educational activities led by indigenous cultural interpreters,
as well as frequent guest artists and speakers from throughout the Americas.
Evelyn rightly objects to critics evaluating the museum solely on the basis of the
content of its exhibits, discounting the activities the museum mediates. When
my own students wrote about their visit to the NMAI on a course fieldtrip this
fall, they pointed to their dialog with tour guides and artists offering demon-
strations as among the most powerful learning experiences of the day.

   I have already touched upon the second difference between the NMAI and
a traditional museum. Audience members are challenged to be active meaning
makers rather than passive receivers of expert-authorized truth. In contrast to
the approach of reviewers who singled out artifacts or texts in isolation from
the larger contexts into which they were incorporated, for audience members
to take full advantage of the exhibits, they need to consider them holistically,
examining the elements that make them up in relationship to all the others
within the exhibit and to the museum as a whole (C. Smith, 2005). As previ-
ously noted, many scholars connect this style of museum design to indigenous
ways of knowing and to Native narrative traditions, as a challenge to museums'
role as instiller of the conventions of Western historical and anthropological
discourse. Some also see it as a critique of the modernist conception of a sin-
gle historical truth, offering an alternative version of historical interpretation
that foregrounds the role of the audience member in making situated meaning
(Isaac, 2008).

   On the other hand, some scholars who do understand the transformative
intentions and indigenous cultural grounding of the exhibits nevertheless ques-
tion whether this design is likely to be successful in reaching non-Native au-
diences, or, indeed, even Native audience members without an academic un-
derstanding of American Indian storytelling and poststructuralist critiques of
historical knowledge. Given that addressing a broad audience of visitors to the
National Mall, including both American Indians and non-natives from numer-
ous countries around the world is central to the NMAI's mission, it may not be
wise to demand so much work from visitors. As Amy Lonetree (2008, p. 311)
puts it:

         Is this really an effective way to present Native American
         history and culture to a nation and world with a willed
         ignorance of this history of [genocide and colonialism]? Or a

                                                                                                171
Cambridge

         society that carries with them so many stereotypes about who
         we are as Indigenous people and to a nation that has defined
         itself by "playing Indian"?

   By leaving so much of the interpretive work to visitors, the NMAI runs the
risk of having its objects and narratives "hijacked" in service of ethnocentric ste-
reotypes of Indianess and an ideology of manifest destiny. These scholars point
out that museum research shows that visitors vary considerably in the amount
of time and energy they are willing to invest in taking in exhibits and that they
choose different styles of engagement (Atalay, 2008). The more casual visitors,
like the initial newspaper reviewers, may either dismiss the NMAI in its cur-
rent form as unscholarly and incoherent, or, worse, ascribe to it ideas that work
against its mission.

   These debates can inform the design the ACP. First, the issue of interpreting
the NMAI by its content versus also taking into account the activity it mediates
raises several important questions: How much of the reflective and self-repre-
sentational activity that the ACP project produces ought to be incorporated
into, or occur within, the portfolio itself? In what sense might the activities that
the ACP mediates count as part of the portfolio, even if ephemeral and produc-
ing no tangible record?

   Like the NMAI, a goal of the ACP is not just to showcase artifacts and sto-
ries but also to be a forum through which community and audience members
can engage in reflective dialog. When records of that dialog are preserved and
incorporated into the content of the ACP itself, the portfolio will arguably be-
come a more transparent--and so, perhaps, more credible--representation of
the process of community deliberation and identity building. Both live and ar-
chived, the presence of community members' voices within the portfolio made
possible through its social software functionality becomes central to its message.
The full meaning of the portfolio comes not just from the content of the exhib-
its but also from the conversations that surround them.

   Research on ePortfolios has shown that the conversations and events they
mediate can be as important to understanding and learning from them as their
content. Perhaps the most important contribution of the ePortfolio systems
that have been developed and implemented over the last decade is the ability for
multiple audiences to provide feedback within the portfolio space and to have
that feedback become available to be used as part of the author's self-representa-
tion (Lane, 2009). Offline, institutions and programs have successfully used in-
dividual conferences with students and public presentations of their portfolios
to engage audiences in dialog (Yancey, Cambridge, & Cambridge, 2009). These
conversations are sometimes recorded in order to become part of the students'

172
                                                                               From Metaphor to Analogy

ePortfolios. Some institutions, such as LaGuardia Community College, have
even established physical spaces, ePortfolio studios, within which such dialog
can be supported (Eynon, 2009).

   At the same time, stressing the often highly personal nature of reflection,
many ePortfolio teachers and learners value the ability to share portfolio con-
tent selectively offered by ePortfolio systems and similar database-driven tech-
nology for managing and sharing content. The principle of ownership suggests
that portfolio authors need to decide for themselves how public to make their
reflections and self-representations. While some ePortfolios are published on
the open Web, others are shared only with a select group of peers, mentors, or
potential employers. Portfolio authors often benefit from bouncing ideas off
of each other, sharing work in progress, and receiving encouragement from a
group with which they have established a trusting relationship (D. Cambridge,
2008).

   Research on supporting groups in developing capacity to pursue collabora-
tive inquiries into their own practice and to participate in public deliberations
points to the importance of what the rhetorician Rosa Eberly (2000) terms
"protopublic spaces," in which individuals can share their private experiences
and ideas with trusted others and develop the skills they need to present them
effectively in more fully public forums. In their analysis of faculty communi-
ties in the scholarship of teaching and learning, Randy Bass and Dan Bernstein
(2008) call such interstices between the privacy of the classroom and the public-
ity of scholarly publication "middle spaces" and stress their essential role.

   A question for the ACP going forward is how to create such trusted spaces
for dialog. One option is to create spaces for social interaction within the social
software functions of the portfolio only accessible to certain groups, such as
verified residents of Augusta or members of the community teams developing
exhibits. Face-to-face events provide another opportunity. We plan to host a
series of community reflection events in which members of the community
come together to view and talk about the contents of the portfolio and what
it says about the history, identity, and future of the community. While it may
make sense to record some such events for integration into the ACP, others
might remain ephemeral, limiting how widely what was said is shared. We will
have to think carefully about how to balance the need for a safe space for open
discussion and the desire to make community process visible.

   The second challenge the NMAI controversy about audience and activity
raises for the ACP is how to balance fidelity to the conventions of the ePortfolio
genre with the expectations and motivations of the audiences the portfolio is
intended to address. My own recent scholarship has focused on demonstrating
how the ePortfolio genre powerfully addresses needs for lifelong learning and

                                                                                                173
Cambridge

identity development that individuals and institutions face in contemporary
Western society (D. Cambridge, 2010). My collaborators and I chose to de-
velop the collective representation of literacy in Augusta as an ePortfolio, rather
than some other digital genre, because we believe the genre also has the poten-
tial to address similar needs of communities. However, it may need to adjust to
the new context in order to have the desired impact.

   My empirical research on the eFolio Minnesota project shows that one of
the two most important factors predicting a self-reported high level of impact
of composing an ePortfolio in learning and identity is what I term integrity (D.
Cambridge, 2008). An ePortfolio has integrity when it helps its author show
coherence across multiple life contexts and roles, such as career, family life, and
civic engagements. An ePortfolio with integrity helps its author demonstrate
how his or her core commitments are consistently evidenced by his or her ac-
tivity across these boundaries and to reflect on conflicts and inconsistencies
when they do occur, helping him or her plan for future action that is true to
those commitments. Through its ability both to incorporate diverse artifacts
from multiple contexts and to draw interpretive connections between them,
the ePortfolio genre appears to be well suited to helping individuals articulate
integrity to their own satisfaction.

   Achieving integrity to one's own satisfaction through the process of compo-
sition does not necessarily mean that the resulting portfolio will prove effective
in communicating that integrity to an audience. Even some of the most com-
pellingly integral ePortfolios require significant work on the part of the audi-
ence to grasp how the whole is more than the sum of the parts. For example,
Samantha Slade, an instructional designer in Montreal, composed an ePortfolio
to "find the thread in [her] life," to articulate integrity. At first look, the portfo-
lio appears to consist of arbitrarily ordered lists of competencies, skills, activi-
ties, work products, and assorted videos about Slade's experiences and beliefs.
However, when these elements are considered not in isolation but as part of an
integral whole, the portfolio presents a powerful story of how Slade's commit-
ment to creating resource-rich social environments for learning not only in-
forms her diverse professional engagements but also shapes the way she interacts
with her family and participates in her community (D. Cambridge, 2010). Like
the NMAI, portfolios such as Slade's require a level of engagement that many
casual visitors may not be motivated to invest.

   For the ACP, another compelling characteristic of the ePortfolio genre is its
ability to link up diverse types of artifacts and reflection. Like NMAI, we hope
that the ACP will speak with many voices that represent the range of experi-
ences and values of the people of Augusta. Yet this very multivocality can work
at cross-purposes with the goals of representing integrity and connecting with

174
                                                                               From Metaphor to Analogy

multiple audiences. Finding consistency and coherence across a single life is dif-
ficult enough. As the ePortfolio genre moves from individual to collective, this
challenge intensifies. Again we face the question of how to maintain multiple
voices without imposing an unrepresentative master narrative while still provid-
ing enough orientation for the audience to appreciate the whole.

   While the best ePortfolios have traditionally asked a lot of readers, in prac-
tice they have also been adapted in order to meet successfully the needs of the
audiences to which they are addressed. This often entails compromises about
the depth of reflection, range of artifacts, and distinctiveness of design (Hart-
nell-Young et al., 2006; Kimball, 2006). It may be possible to better accommo-
date audiences through providing explicit guidance on how to read the ePort-
folio for readers unfamiliar with its purposes and structure, such as through the
"readers guide" that is sometimes suggested by faculty as a useful component of
student portfolios. Scholars have suggested that the NMAI could become more
accessible by making it clear to visitors as they enter exhibits the logic behind
the choice and arrangement of artifacts and the context of indigenous ways of
knowing that informs those choices (Atalay, 2008). Similarly, the ACP might
include on its homepage an account of how it differs from other community
websites, why the design serves the goals of literacy project participants, and
why it might prove worthwhile for readers to engage with it despite its unfa-
miliar form.

   I hope we can achieve a balanced relationship between community ePort-
folio authors and readers, developing design and content that both provides
audiences with immediate value and convinces them to stretch a bit beyond
their comfort zone to create a more powerful experience. I hope that we will
both take advantage of the potential of the ePortfolio genre for literacy learn-
ing and community building but also not be afraid to depart from it when it
doesn't serve our purposes. The same balance of fidelity and flexibility would be
welcome in the process of composing individual portfolios and in the design of
museums.

UNITY AND DIFFERENCE

   The metaphor of portfolio as museum was powerful for envisioning and
launching the Augusta Community Portfolio project. The analogy to the Na-
tional Museum of the American Indian has the potential to help guide it into
maturity. Through evoking unity between the familiar and novel, metaphors
provide an active, immediate entry point into a new domain. Analogies, in con-
trast, acknowledge difference alongside similarity. They honor the complexity

                                                                                                175
Cambridge

of situated identity and practice. As the ePortfolio field matures, transforming
from a marginal innovation into a pervasive practice, it may also want to shift
its focus from metaphors for ePortfolios in general to analogies that capture the
complexity of specific contexts and purposes.

REFERENCES

Archuleta, E. (2008). Gym shoes, maps, and passports, oh my!: Creating com-
   munity or creating chaos at the National Museum of the American Indian?
   In A. Lonetree, & A. J. Cobb (Eds.), The National Museum of the American
   Indian: Critical conversations (pp. 181-207). Lincoln, NE: University of Ne-
   braska Press.

Atalay, S. (2008). No sense of struggle: Creating a context for survivance at the
   National Museum of the American Indian. In A. Lonetree, & A. J. Cobb
   (Eds.), The National Museum of the American Indian: Critical conversations
   (pp. 267-290). Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.

Barrett, H. (2009). Metaphors for portfolios. Retrieved from http://electronic-
   portfolios.com/metaphors.html

Barrett, H., & Carney, J. (2005). Conflicting paradigms and competing pur-
   poses in electronic portfolio development. Retrieved from http://electronic-
   portfolios.com/portfolios/LEAJournal-BarrettCarney.pdf

Bass, R., & Eynon, B. (2009, March 18). Electronic portfolios: A path to
   the future of learning. The Chronicle of Higher Education. Retrieved from
   http://chronicle.com/blogPost/Electronic-Portfolios-a-Path/4582

Bolter, J. D., & Grusin, R. (1999). Remediation: Understanding new media.
   Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Brady, M. J. (2008). Governmentality and the National Museum of the Ameri-
   can Indian: Understanding the indigenous museum in a settler society. Social
   Identities, 14(6), 763-773.

Brandt, D. (2001). Literacy in American lives. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Broadbank, A., & McGill, I. (2007). Facilitating reflective learning in higher

   education (2nd ed.). Milton Keynes, England: Open University Press.
Brookfield, S. (1995). Becoming a critically reflective teacher. San Francisco:

   Jossey-Bass.
Brookfield, S. (1986). Understanding and facilitating adult learning. San Fran-

   cisco: Jossey-Bass.
Cambridge, B. (Ed.). (2001). Electronic portfolios: Emerging practices in student,

   faculty, and institutional learning. Washington, DC: American Association
   for Higher Education.

176
                                                                               From Metaphor to Analogy

Cambridge, D. (2008). Audience, integrity, and the living document: Efolio
   Minnesota and lifelong and lifewide learning with ePortfolios. Computers &
   Education, 51(3), 1227-1246.

Cambridge, D. (2010). Eportfolios for lifelong learning and deliberative assess-
   ment. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Cambridge, D., & Cambridge, B. (2003, October). The future of ePortfolio tech-
   nology: Supporting what we know about learning. Paper presented at the eP-
   ortfolio Conference, Portiers, France.

Carpio, M. V. (2008). (Un)disturbing exhibitions: Indigenous historical mem-
   ory at the National Museum of the American Indian. In A. Lonetree, & A. J.
   Cobb (Eds.), The National Museum of the American Indian: Critical conversa-
   tions (pp. 305-327). Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.

Conn, S. (2006). Heritage vs. history at the National Museum of the American
   Indian. Public Historian, 28(2), 69-73.

Delandshere, G., & Arens, S. A. (2003). Examining the quality of the evidence
   in preservice teacher portfolios. Journal of Teaching Education, 54(1), 57-73.

Dietz, M. (1996). The portfolio: Sonnet, mirror, and map. In K. Burke (Ed.),
   Professional portfolios (pp. 17-26). Arlington Heights, IL: IRI Skylight.

Eberly, R. (2000). Citizen critics. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois.
Evelyn, D. E. (2006). The Smithsonian's National Museum of the American In-

   dian: An international institution of living cultures. Public Historian, 28(2),
   51-55.
Eynon, B. (2009). Making connections: The LaGuardia eportfolio. In D. Cam-
   bridge, B. Cambridge, & K. Yancey (Eds.), Electronic portfolios 2.0: Emergent
   research on implementation and impact (pp. 59-68). Sterling, VA: Stylus.
Fisher, M. (2004, September 21). Indian museum's appeal, sadly, only skin
   deep. The Washington Post, p. B01.
Freire, P. (1970). Pedagogy of the oppressed (15th ed.). New York: Seebury.
Griffin, R. E. G. (2007). The art of native life: Exhibiting culture and identity
   at the National Museum of the American Indian. American Indian Culture
   and Research Journal, 32(5), 167-180.
Guignon, C. (2004). On being authentic. New York: Routledge.
Hamilton, S. (2002). Red light districts, washing machines, and everything
   in-between: Creating iport (the IUPUI electronic institutional portfolio).
   Metropolitan Universities, 13(3), 11-21.
Hamp-Lyons, L., & Condon, W. (2000). Assessing the portfolio: Principles for
   practice, theory & research. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton.
Hartnell-Young, E., Smallwood, A., Kingston, S., & Harley, P. (2006). Joining
   up the episodes of lifelong learning: A regional transition project. British
   Journal of Educational Technology, 37(6), 853-866.

                                                                                                177
Cambridge

Hughes, J. (2009). Becoming ePortfolio learners and teachers. In D. Cam-
   bridge, B. Cambridge, & K. Yancey (Eds.), Electronic portfolios 2.0: Emergent
   research on implementation and impact (pp. 51-58). Sterling, VA: Stylus.

Isaac, G. (2008). What are our expectations telling us? Encounters with the
   National Museum of the American Indian. In A. Lonetree, & A. J. Cobb
   (Eds.), The National Museum of the American Indian: Critical conversations
   (pp. 241-266). Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.

Joint information systems committee. (2009). E-portfolios infokit. Retrieved
   from http://www.jiscinfonet.ac.uk/e-portfolios

Kahn, S. (2001). Linking learning, improvement, and accountability: An intro-
   duction to electronic institutional portfolios. In B. Cambridge (Ed.), Electronic
   portfolios: Emerging practices in student, faculty, and institutional learning (pp.
   135-158). Washington, DC: American Association for Higher Education.

Kahn, S. (2002). The urban universities portfolio project: Overview essay. Met-
   ropolitan Universities, 13(3), 7-10.

Katriel, T. (1993). Our future is where our past is. Studying heritage museums as
   ideological and performative arenas. Communication Monographs, 60(1), 69-75.

Ketcheson, K. A. (2001). Portland state university's electronic institutional port-
   folio: Strategy, planning, and assessment. In B. Cambridge (Ed.), Electronic
   portfolios: Emerging practices in student, faculty, and institutional learning (pp.
   178-191). Washington, DC: American Association for Higher Education.

Ketcheson, K. A. (2009). Sustaining change through student, departmental,
   and institutional portfolios. In D. Cambridge, B. Cambridge, & K. B. Yanc-
   ey (Eds.), in Electronic portfolios 2.0: Emergent research on implementation and
   impact (pp.137-144). Sterling, VA: Stylus.

Kimball, M. (2006). Database e-portfolio systems: A critical appraisal. Comput-
   ers and Composition, 22, 434-458.

Kimball, M. (2002). The web portfolio guide: Creating electronic portfolios for the
   web. New York: Longman.

Kirkpatrick, J., Renner, T., Kanae, L., & Goya, K. (2009). A values-driven eP-
   ortfolio journey: N wa'a. In D. Cambridge, B. Cambridge, & K. Yancey
   (Eds.), Electronic portfolios 2.0: Emergent finding and shared questions (pp.
   97-102). Sterling, VA: Stylus.

Lamar, C. C. (2008). Collaborative exhibit development at the Smithsonian's
   National Museum of the American Indian. In A. Lonetree, & A. J. Cobb
   (Eds.), The National Museum of the American Indian: Critical conversations
   (pp. 144-164). Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.

Lane, C. (2009). Technology and change. In D. Cambridge, B. Cambridge, &
   K. B. Yancey (Eds.), Electronic portfolios 2.0: Emergent research on implemen-
   tation and impact (pp. 149-154). Sterling, VA: Stylus.

178
                                                                               From Metaphor to Analogy

le Carpentier, J. L., Groot, R. D., & Wasko, P. (2008, October). EPortfolio for
   regions and territories. Paper presented at the ePortfolio Conference, Maas-
   tricht, The Netherlands.

Lonetree, A. (2006). Continuing dialogs: Evolving views of the National Mu-
   seum of the American Indian. Public Historian, 28(2), 57-61.

Lonetree, A. (2008). Acknowledging the truth of history: Missed opportunities
   at the National Museum of the American Indian. In A. Lonetree, & A. J.
   Cobb (Eds.), The National Museum of the American Indian: Critical conversa-
   tions (pp. 305-327). Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.

Mezirow, J. (Ed.). (1990). Fostering critical reflection in adulthood: A guide to
   transformative and emancipatory learning. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Miller, C. R., & Shepherd, D. (2004). Blogging as social action: A genre
   analysis of the weblog. In L. Gurak, S. Antonijevic, L. Johnson, C. Ratliff,
   & J. Reyman (Eds.), Into the blogosphere: Rhetoric, community, and culture
   of weblogs. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. Retrieved from
   http://blog.lib.umn.edu/blogosphere/bloggin_as_social_action.html

Peet, M. (2005). We make it the road by walking it: Critical consciousness, structur-
   ation, and social change school. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.

Pitts, W. & Ruggierillo, R. 2012). Using the e-portfolio to document and
   evaluate growth in reflective practice: The development and application of a
   conceptual framework. International Journal of ePortfolio. 1(1). 49-74.

Procter, D. E. (2005). Civic communion: The rhetoric of community building.
   Lanham, MD: Rowan & Littlefield Education.

Ravet, S. (2005, May). ePortfolio for a learning society. Paper presented at the
   2005 eLearning Conference, Brussels, Belgium.

Richard, P. (2004, September 21). Shards of many untold stories: In place of
   unity, a mélange of unconnected objects. The Washington Post. Retrieved from
   http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/articles/A36886-2004Sep20.
   html. p. C01.

Ross, J. A. (2006). The reliability, validity, and utility of self-assessment. Practi-
   cal Assessment, Research & Evaluation, 11(10), 1-13.

Rothstein, E. (2004, December 21). Who should tell history, the tribes or
   the museums? The New York Times. Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.
   com/2004/12/21/arts/design/21muse.html

Shepherd, R., & Goggin, P. (2012). Reclaiming "old" literacies in the new lit-
   eracy information age: The functional literacies of the mediated workstation.
   Composition Studies, 40(2), 66-91.

Slade, S. (2008, October). ePortfolio for immigrants: Modular personal portal
   supporting lifelong learning,. Paper presented at the ePortfolio and Digital
   Identity Conference, Maastricht, Netherlands.

                                                                                                179
Cambridge

Smith, C. (2005). Decolonising the museum: The National Museum of the
   American Indian in Washington, DC. Antiquity, 79, 424-439.

Smith, P. C. (2008). Critical reflections on the Our Peoples exhibit: A curator's
   perspective. In A. Lonetree, & A. J. Cobb (Eds.), The National Museum of
   the American Indian: Critical conversations (pp. 131-143). Lincoln, NE: Uni-
   versity of Nebraska Press.

Taylor, C. (1991). The ethics of authenticity. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer-
   sity Press.

Taylor, C. (1989). Sources of the self: The making of modern identity. Cambridge,
   MA: Harvard University Press.

Wakeham, P. (2008). Performing reconciliation at the National Museum of the
   American Indian: Postcolonial rapproachement and the politics of historical
   closure. In A. Lonetree, & A. J. Cobb (Eds.), The National Museum of the
   American Indian: Critical conversations (pp. 353-383). Lincoln, NE: Univer-
   sity of Nebraska Press.

Western Association of Schools & Colleges (2002). Evidence guide. Oakland,
   CA: Western Association of Schools & Colleges.

Williams, B. (2002). Truth and truthfulness: An essay in genealogy. Princeton,
   NJ: Princeton University Press.

Yancey, K. B., Cambridge, B., & Cambridge, D. (2009, January 7). Making
   common cause: Electronic portfolios, learning, and the power of communi-
   ty. Academic Commons. Retrieved from http://www.academiccommons.org/
   commons/essay/making-common-cause-electronic-portfolios

Yancey, K. B. (1998). Reflection in the writing classroom. Logan, UT: Utah State
   University Press.

Yancey, K. B. (2001). Introduction: Digitized student portfolios. In B. Cam-
   bridge (Ed.), Electronic portfolios: Emerging practices in student, faculty, and
   institutional learning (pp. 15-30). Washington, DC: American Association
   for Higher Education.

Yancey, K. B. (2004). Postmodernism, palimpsest, and portfolios: Theoretical
   issues in the representation of student work. College Composition and Com-
   munication, 55(4), 738-762.

Young, C. The MAEd English education electronic portfolio experience: What
   preservice English teachers have to teach us about EPs and reflection. In D.
   Cambridge, B. Cambridge, & K. B. Yancey (Eds.), Electronic portfolios 2.0:
   Emergent research on implementation and impact (pp. 181-192). Sterling, VA:
   Stylus.

180
SECTION 4: AUTHENTIC
ASSESSMENT TOOLS AND
KNOWLEDGE TRANSFER

  Improving productivity in our complex business
  environments through technology means improving human
  performance--enabling people to do more with less, and to
  do it better, faster, cheaper. Technology can be an enabler,
  but not the panacea predicted with each new wave. Each
  technology must be targeted at the correct problem, and
  people must become the masters of the technology in order
  for benefits to be realized. The formula for improving
  productivity is about striking a balance between people and
  technology, but the people must take center stage in this
  production enhancement process.
  --Bielawski & Boyle, Electronic Document Management
  Systems: A User Centered Approach for Creating, Distributing
  and Managing Online Publications (1996), p. 3

                                  Paulos, "Interaction Design
                                  Studio" (Spring 2012),
                                  http://www.chloefan.com/design/
                                  happystance/process.html
CHAPTER 10.

MAPPING, RE-MEDIATING,
AND REFLECTING ON
WRITING PROCESS REALITIES:
TRANSITIONING FROM PRINT
TO ELECTRONIC PORTFOLIOS
IN FIRST-YEAR COMPOSITION

Steven J. Corbett
Southern Connecticut State University

Michelle LaFrance
The University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth

Cara Giacomini
University of Washington

Janice Fournier
University of Washington

New technologies are often introduced to teachers and administrators
in terms of their ideal use, and they are often disconnected from issues
of context. Accounts of "best practices" in implementing technology can
be similarly misleading. While such accounts might provide a sense
of what can be done with the technology and the kinds of outcomes
that can be achieved, best practices often fail to specify the conditions
that contributed to success in a particular context, or to discuss what
was involved in learning to use the technology successfully. We trace
initial steps in the journey toward best practices, describing the
"implementation path" for ePortfolios in first-year composition (FYC)
courses at the University of Washington (UW).

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0490.2.10                         183
Corbett, LaFrance, Giacomini, and Fournier

   Portfolios do more than move a writer's work from paper to screen. In "Post-
modernism, Palimpsest, and Portfolios: Theoretical Issues in the Representation
of Student Work," reprinted in this collection, Kathleen Blake Yancey claims
that ePortfolios substantially "re-mediate" traditionally linear paper portfolio
models. She suggests that, with collections like Situating Portfolios (1997) and
New Directions in Portfolio Assessment (1994), compositionists have done a fair
job of mapping the value of paper portfolios: their ability to highlight writing as
a process and showcase student learning (Elbow, 1994; White, 1994; Yancey &
Weiser, 1997, "Introduction") and their usefulness in encouraging teacher for-
mative versus summative evaluation (Belanoff & Dickson, 1991; Perry, 1997;
Weiser, 1994 ). Indeed, leading authorities in composition have done much to
chart the theoretical and practical terrain of paper portfolios. But, as Yancey
asserts, "we are only beginning to chart the potential of the digital" (p. 757).

   Composition scholars have begun to further link reflective practice to writ-
ing assessment, especially portfolio assessment (Peters & Robertson, 2007;
Pitts & Ruggierillo, 2012; White, 1994, 2005; Yancey, 2004a, 2004b; Yancey
& Weiser, 1997 ). In Teaching Literature as Reflective Practice, Yancey (2004b)
highlights the insights she gained while transitioning from paper portfolios to
ePortfolios. On a practical level, she found that grading ePortfolios took less
time, for example; it was easier for her to click between links than scramble
through printed pages (p. 81). Yancey's biggest insight, however, from mov-
ing to ePortfolios involves student reflection. Drawing on John Dewey, Lev
Vygotsky, and Donald Schön, Yancey maintains that reflection requires both
scientific and spontaneous thinking, technical and nontechnical knowing, and
is goal-directed, habitual, and learned (pp. 12-15). In "The Scoring of Writ-
ing Portfolios: Phase 2," writing assessment expert Edward White believes the
reflective letter is so important (and consequently so difficult for students to
prepare) because "few of them are accustomed to thinking of their own written
work as evidence of learning, or to taking responsibility for their own learning"
(p. 591). Portfolios offer students exactly this opportunity for deeply purposeful
and guided reflection. White argues further that reflection is also an important
element in assessing student written work and their performances as evolving
writers. White contends that two documents must accompany portfolio as-
sessment of student work: first, a set of goals that outline the purposes of the
particular course, program, or purpose of the collected works; and second, a
reflective letter written by the student arguing how those goals may or may not
have been met, using evidence from the portfolio (p. 586).

   For proponents of portfolios, paper portfolios are indeed exercises in "deeply
reflective activity," but activity that can be "more singular than plural" (Yancey,
2004a, p. 91). ePortfolios, on the other hand, require students to reflect on their

184
                                                       Transitioning from Print to Electronic Portfolios

work from various angles, for multiple readers, and in multiple contexts. Stu-
dents can use links and images like a gallery to link internally to their own work
and externally to outside sources. In our two-year study of ePortfolio imple-
mentation at UW, our observations of the differences between paper portfolios
and ePortfolios were similar to Yancey's. We found that beginning to unlock
the educational potential of these aspects of ePortfolios is reliant on incremental
and interconnected changes in attitudes and practices among instructors and
students.

   Unfortunately, new technologies, such as ePortfolios, do not come with di-
rections for how to create the environment that will support their most effec-
tive use (Lunsford, 2006). As suggested by Yancey, traditional conceptions of
"composition" imply a linear organization of ideas presented on printed pages;
ePortfolios, however, challenge instructors to expand on this notion and con-
sider how visual rhetoric and design, and multiple navigational paths (afforded
by hypertext) may also figure in the work of composing. Katerine Bielaczyc
uses the term "implementation path" to describe the sequence of phases teach-
ers move through as they progress from initial trials with a new technology to
more sophisticated and effective use. Advancing along this trajectory, Bielac-
zyc argues, involves more than gaining familiarity with the functionality of a
tool; it may also require shifting the mindset of students and teachers, engaging
students and teachers in new types of learning activities, and moving toward
new types of interactions among students and others outside of the classroom
(p. 321). As research in the learning sciences has demonstrated, classrooms are
complex learning environments where variables such as curriculum and instruc-
tional practices, cultural beliefs, social and physical infrastructure, and expe-
rience with technology all interact and influence how effectively technology
is used (Brown & Campione, 1996; Collins, Joseph, & Bielaczyc, 2004). As
Shepherd and Goggin (2012) suggest, reclaiming literacies in terms of new me-
dia infrastructures is critical. In the sections that follow, we highlight changes in
the learning environment and classroom practice that emerged from our study
as critical for advancing along the trajectory toward an effective implementation
of ePortfolios.

OUR PARTNERSHIP

   Supporting the use of instructional-technology on the UW campus, Learn-
ing & Scholarly Technologies (LST) develops and maintains the Catalyst Tool
Kit, a suite of Web tools for use by faculty members, students, and staff, and
conducts research on the use of technology for teaching and learning. Catalyst

                                                                                                185
tools include Portfolio and Portfolio Project Builder; the former allows individuals
to create portfolios and the latter allows instructors to create portfolio templates
to help direct their students' portfolios. As participants in the Inter/National
Coalition for Electronic Portfolio Research (I/NCEPR), LST researchers have
been collaborating with representatives from nine other colleges and universi-
ties since 2003 to study ePortfolio adoption. Our ongoing research on ePort-
folios seeks to understand how students learn to compose in this medium--to
select and reflect on artifacts, combine words and images in a coherent whole,
effectively employ hypertext, and demonstrate awareness of audience and pur-
pose. In autumn 2005, LST had the opportunity to enter a partnership with the
Expository Writing Program (EWP) in the UW Department of English to bet-
ter understand the effects of using ePortfolios in a specific context. During the
2005/06 academic year, LST researchers partnered with EWP to pilot the use of
ePortfolios in nine sections of FYC. Participants in the pilot also agreed to take
part in a study on the opportunities and challenges involved in ePortfolio adop-
tion. The following academic year, 2006/07, EWP administrators gave all FYC
TAs the choice of teaching with electronic or paper portfolios. In this essay, we
share findings from our joint study of the ePortfolio pilot and second year of
implementation. In the conclusion, we share observations on the current status
of ePortfolio use within EWP.

The Setting

   Several characteristics of EWP made it an ideal setting for adoption of eP-
ortfolios. For one, the program had in place clearly articulated course outcomes
and a well-developed paper portfolio assignment; administrators and instruc-
tors easily saw a fit between the Portfolio tool and the established curriculum.
Although individual instructors determine the exact texts and assignments for
each section of FYC, all students complete assignments designed to target four
course learning outcomes. For the final portfolio, students are required to se-
lect 5-7 papers and develop a statement about how these works demonstrate
achievement of the outcomes. In the traditional paper portfolio, students are
asked to write their statement in the form of a cover letter to their instructor.

   Other aspects of the program and classroom practice, however, posed chal-
lenges for our pilot. The first was how we could successfully train instructors
on the functionality of the tool. Upwards of 30 sections of English 131 are of-
fered each quarter, all of which are taught by teaching assistants. Nearly all of
these TAs are in their first year of appointment; many have no prior teaching
experience. Use of Catalyst Portfolio needed to be made as easy as possible for
TAs already burdened with learning to teach, never mind teach with technol-
ogy. More daunting challenges were posed by the department's physical and
social infrastructure. The majority of classrooms assigned to EWP courses, and
many other courses in English, do not have technology available that would
make the demonstration or discussion of ePortfolios easy. Exceptions to this
pattern were courses in the department's Computer-Integrated Courses (CIC)
program, which has two computer classrooms dedicated to instructional use.
Teaching in CIC is not an option for the majority of graduate students teaching
FYC, however, since the program's facilities serve a large population and have
limited availability. Traditional practices and beliefs, as well as the physical in-
frastructure of English department classrooms, were challenges we anticipated
might require a longer time frame to address.

STUDY DESIGN

Participants

   During the ePortfolio pilot in 2005/06, six TAs assigned to teach sections of
FYC in fall, winter, and spring volunteered to participate in the study. Two of
the six TAs were instructors in CIC. While all TAs expressed interest in imple-
menting ePortfolios in their classes, they ranged widely in their knowledge of
and comfort with educational technology. Two administrators from the English
department also participated in the study, as did 48 students from the 12 sec-
tions of composition taught by TAs participating in the pilot study.

   During the 2006/07 academic year, the EWP's approach to implementing
ePortfolios was two-fold: it gave all TAs teaching English 131 the option of
teaching with ePortfolios and also began using ePortfolios in English 567, a
required course on composition theory for TAs of 131. During the second year
of our study (2006/07), 16 TAs, two instructors of 567, two program adminis-
trators, and 90 students participated in the study.

Study Procedures

   In autumn 2005, Catalyst researchers worked with the director and assistant
director of EWP to create a project template, Portfolio Project Builder, which
TAs could easily modify. The design closely matched the traditional paper port-
folio in asking students to demonstrate achievement of the course outcomes,
but distributed portions of the cover letter over several Web pages and enabled
direct links to student documents. We created two ePortfolio templates--one
in which pages were organized by outcomes, the other by papers--to match the

                                                                                                 187
Corbett, LaFrance, Giacomini, and Fournier

organizational structure students most often used in their cover letters. Figure
1 shows a sample template page. The instructions and prompts disappear when
students publish their portfolios, leaving only the students' writing visible.

   We also made two sample ePortfolios using these project templates; mate-
rials for these portfolios came from students who had taken FYC in the fall.
Figure 2 shows a page from one of these sample portfolios initially created for
the project. Figures 3 and 4 show pages from FYC students' actual portfolios.

   At the start of winter 2006, we used the sample templates and ePortfolios as
resources for participating TAs in a one-hour training session. We encouraged
TAs to modify the project templates as they saw fit and to share the ePortfolio
models with their students. They were also encouraged to make a model port-
folio of their own, if possible. To control for effects of teaching the course a
second time, 3 TAs taught with paper portfolios during winter quarter and 3
taught with ePortfolios; all 6 used ePortfolios in spring.
Data Collection

   At the start of winter quarter 2006, all participating TAs in the pilot study
completed a questionnaire about what challenges and opportunities they an-

Figure 1: Section of an ePortfolio Template.

188
                                                       Transitioning from Print to Electronic Portfolios

ticipated, for themselves and for their students, in the transition from paper to
ePortfolios. At the end of winter and spring quarters, we interviewed TAs and
asked them about their experiences using paper or ePortfolios and what they
discovered (positive and negative) in this process. We also collected copies of
each TA's portfolio assignment and any support materials they distributed to
their students. During the interviews, TAs shared three sample portfolios that
represented a range of responses to their assignment.

   Students in participating sections also completed a brief survey at the end
of winter and spring quarters for the pilot study. The surveys asked students
about their overall experience completing the paper portfolio (three sections in
winter) or ePortfolio (three sections winter, six in Spring). At the start of winter
quarter and again at the completion of the pilot, we interviewed two adminis-
trators from English about the challenges and opportunities they anticipated in

Figure 2: Page from a Sample Portfolio.
                                                                                                189
Corbett, LaFrance, Giacomini, and Fournier

a transition from paper to ePortfolios, and later what they had experienced or
learned as a result of the study.

   The following academic year, 2006-07, our data collection built upon the
pilot and expanded to include more TAs and an additional class. The EWP gave
the ePortfolio option to all of its TAs and included the design of an ePortfolio
in the required composition theory class, English 567, so that all TAs teaching
English 131 would have the experience of developing their own portfolios. At
the end of autumn quarter, we interviewed two instructors of 567 about their ex-
periences using ePortfolios and distributed an online survey to all TAs, inquiring
into their experiences using ePortfolios, their teaching practices, and their plans
and rationales for integrating or not integrating various technologies into classes.
From this initial group of respondents, we selected seven TAs to for follow-up in-
terviews later in the academic year. Consenting students in participating sections

Figure 3: Excerpt from a FYC student's ePortfolio.
190
                                                       Transitioning from Print to Electronic Portfolios

of English 131 received online surveys at the end of each quarter. These surveys
asked students to comment on their overall experience completing electronic
or paper-based portfolios. In all, 46 students in ePortfolio based courses and 44
students in paper-based portfolio courses responded to the online survey.

Figure 4: Excerpt from a FYC Student's ePortfolio, with Multimedia Elements.
                                                                                                191
Corbett, LaFrance, Giacomini, and Fournier

FINDINGS

   EWP administrators and TAs participating in the pilot study both considered
the initial introduction of ePortfolios to be a success. Students in the nine sections
(three in Winter, six in Spring) where ePortfolios were used completed their eP-
ortfolios with only a few minor technical difficulties. In addition, all TAs reported
that the quality of students' ePortfolios equaled, and at times surpassed, the qual-
ity of paper portfolios that students had created during previous quarters. Several
TAs observed that students who completed ePortfolios were better able to con-
nect their writing with the course outcomes than students who completed paper
portfolios. At the end of the pilot, administrators saw the potential for expanding
this technology in EWP and eventually to other writing programs at the UW.

   In the second year of our study, LST stepped back from its support role and
the CIC program became the central technological support service for ePort-
folio adoption in the classroom. The CIC program included resources such as
templates and instructions on their website and provided assistance, at times
on-to-one, to TAs who wanted to use ePortfolios and/or other technology in
their classes. With the CIC program primed to provide technical support, the
EWP took on the role of supporting the pedagogical applications of ePortfolios
for new TAs. Despite greater departmental uptake and technological support
within the department during the second year of our study, however, the num-
ber of TAs who adopted ePortfolios over paper-based portfolios was minimal.
Overall, TAs in 2006/07 demonstrated a greater use of technology beyond eP-
ortfolios compared with TAs in the 2005/06 pilot, but this trend was most
apparent in CIC classes, where TAs attribute their usage of technology to the
support and information they received from the CIC program. While, in gen-
eral terms, the first leg of the journey toward the implementation of ePortfo-
lios was traversed with ease, our research on the ePortfolio pilot identified four
critical variables within the instructional context that affected, positively and/
or negatively, the implementation of ePortfolios within particular course sec-
tions and had implications for long-term success of the project within the EWP.
These include: portfolio assignment function, instructional practice, access to
technology, and audience engagement. In the following section we discuss each
variable in detail, providing insights from TAs and administrators and sharing
our observations on various aspects of the research data.

Portfolio Assignment Function

   Portfolio assignment function has two inter-related aspects: TAs' under-
standing of the function of the portfolio assignment, paper or electronic, in the

192
                                                       Transitioning from Print to Electronic Portfolios

curriculum and their understanding of how the functionality of the Catalyst
Portfolio tool reconfigures ("re-mediates" in Yancey's terms) the standard paper
portfolio. In our review of TAs' portfolio assignments, we observed that TAs
described a portfolio, whether paper or electronic, in the following ways: as a
comprehensive collection of all course writing, as a vehicle for students to de-
scribe their journey as writers, and as a forum for persuasive argument.

   The traditional paper portfolio used in EWP begins with a "cover letter"
addressed to the instructor, in which the student introduces the contents of the
portfolio and discusses them in relation to the course outcomes, followed by a
comprehensive collection of all writing assignments, from revised papers to early
paper drafts with instructors' comments. The ePortfolio is not simply an elec-
tronic version of the cover letter. Instead, it takes the reflective writing tradition-
ally done in the cover letter and distributes it across several pages of the portfolio.
This distributed form of reflection allows students to discuss artifacts (papers,
segments of papers, images, or other materials) at the point at which they are
introduced. It also emphasizes the selection and organization of artifacts over
the comprehensiveness of the collection. As Glenda Conway suggests, instruc-
tors should consider encouraging reflection throughout the quarter, rather than
only at the end of a course with an all-inclusive cover letter. ePortfolios hold the
potential for the realization of this sort of ongoing course reflection.

   In general, during the 2005/06 pilot, we found that TAs who emphasized
the portfolio as a comprehensive collection of all course work had the most dif-
ficulty transitioning from the paper to the electronic format. For instance, one
TA, Amanda, felt strongly that the ePortfolio would not be complete without
a distinct cover letter, in addition to the distributed reflections. Thus, she had
students begin their ePortfolio with a page (or screen) containing the complete
cover letter. They then copied various sections from this cover letter and distrib-
uted them throughout the pages where they introduced artifacts (papers, etc).
Another TA, Ivy, felt strongly that all of her handwritten comments on early
drafts of papers should be a part of the ePortfolio, so she asked her students to
scan all comments. In both cases, the TAs' desire for a comprehensive ePortfolio
directly translated into more work for their students than would have occurred
with the traditional paper portfolio model or using the ePortfolio templates
without the addition of a separate cover letter or scanned comments. In inter-
views, both TAs indicated that their students expressed some resentment over
the workload, although they were able to complete the assignment success-
fully. In contrast, TAs that emphasized students' journeys as writers or students'
abilities to write persuasively about course outcomes adjusted more easily to the
electronic format. Jenna was pleased that the ePortfolio allowed students to talk
about individual artifacts more directly than the paper portfolio did:

                                                                                                193
Corbett, LaFrance, Giacomini, and Fournier

         The traditional portfolio (the paper one) is set up so it is all
         in the cover letter and you have got to make the matching
         yourself, which defeats the purpose for me, because it doesn't
         highlight each artifact the way the ePortfolio does.

   Cole described the difference between the paper and ePortfolio as follows:
"Paper is a little more holistic and I think ePortfolios get specific." Both Jenna
and Cole felt students presented more compelling and detailed accounts of their
progress with the ePortfolio than they had with paper portfolios. Adjusting as-
signments to play to the strengths of the ePortfolio represents a tangible step in
the journey toward best practices, and one that can be taken with relative ease.
Even TAs that initially struggled with this adjustment were able to identify the
changes that would lead them to better practice in the future.

Instructional Practice

   Achieving seamless integration between the ePortfolio and other course ele-
ments required flexibility in TAs' instructional practice. In the final interview
for the pilot study, Ivy, the TA who asked her students to scan all comments,
observed, "I think it is impossible to just pretend [the ePortfolio] can be taught
the same way as the paper portfolio." Indeed, in year one all 6 TAs described
various aspects of their instruction where they had made adjustments, or felt
that they should have made adjustments, to integrate the ePortfolio into the
curriculum. For instance, several TAs felt that the ePortfolio needed to be in-
troduced early in the course, rather than at the end, so that any technical dif-
ficulties could be diagnosed and overcome with less time pressure. In addition,
they acknowledged that this would allow students to have more opportunities
to share their ePortfolios and learn from each other and the transition between
the earlier paper assignments and the ePortfolio would be less abrupt. TAs also
observed that the ePortfolio influenced the other assignments they designed for
the course. Amanda explained: "I don't think the ePortfolio should be the kind
of thing that dominates the course, but the way you think about it can help
shape the kind of assignments you create." One TA intentionally designed a
paper assignment with a visual component so students would have more visual
elements to include in their ePortfolios.

   TAs expressed that ePortfolios had a long-term potential to become vehicles
for teaching students how to integrate text and images and for introducing
multimedia elements into the course. In our review of students' work we en-
countered a handful of visually sophisticated portfolios and a couple that ex-
perimented with multimedia, but these skills were not widely evident. In the

194
                                                       Transitioning from Print to Electronic Portfolios

final interview, one TA, Rob, shared his vision for the future of ePortfolios: "It
becomes less of `this is an English paper' and more of `this is an interdisciplinary
project' where students can bring in various media and bring in various resourc-
es." Like portfolio assignment function, instructional practice is an area where
individual initiative leads to a readily attainable course of action for the future.

Access to Technology

   The six TAs participating in the pilot study had widely divergent access to
technology in their classrooms. TwoTAs were a part of CIC, where they alternated
their class sessions between a computer lab and a traditional classroom. Consistent
access to tech-ready classrooms and basic hardware also continued to be problem-
atic for TAs in the 2006/07 academic year. Other than CIC, the EWP does not
have dedicated instructional space, so the classrooms assigned to TAs varied each
quarter. As graduate student instructors, teaching small classes (20-22 students),
in a department that does not have a strong reputation for technology use, most
TAs typically were assigned small classrooms with very limited technology--no
computer station, no data projector, and limited or non-existent Internet access.
Regular access to a computer station and Internet in classrooms influences how
fully ePortfolios can be integrated into all aspects of the course. While it is pos-
sible to use ePortfolios in non-technological classrooms, the lack of access limits
the full realization of their potential, since TAs are not able to display ePortfolios
for discussion or to walk students through the aspects of the ePortfolio creation
process and students are not able to easily share their work during class sessions.

   During the pilot and follow-up studies it was relatively simple for partici-
pating TAs, due to the small number of courses involved, to reserve a campus
computer lab for one day during the quarter to show students ePortfolio models
and orient them to Catalyst Portfolio. However, this solution loses viability as
more sections of beginning composition use ePortfolios, since lab reservations
are limited. While the CIC program does provide technology facilities, it does
not have the capacity to accommodate all FYC TAs. Expanding the use of eP-
ortfolios to a larger number of course sections will require taking steps to ensure
TAs have adequate access to technology in classrooms. Making progress in this
area will likely require action at the programmatic level, since instructor initia-
tive will only overcome part of this challenge.

Audience Engagement

   At the outset of the pilot study, both TAs and administrators felt that ePort-
folios presented the opportunity for students to compose for a public audience.

                                                                                                195
Corbett, LaFrance, Giacomini, and Fournier

By the end of the pilot we observed that some progress had been made in this
area; students' writing in ePortfolios tended to address an audience beyond the
instructor, unlike the cover letter in the traditional paper portfolio. Mary Perry
maintains the importance of having students involved in the negotiation of au-
dience with portfolios (also see Conway; Yancey Teaching Literature, "Postmod-
ernism"). ePortfolios magnify this exigency. Some TAs, however, questioned
the extent of audience engagement that was possible with the current use of
ePortfolios. They observed that opportunities for students in their sections to
share their ePortfolios with each other were limited. Introducing ePortfolios
earlier in the quarter and access to better-equipped classrooms would facilitate
the sharing of student work within a course section. Engaging an audience
beyond an individual course section represents a larger challenge. As Amanda
observed, "The writing might look really different if it were not being evaluated
by their composition instructor." By the end of the pilot, she felt an ideal eP-
ortfolio would use less formal language that explained its contents in a manner
that would engage an outside audience: "I mean it's bizarre for the instructor
to be requesting less formal language, but that is what I had to do with a few
of my students."

   Publishing an ePortfolio online does not make it automatically "public."
Building an authentic external audience requires a substantial effort from TAs,
program administrators, and LST or other technology support units. Facilitat-
ing the sharing of ePortfolios between students in the EWP program would be
a useful next step toward expanding audience engagement. Enabling such an
exchange would likely require a technical solution for collecting, sharing, and
sorting students' ePortfolios, along with changes in program curriculum to en-
courage interaction between courses. At the end of the second year of the study,
we observed that building an audience beyond the program constitutes an even
larger challenge. This leg of the ePortfolio implementation path covers difficult
terrain, since making this journey requires a cultural shift toward increased con-
nection between EWP and other individuals and units at the UW and beyond
the institution.

IMPLICATIONS FOR EWP

   The work of Bielaczyc, Yancey, and others foreground the idea that the
implementation of new pedagogical technologies requires students and teach-
ers to adjust their attitudes and practices. These sorts of adjustments of mind
and action were clearly seen during the first-year pilot among participating in-
structors. A year later, additional adjustments are evident on a wider scale as

196
                                                       Transitioning from Print to Electronic Portfolios

EWP continues its implementation of ePortfolios. All TAs who taught with
ePortfolios reported that they improved each quarter in understanding their
own expectations for the ePortfolio and communicating these to their students
(particularly in terms of visual design), and all found that showing examples of
other ePortfolios to their students was critical to their student's success.

   In year two, the EWP and the English department as a whole took greater
role in promoting ePortfolios in the program. Although use of ePortfolios was
not yet a requirement, all FYC instructors new in 2006-07 were offered the op-
tion of teaching with ePortfolios or the standard paper model in their sections.
In addition, all new TAs in EWP gained personal experience with Catalyst
Portfolio during their first quarter. The director of EWP and a fellow professor
agreed to teach with ePortfolios in the required composition theory course, ask-
ing each TA to construct a teaching portfolio using the Catalyst portfolio tools.
TAs and professors underwent the same negotiations of attitude and practice
that students and TAs experienced in the classroom during the pilot study. In
this context, however, professors were able to expand on the "lifelong learning"
benefits of portfolios (see Chen, 2009 and the conclusion below), emphasiz-
ing to TAs their value as tools for reflection and for self-promotion on the job
market (Heinrich, Bhattacharya, & Rayudu, 2007). Both professors confessed
minimal experience teaching with technology at the start. One commented:
"Like most faculty in the department, I haven't used much technology. I never
developed expertise with it. Until I taught with ePortfolios in 567, I never used
ePortfolios, listservs, or Web sites for my courses." Both professors came away
at the end of the quarter delighted with the results of their experiment and en-
thusiastic about promoting more systematic ePortfolio use next year.

   Additional structures within the department--formal and informal--also
helped to advance best practices with ePortfolios. LST and EWP together con-
ducted only one information session early in the year to discuss technical and
pedagogical strategies associated with successful integration of the technology.
Later discussion of "best practices" happened informally, as TAs in shared of-
fices talked about their experiences and innovative assignments using ePortfo-
lios. Extending beyond the program, the implementation of ePortfolios in the
curriculum was also a topic of Practical Pedagogy roundtables hosted by the
Department of English.

   Further change was evident in the department's computer classrooms. The
CIC program became directly involved in the implementation of ePortfolios in
all 100- and 200-level English courses, housing the easily navigable ePortfolio
guidelines and templates on their Web page and providing substantial support
to any instructors wishing to use ePortfolios (http://depts.washington.edu/
engl/cic/portfolio_final.php). In CIC's quarterly training seminars, the CIC di-

                                                                                                197
Corbett, LaFrance, Giacomini, and Fournier

rector and assistants introduced instructors who are often new to teaching with
technology to the potential educational benefits of multiple tools, including
ePortfolios. The close connection between ePortfolios and other Catalyst tools
(i.e., online discussion, homework collection, and file sharing) becomes clear
to new instructors as they witness the compatibility between various computer
technologies that may be used inside or outside of the classroom to enhance
student learning. TAs teaching with ePortfolios felt that EWP and the larger
English department should embrace multiple educational technologies, because
students were already using them or would need to learn them. One TA even
expressed the belief that use of technology should be incorporated into the
outcomes for English 131 more broadly. With CIC promoting their use, ePort-
folios are extending to courses beyond FYC and being more tightly integrated
with other technologies; several CIC instructors over this last year have ex-
pressed enthusiasm about "going paperless" in their classes. More sophisticated
uses of ePortfolios (for example, students creating their own portfolios without
the help of a template) may also be possible and appropriate in intermediate or
advanced writing classes.

   Some TAs in the study did report that "TA resistance" was the main ob-
stacle to more widespread adoption of ePortfolios--a moniker that described
a number of affective responses, including discomfort with technology, a sense
that workload might increase, and uncertainty about the pedagogical ends of
the electronic format. At the end of our two-year study we anticipated that the
English department would continue to advance on a trajectory of more effective
and sophisticated use of ePortfolios, with teaching assistants and CIC playing a
major role in their implementation.

MAPPING STUDENT AND TA EXPERIENCE

   We turn now to discussing in more depth the experience of students and
TAs who used ePortfolios in their classes. In the second year of this study, we
collected paper and electronic portfolios from consenting students in partici-
pating sections of English 131. From these portfolios we chose a random sam-
ple of 12 paper portfolios and 12 ePortfolios to analyze on several dimensions:
the intended audience for the portfolio, degree and type of evidence used to
support claims, visual organization of information, total word count for com-
mentary, and use of multimedia artifacts. We also asked TAs to share with us
student portfolios that represented a range of responses to their assignments.

   Our initial findings demonstrate differences between the ways students ap-
proach paper versus electronic portfolios. When using paper portfolios, stu-

198
                                     Transitioning from Print to Electronic Portfolios

dents tended to address the instructor as the primary audience for their work.
In general, however, those students who created ePortfolios addressed an audi-
ence beyond the classroom, while at the same time assuming that audience had
knowledge of the EWP and the UW. Portfolio format seemed to have little
effect on students' abilities to use evidence in support of a claim, but those who
created ePortfolios tended to include direct references to or excerpts from their
work more often than those who created paper portfolios. Students who used
paper portfolios used the cover letter to organize and present information about
the work that followed, but students who created electronic portfolios used vi-
sual cues to organize their work via headings, fonts, colors and bullets. Students
using ePortfolios did vary widely in the extent to which they used particular
visual cues to make their portfolios more readable. Although the electronic en-
vironment allows for inclusion of a greater array of artifacts than the paper
portfolio, only five of 12 ePortfolios reviewed included linked or embedded
multi-media artifacts. Images were included in each portfolio, but they were
not explicitly referenced or discussed. Finally, our data shows that students who
completed ePortfolios wrote almost twice as much in their reflections overall
than for students who completed paper portfolios (see Table 1).

Table 1: Total Word Count for Two Portions of Electronic and Paper Port-
folios

ePortfolio       Overall Reflection  Range
Paper Portfolio  Average             1458-5226
                 3341                1139-2652
                 1714

   Overall, the student ePortfolios shared in the second year of the study were
not just longer, but clearly more sophisticated than those shared by TAs during
the pilot year. Several students, on their own initiative, chose to use a theme
to connect the various elements of their ePortfolios (i.e. one student compared
her growth as a writer to musical composition and used language and images
connected to music throughout her ePortfolio). By Spring quarter, some TAs
reported that they encouraged students to use themes. The range in design strat-
egies and total words in both portfolio formats are likely the result of different
instructions and/or templates provided by TAs.

   Online survey responses demonstrated further differences of perception
among students creating paper portfolios and those using ePortfolios. Students
who completed the paper portfolios tended to interpret the survey as asking

                                                199
Corbett, LaFrance, Giacomini, and Fournier

about the effects of the portfolio process on their learning. Those who com-
pleted ePortfolios interpreted the survey as asking them about the technology.
Students who created paper portfolios indicated at higher rates that they had
"benefited" from the portfolio process, attributing all positive experiences to the
acts of reflection, receiving feedback, and working on a revision cycle in and of
themselves, while students who created ePortfolios frequently wrote about the
benefits or drawbacks of the portfolio software.

   At the same time, students overwhelmingly recommended the ePortfolio
format that they had used for future courses, with 65.2% of students endorsing
the ePortfolio format and only 50% endorsing the paper format. TAs teaching
with ePortfolios also tended to express high levels of enthusiasm for the ePort-
folios their students created. However, these TAs also expressed confusion over
the relationship of some elements of the ePortfolios to students' grades. For
instance, TAs reported telling students that the visual elements of the ePortfo-
lio would have little or no effect on grades, unless students made poor design
choices that made the portfolio difficult to read. TAs expressed some further
uncertainty about whether or not this was the correct choice, since in the end
they preferred the ePortfolios that incorporated visual elements. Interestingly,
the most visually sophisticated assignment encountered during the study--a
project that asked students to integrate visual and textual materials--was cre-
ated by a TA using the paper portfolio format.

CONCLUSION

   While recognizing the pedagogical implications of tools that enable student
reflection, Ed White also advises practitioners to provide explicit instruction
to students in how to negotiate the reflective letter as a rhetorical, persuasive
document or argument. He writes: "without instruction, students are likely to
give a hasty overview of the portfolio contents, including much personal expe-
rience about the difficulty of writing and revising--along with some fulsome
praise of the teacher--without attending to the goals of the program at all" (p.
591). White urges direct, focused instruction in how and why to compose the
portfolio cover letter so that students will be more likely to see how they met the
goals and expectations of the course and how they did or not apply themselves
with full effort and engagement in their learning. Our findings demonstrate
that new instructors need similar support for understanding the applications
of portfolio tools and their usefulness in encouraging student reflection in their
classrooms. Simply having an electronic portfolio tool available to instructors
does not mean that tool will be widely adopted or used efficaciously. Like stu-

200
                                                       Transitioning from Print to Electronic Portfolios

dents, new instructors benefit from being shown and supported in the effective
use of tools that enable non-traditional forms of student learning, reflection,
and movement toward course learning objectives.

   In the years following our data collection, progress continues to be made
toward more closely integrating the support and services available to TAs teach-
ing portfolio-based classes in the EWP. Working closely with the CIC, the EWP
has set out to introduce TAs to the ePortfolio option earlier in their orientation
process and has worked to increase the availability of sample assignments and
examples of student-designed projects for TAs to adopt and adapt. To alleviate
the techno-anxieties of new TAs, the CIC program has not only continued to
provide one-to-one support services for TAs using ePortfolios in their class-
rooms, but also increased its availability for classroom visits to all TAs using the
ePortfolio option. CIC program staff have also developed a website specifically
tailored to answering student questions and can be available in person when
necessary. The result of these efforts is that TAs now no longer bear sole or full
responsibility for teaching their students how to use or design with the tool.
Most importantly, practices within the EWP are changing: the ePortfolio has
been made the default mode for new TAs in the program and the ePortfolio is
no longer described as an optional alternative to paper portfolios in program
documents or support materials. In fact, the online version of the portfolio tool
is no longer differentiated as an "ePortfolio" at all, but is referred to as simply
the "portfolio." These recent moves on the programmatic level encourage all
involved in planning and support for new TAs--as time advances, ePortfolios
are becoming a more familiar pedagogical fixture of teaching in the EWP.

   On a final note, during the academic year 2008/09, LST informed the EWP
that Catalyst Portfolio and Portfolio Project Builder, the current tools available
for ePortfolios, were going to be phased out of use at the UW by the end of the
2009/10 academic year, due to the advanced age of the software. Discussion
is currently underway on whether LST will build a new portfolio tool or will
encourage adoption of a commercial or open-source solution. This change ini-
tially created anxiety among administrators of the EWP and CIC, as much time
and energy had been devoted to developing resources for TAs who chose to use
ePortfolios in their classrooms. A new tool will require that all resources avail-
able to TAs (directions and guidelines for classroom use, troubleshooting tips,
and examples of students' portfolios) be redesigned. At the time of submission
of this article, an EWP/CIC working group (in coordination with LST) has
been set up to investigate options for moving forward. This reaction is heart-
ening. Instead of simply abandoning ePortfolios, the EWP has committed to
having electronic options available to those TAs who would chose to include
technological tools for reflection in their classes. This change in the educational

                                                                                                201
Corbett, LaFrance, Giacomini, and Fournier

software and technology availability, however, has prevented EWP/CIC from
making ePortfolios mandatory at this time. But even without required use, eP-
ortfolio implementation is continuing to advance in the program.

   While visualizing ideal use provides inspiration and commitment to the
development of support for new technologies, analyzing the journey of tech-
nology implementation increases our practical understanding of educational
change. On the one hand, our study reveals the early stages of a journey that
may eventually lead to more extensive and well-supported ePortfolio use within
the institution. On the other hand, it emphasizes the everyday challenges of eP-
ortfolio adoption, rather than the ideal outcome. Our research highlights subtle
shifts in practice and culture that could over time--with further on-going sup-
port and more purposeful recruitment and training of new instructors--culmi-
nate in dramatic transformations.

   Other individuals and/or institutions that are embarking on the implemen-
tation journey need to remember that true transformation takes time. Unlock-
ing the full potential of new technology, such as ePortfolios, requires a series of
changes, many of which will not be obvious until the technology has been in-
troduced. For EWP, our study of the ePortfolio pilot made visible early changes
in practice and identified areas where shifts will need to be made as the journey
continues. One valuable aspect of our research study was that it provided an
opportunity for those participating in the ePortfolio pilot to reflect on their
experiences and partnerships. More importantly, we provided a means of com-
municating the lessons from that reflection. Brad Peters and Julie Robertson,
reflecting on their analyses of WAC portfolio partnerships, believe that port-
folio learning can be "a social force that also gives rise to a faculty "culture of
assessment,' where reflection becomes the dominant mode of uniting faculty
practice and theory" (p. 208). Venues for reflection and communication are
important components of any technology implementation, since the experi-
ences and ideas of early participants can help shape and unify future steps in
the process. Other individuals or institutions may not follow the same path that
we traced in this paper, but this case identifies variables, both pros and cons, to
consider as they chart their own progress with ePortfolios.

   Within the ePortfolio community it is important to recognize the incremen-
tal stages of transformation, in addition to focusing on the long-term goals for
this technology. While ePortfolios do have the potential to promote lifelong
learning and reflection, making this future viable will require an extended series
of subtle transformations in instructional practice and departmental and insti-
tutional culture, as well as expanding awareness and collaboration within social
and professional spheres.

202
                                                       Transitioning from Print to Electronic Portfolios

REFERENCES

Belanoff, P., & Dickson, M. (Eds.). (1991). Portfolios: Process and product.
   Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook.

Bielaczyc, K. (2006). Designing social infrastructure: Critical issues in creating
   learning environments with technology. The Journal of the Learning Sciences,
   15(1), 301-329.

Black, L., Daiker, D. A., Stygall, G., & Sommers, J. (Eds.). (1994). New direc-
   tions in portfolio assessment: Reflective practice, critical theory, and large-scale
   scoring. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook.

Brown, A. L., & Campione, J. C. (1996). Psychological theory and the de-
   sign of innovative learning environments: On procedures, principles, and
   systems. In L. Schauble, & R. Glaser (Eds.), Innovations in learning: New
   environments for education (pp. 289-325). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Chen, H. L. (2009). Using eportfolios to support lifelong and lifewide learning.
   In D. Cambridge, B. Cambridge, & K. B. Yancey (Eds.), Electronic portfolios
   2.0: Emergent research on implementation and impact (pp. 29-35). Sterling,
   VA: Stylus.

Collins, A., Joseph, D., & Bielaczyc, K. (2004). Design research: Theoretical
   and methodological issues. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 15-42.

Conway, G. (1994). Portfolio cover letters, students' self-presentation, and
   teachers' ethics. In L. Black et al. New directions in portfolio assessment: Reflec-
   tive practice, critical theory, and large-scale scoring (pp. 83-92). Portsmouth,
   NH: Boynton/Cook.

Elbow, P. (1994). Will the virtues of portfolios blind us to their potential dan-
   gers? In L. Black et al. (Eds.), New directions in portfolio assessment: Reflective
   practice, critical theory, and large-scale scoring (pp. 40-55). Portsmouth, NH:
   Boynton/Cook.

Greenberg, G. (2004). The digital convergence: Extending the portfolio model.
   Educause Review, 39(4), 28-37.

Heinrich, E., Bhattacharya, M., & Rayudu, R. (2007). Preparation for lifelong
   learning using ePortfolios. European Journal of Engineering Education, 32(6),
   653-663.

LaCour, S. (2005). The future of integration, personalization, and ePortfolio
   technologies. Innovate Online, 1(4). Retrieved from http://www.innovateo-
   nline.info/pdf/vol1_issue4/The_Future_of_Integration,_Personalization,_
   and_ePortfolio_Technologies.pdf

Lunsford, A. (2006). Writing, technologies, and the fifth canon. Computers and
   composition, 23(2), 169-177.

                                                                                                203
Corbett, LaFrance, Giacomini, and Fournier

Perry, M. (1997). Producing purposeful portfolios. In K. B. Yancey, & I. Weiser
   (Eds.), Situating portfolios: Four perspectives (pp. 182-195). Logan, UT: Utah
   State University Press.

Peters, B., & Robertson, J. F. (2007). Portfolio partnerships between faculty
   and WAC:

Lessons from disciplinary practice, reflection, and transformation. College Com-
   position and Communication, 59(2), 206-236.

Pitts, W. & Ruggierillo, R. (2012). Using the e-portfolio to document and
   evaluate growth in reflective practice: The development and application of a
   conceptual framework. International Journal of ePortfolio. 1(1), 49-74.

Schofield, J. (1997). Computers and social processes: A review of the literature.
   Social Science Computer Review, 15, 27-39.

Shepherd, R., & Goggin, P. (2012). Reclaiming "old" literacies in the new lit-
   eracy information age: The functional literacies of the mediated workstation.
   Composition Studies, 40(2), 66-91.

Weiser, I. (1994). Portfolios and the new teacher of writing. In L. Black et al.
   (Eds.), New directions in portfolio assessment: Reflective practice, critical theory,
   and large-scale scoring (pp. 219-229). Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook.

Wheeler, B. (2004). The open source parade. Educause Review, 39(5), 68-69.
White, E. M. (1994). Portfolios as an assessment concept. In L. Black et al.

   (Eds.), New directions in portfolio assessment: Reflective practice, critical theory,
   and large-scale scoring (pp. 25-39). Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook.
­­­White, E. M. (2005). The scoring of writing portfolios: Phase 2. College Com-
   position and Communication, 56(4), 581-600.
Yancey, K. B. (1997). Situating portfolios: Four perspectives (pp. 1-17). Logan,
   UT: Utah State University Press.
Yancey, K. B. (2004a). Postmodernism, palimpsest, and portfolios: Theoretical
   issues in the representation of student work. College Composition and Com-
   munication, 55(4), 738-762.
Yancey, K. B. (2004b). Teaching literature as reflective practice. Urbana, IL:
   NCTE.
Yancey, K. B., & Weiser, I. (1997). Situating portfolios: An introduction. In
   K. B. Yancey, & I. Weiser (Eds.), Situating portfolios: Four perspectives (pp.
   1-20). Logan, UT: Utah State University Press.

204
CHAPTER 11.

EPORTFOLIOS AS TOOLS FOR
FACILITATING AND ASSESSING
KNOWLEDGE TRANSFER FROM
LOWER DIVISION, GENERAL
EDUCATION COURSES TO
UPPER DIVISION, DISCIPLINE-
SPECIFIC COURSES

Carl Whithaus
University of California, Davis

ePortfolios can both facilitate and assess knowledge transfer from lower
division, general education courses to upper division, discipline-specific
courses. The chapter opens with a discussion of Teaching/Writing in
Thirdspaces (Grego & Thompson, 2008) and argues that the notion
of thirdspace can apply to the distance between general education
courses and the information skills required within students' majors.
By tracking student learning in general education courses, ePortfolios
provide a tool for faculty and administrators to make visible the
connections and disjunctures between the delivered curriculum in
lower division courses and the expectations for students' competencies
expressed by faculty teaching upper division courses for majors.

   In Teaching/Writing in Thirdspaces: The Studio Approach, Rhoda Grego and
Nancy S. Thompson (2008) develop the concept of "thirdspaces" as a means
to account for how work with student writing "was influenced by institutional
politics, preferences, and power relations" (p. 5). Drawing on the cultural geog-
raphy work of Edward Soja (1996) and Doreen Massey (1994; 2005) as well as
Nedra Reynolds' (2004) analysis of writing as "spatial, material, and visual" (p.
3), Grego and Thompson account for how local institutional pressures can in-
fluence writing instruction as much as the national-level discussions about basic
writing and composition pedagogies (Bartholomae & Petrosky, 1986; Shaugh-

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0490.2.11                          205
Whithaus

nessy, 1977; Shor, 1987, 1996). Grego and Thompson develop the Writing
Studio as a systematic method of helping student writers, but their pedagogical
practices also allow an understanding of composition's meaningful work as con-
tingent upon localized needs. As a method, Grego and Thompson clarify that
their model of the Writing Studio:

         is not limited to a course per se but is a configuration of
         relationships that can emerge from different contexts.
         Writing Studio has what might be a fourth credit-hour (or
         otherwise-configured small group meeting) attached to an
         existing course. These Studios can appear anywhere across the
         curriculum. ... A Studio organizes small groups of students
         to meet frequently and regularly (typically once a week) to
         bring to the table the assignments they are working on for
         a writing course, another English course, or a disciplinary
         course or undergraduate research experience that requires
         communication products. (p. 7)

   Their development of the Writing Studio not as "a pedagogy so much as
an institutionally aware methodology" (p. 21) to improve writing instruction
in both general education and disciplinary courses parallels Soja's concept of
"thirdspace" (1996). For Grego and Thompson "thirdspaces" are institutional
openings or locations where writing faculty engage what Jonathan Mauk (2003)
has called "the spatial and material conditions that constitute the everyday lives
of students" (p. 370). For Grego and Thompson, the Studio approach is not
only what happens within an individual instructor's classroom but rather is
the product of compositionists and writing program administrators using their
knowledge about writing, student learning, and their local institutional envi-
ronments to enact systemic changes that impact students (see also Thompson,
2005).

   In "Integrating Undergraduate Research into Engineering," (Thompson,
Alford, Liao, Johnson, & Matthews, 2005) describe how teaching writing
in the "thirdspace" of a Studio connected with undergraduate engineering
research makes explicit the connections between the "general education skill"
of writing and the particular disciplinary moves that more experienced engi-
neering students, graduate students, and faculty make in their own writing
and communication processes. By focusing on communications, the Research
Communications Studio (RCS) aims to "develop the cognitive abilities of un-
dergraduate researchers" (p. 300). These cognitive abilities have been shaped

206
                                                                    Facilitating and Assessing Knowledge

by the students' experiences in their previous general education courses;
however, the RCS approach engages participants in intensive communica-
tion practice for making sense of their engineering research experiences. The
explicit focus on the communication of discipline-specific research improves
both students' communication skills as well as their engineering abilities (pp.
300-304). The Studio method used in the RCS is a product of a thirdspace
approach to postsecondary institutions' treatment of writing as a generaliz-
able cognitive skill, that is, something that can be taught with what post-
process theorists (Kent, 1999; Petraglia, 1998) have derisively called General
Writing Skills Instruction (GWSI). The Studio approach recognizes the dif-
ferent forms of expertise that undergraduate engineering students, engineer-
ing faculty members, engineering graduate student mentors, communication/
writing graduate students, and writing/communications faculty bring to the
RCS. Combining these different forms of expertise to focus on students' de-
veloping cognitive abilities as effective engineers and writers cuts across dis-
ciplinary boundaries and, at the same time, requires a bringing together of
those disciplinary knowledge.

   The work of a highly situated Studio approach to teaching engineering
writing is localized within the institutional politics, preferences, and power
relations of the University of South Carolina. As such, the RCS is a third-
space technique, in that it is not a stand-alone course offered through either
an English department or an engineering department, but rather, like other
incarnations of the Studio, a simultaneous "outside-but-alongside/inside" ap-
proach to the institutional location of (supplemental) instruction through
writing (Grego & Thompson, 2008). The Studio approach and the notion
of thirdspaces for understanding explicit instruction in writing are valuable
because they highlight the disconnections that can occur between the artic-
ulated learning outcomes for general education courses and the articulated
learning outcomes valued within disciplinary communities such as engineer-
ing. What students learn in their general education courses may not always
transfer as effectively as intended to their disciplinary modes of inquiry. Re-
searchers interested in understanding how students' knowledge and skills
transfer from one learning environment to another could use the concept of
thirdspaces as a way of articulating why and how these disconnections occur.
To fully use the concept of thirdspaces, researchers and teachers need a tool
to help measure learning outcomes. ePortfolios appear to be promising tools
to use for measuring learning outcomes (Acker & Halasek, 2008; Desmet,
Church Miller, Griffin, Balthazor, & Cummings, 2008; Lopez-Fernandez,
2009; Mauk, 2003; Van Aalst & Chan, 2007).

                                                                                                207
Whithaus

EPORTFOLIOS AS TOOLS FOR OUTCOMES-BASED
ASSESSMENTS IN GENERAL EDUCATION

   Measuring the learning outcomes of general education courses has become
an increasingly important issue for postsecondary institutions (Humphreys,
2009; Schneider, 2008; "What General Education Courses Contribute to Es-
sential Learning Outcomes," 2009). Within this larger push for accountability
and the measurement of learning outcomes, Desmet et al. (2008) have shown
that ePortfolios can effectively be used as tools for assessments of the types of
learning that take place in lower-divisions writing courses. They argue that
electronic portfolios, "creat[e] a large centralized database of documents" and
thereby make "it possible to articulate classroom and program concerns with
larger institutional imperatives for measurable outcomes in assessment" (p.
16). In particular, they point out the ways in which electronic portfolios can
be used to support and study revision (p. 16) and enhance student reflection
(pp. 16-19).

   Students' abilities to reflect upon their own work are not only important
in terms of improving writing, but are vital skills to develop as they move into
professional environments (Argyris & Schön, 1974; Schön, 1983, 1987, 1991).
Since reflection further develops professionals and their abilities to perform
complex tasks, it is no surprise that as students progress from lower division
courses into their major course work and pre-professional studies, they are
asked to engage in more reflective activities (Butcher, 2009; Ostorga, 2009;
Xiao, 2008). The increase in reflection is seen in fields as various as education
(Butcher, 2009), design (Ostorga, 2009), and nursing (Xiao, 2008).

   The development of student writing abilities underscores reflection as an
important skill area transferable across various courses and writing situations
(Yancey, 1998). Writing provides a means for developing students' abilities to
reflect on their practices, whether that reflection is explicitly about their writing
or about the development of skills they will need in their professional prac-
tices. As Dawn (Swartzendruber-Putnam, 2000) has written, "Able writers can
think critically about their writing" (p. 88). This ability to reflect on writing
practices--and really on communication practices and rhetorical situations--
appears to be heightened when using ePortfolios. Desmet et al. (2008) found
"the articulation of learning as a product, is what separates formal reflection in
ePortfolios from the more dispersed processes of revision involved in the vari-
ous exhibits of a [traditional print-based] writing portfolio" (p. 20). The large
corpus of texts that Desmet et al. were able to analyze from the University of
Georgia led them to find statistically significant evidence that "revision, at least
within the context of ePortfolio assessment, improves student writing" (p. 25).

208
                                                                    Facilitating and Assessing Knowledge

Not only does the ePortfolio system at the University of Georgia demonstrate
connections between students working explicitly on revision and improvement
in their writing, but this extensive database also allows for tracking student
learning in general education courses. A system such as the EMMA-based eP-
ortfolios provides a tool for faculty and administrators to make visible the con-
nections, as well as the possible ruptures, between the delivered curriculum
in lower division courses and the skills needed to succeed in upper-division,
disciplinary courses.

   ePortfolios then provide a way to operationalize Soja's (1996) concept of
thirdspace within a university's writing curriculum that complements Grego
and Thompson's Writing Studio model. ePortfolios may serve as an institution-
ally aware methodology that draws in the everyday conditions and concerns of
students' lives and emphasizes building connections between general education
courses and course work that prepares students for work in their professions.
Understanding how knowledge about writing transfers from one educational
environment or course to another is a key way in which a well-constructed eP-
ortfolio program can help administrators, faculty, and students.

USING EPORTFOLIOS TO PROMOTE AS WELL
AS ASSESS KNOWLEDGE TRANSFER

   Acker and Halasek (2008) have examined the question of ePortfolios' abili-
ties to facilitate knowledge transfer by looking at how ePortfolios can increase
connections between secondary English courses and general education college
writing courses. Working with faculty from Ohio State University and two
high schools, Acker and Halasek designed and studied an ePortfolio program
"through which high school and university personnel conducted joint research
to address K-16 English language arts (ELA) alignment and student success in
the postsecondary environment" (p. 2). High school students wrote essays and
used an Open Source Portfolio (OSP) system to receive feedback from both
university and high school writing faculty. The goal was to improve alignment
between K-12 and postsecondary writing instruction and help students better
understand what constitutes "good" writing in high school and the university.
In addition, Acker and Halasek believed that an ePortfolio system would pro-
vide the "richer, innovative, and `more authentic' measure of student writing"
(p. 2) called for by the Center for Educational Policy Research's (CEPR) Mixed
Messages study (Conley, 2003). The two key aspects of the knowledge transfer in
Acker and Halasek's project turned out to be the benefits that students received
from having feedback from differently situated readers (i.e., high school teach-

                                                                                                209
Whithaus

ers and college instructors) and the discussions among high school and college
faculty about the aspects of writing they valued.

   While Acker and Halasek hypothesized that "methods of responding to stu-
dent writing differ between high school language arts teachers and college com-
position teachers" and that "different response patterns ... have adverse effects
on the quality of student writing and revision" (p. 4), they found that having
different forms of comments actually benefitted students. Their study indicates
that high school and college teachers' different types of responses "did not nega-
tively affect the students' revisions" (p. 7). In fact, students may have benefitted
from the "two kinds of readers--one who focused on local and a second who
focused on global issues" (p. 7). Because ePortfolios easily allow the sharing
of student documents among multiple readers, they encourage distributive as-
sessment (Whithaus, 2005, pp. xxix-xxxii, 49-66; Warnock, 2009)--multiple
readers reading, responding, and evaluating a document or an entire portfolio
based on their own situation-specific criteria rather than using a rubric that
strips away the authentic perspectives of different readers and different contexts.

   In addition to increasing the amount and types of feedback students re-
ceived, Acker and Halasek's ePortfolio system encouraged collaboration and
community among high school and college faculty. By sharing curricula and
discussing their evaluations of student writing, the participants talked across
institutional boundaries about issues such as the value of "voice" in student
writing. As an evaluation concept, "voice" is particularly difficult to quantify,
but the differences between high school and college teachers were not solely
focused on identifying students' use of personal voice, but on the appropriate
context in which personal voice should be used. Acker and Halasek note that
in their study "high school teachers typically encouraged students to create a
voice in personal essays (e.g., personal narratives or opinion pieces) but discour-
aged them from using that same `voice' in more academic pieces (e.g., research
papers). The distinction was not one generally made by college teachers, who
encouraged students to create voice in all of their academic writing" (p. 9). Al-
though the study and the discussion among the high school and college faculty
revealed a difference about the way that voice was defined and when personal
voice was considered appropriate, the very act of having the discussion about
ePortfolios across the institutional divide of high schools and colleges created a
thirdspace where knowledge transfer could occur not only for students but also
between faculty members.

   While Acker and Halasek's study shows how ePortfolios can be used to both
promote and assess knowledge transfer about writing, ePortfolios can also fa-
cilitate the transfer of multimodal composing abilities and information skills.
Pinto and Sales (2008) have defined information literacy skills or INFOLIT as

210
                                                                    Facilitating and Assessing Knowledge

the ability to locate, evaluate, and manage information; these information lit-
eracy skills "are basic to the process of `learning to learn' [and play] a key role in
promoting the autonomy of the graduate and future professional" (p. 54). The
concept of information literacy (INFOLIT) was introduced by Paul Zurkowski
(1974). The American Library Association defines information literacy as "an
understanding and set of abilities enabling individuals to recognize when in-
formation is needed" and "a capacity to locate, evaluate, and use effectively the
needed information" (p. 58). Pinto and Sales' work on INFOLIT in Spanish
universities helps address the question of how building information literacy
competencies can enable knowledge transfer. It also addresses the question of
how to transfer knowledge about information literacies from one context to
another. Like the tensions between teaching writing as a general skill and teach-
ing writing within the disciplines, Pinto and Sales point to the tensions between
generic information literacy and the specific knowledge of any disciplinary or
professional community. They claim that "despite the generic need for informa-
tion literacy, it is also part of the specific competencies of any community of
practice; and, in this sense, we believe that much effort still needs to be made
in order to help to promote real user-centered information literacy instruction"
(p. 72). ePortfolios as tools and the concept of a thirdspace between general
education courses and discipline-specific competencies may help promote the
"real user-centered information literacy instruction" that Pinto and Sales call
for in Spanish universities. The increasing emphasis on information literacy in
Spanish universities parallels the new focus on multimodal composing found
in many North American postsecondary writing programs. Researchers (Gee,
2003; Kress, 2003; Whithaus, 2005) have found that effective writers in the
early 21st-century are not only engaged in text-based literacy practices, but need
to be able to use multimodal information and communication technologies
(ICTs).

   Lambert and Corrin (2007) have traced the development of an ePortfolio
system that includes vigorous reflection for the development of text-based liter-
acy practices as well as competence in the use of multimodal forms of composi-
tion. While this ePortfolio system at the University of Wollongong in Australia
was designed to be customizable "for all students across all faculties," the pilot
projects were run with 300 students in Performance and Journalism. Working
with these disciplines foregrounds the need for ePortfolios to represent students'
developing competence as writers and as composers able to work in multiple
media. Like Pinto and Sales (2008) and many North American proponents of
writing in the disciplines, Lambert and Corrin are aware of the tensions between
developing generic skills and the more nuanced set of competencies required
within disciplinary and professional contexts. Their ePortfolio system addresses

                                                                                                211
Whithaus

these issues by having eight skills develop across three different contexts (see
Figure 1). Notice how the eight skills (critical thinking, problem solving, team-
work, written communication, oral communication, self-management, initia-
tive, and technology) cut across three different contexts (work, university, and
community).

   Lambert and Corrin's study shows that ePortfolios have the potential to
represent students' movement from developing general skills when they enter
college to developing professional competencies as they prepare to graduate and
enter the workforce, graduate school, or professional schools. Taken together
with Acker and Halasek's (2008) and Pinto and Sales' (2008) studies, Lam-
bert and Corrin's work shows how ePortfolios may be used to promote as well
as assess knowledge transfer across institutional and social divisions (i.e., high
school to college, general education to disciplinary courses, college to profes-
sional training). Understanding these institutional and social divisions as lim-
inal thirdspaces challenges ePortfolio developers to link outcomes assessments
with the students' next learning environments. Acker and Halasek's (2008) ex-
amination of how ePortfolios could connect high school students in Ohio with
the writing curriculum at Ohio State offers one illustration of using ePortfolios
as a way of negotiating these thirdspaces. Lambert and Corrin's (2007) work
with Performance and Journalism students at Wollongong suggests another.
The question now is whether it would be possible to build an assessment of

Figure 1: Attributes and Outcomes for the University of Wollongong ePortfolio
(Lambert & Corrin, 2007).

212
                                                                    Facilitating and Assessing Knowledge

knowledge transfer onto a large-scale learning outcomes study such as Desmet
et al. (2008), who measure the importance of revision within the required gen-
eral education writing course at the University of Georgia. Using a multiyear,
institution-wide ePortfolio (similar to the ones from Ohio and Australia dis-
cussed in this essay), it would be possible to expand their study to account for
how students used revision in their upper division, disciplinary courses. This ex-
pansion of a learning outcomes assessment from within general education writ-
ing courses to the impact of general education writing courses on students' use
of particular writing skills (such as revision) within upper-division, disciplinary
courses, highlights the potentials of ePortfolios as systems. These systems can be
used not only for the assessment of individual students' growth, but also for the
assessment of the knowledge transfer that occurs when students take particular
writing skills developed in general education courses into discipline-specific up-
per division courses.

USING THE OPEN SOURCE PORTFOLIO (OSP)
TOOL WITHIN SAKAI TO MEASURE KNOWLEDGE
TRANSFER FROM LOWER DIVISION WRITING
COURSES TO UPPER DIVISION WRITING COURSES

   What would an ePortfolio system for measuring knowledge transfer from
lower division, general education courses to upper division, discipline-specific
courses look like in practice? At the University of California, Davis, we are
developing an ePortfolio system that would allow us to assess how students'
knowledge about the writing skills stressed in their lower division writing cours-
es transfer to their upper division writing experiences. This ePortfolio system
works within UC Davis' build-out of the Sakai course management system and
incorporates the Open Source Portfolio (OSP) tool that is integrated into Sakai.
By collecting student writing samples from our first-year composition courses
(University Writing Program, 1), we are assembling a corpus of texts that will
allow us to replicate and extend the University of Georgia study (Desmet et al.,
2008). In replicating the University of Georgia study, we will use ePortfolios
to focus on revision and measure the impact that revision has on the quality
of student writing within a given course. Extending the University of Georgia
study, we will track the development of students' abilities:

   1. To use evidence effectively,
   2. To shape an essay for a particular audience and purpose, and
   3. To use a variety of appropriate prose styles and to master accepted gram-

       mar, syntax, and usage.

                                                                                                213
Whithaus

   Each of these areas relates to a set of explicitly articulated course goals for
our first-year writing courses (see Table 1).

Table 1. Course Goals for UWP 1 and Areas to be Measured via Data Col-
lected through a Sakai/OSP ePortfolio System

Areas to be Measured    UWP 1 Course Goals
Revision
Evidence                · Not an explicit course goals of UWP 1

                        · To explore the nature of evidence in academic and
                              expository writing (and to synthesize multiple texts,
                              formulate an original argument, and support it with
                              appropriate evidence)

Audience and Purpose    · To provide students with instruction and practice in
Style and Usage               synthesizing multiple texts, formulating an original
                              argument, and supporting it with appropriate evidence

                        · To introduce students to the concepts of audience,
                              purpose, persona, voice, authority, and tone as they relate
                              to expository writing

                        · To review the requirements of standard written English
                              and to help students master accepted grammar, syntax,
                              and usage

                        · To develop students' ability to recognize the stylistic
                              aspects of expository texts, and to develop a clear,
                              reasonably sophisticated, and appropriately varied prose
                              style in their own writing

[Course Goals Excluded  · To develop their awareness of language, including
from ePortfolio Study]        such concepts as diction, word choice, connotation/
                              denotation, and figurative language

                        · To develop the close reading skills necessary for analysis
                              and interpretation of academic and scholarly writing

                        · To introduce the forms and conventions of non-fiction
                              prose

                        · To explore, through readings, how assumptions, key
                              questions, and fundamental concepts lead to the
                              construction of knowledge in different disciplines

                        · To introduce students to effective ways to structure and
                              organize texts

                        · To help students learn how to analyze individual
                              arguments

214
                                                                    Facilitating and Assessing Knowledge

   The use of ePortfolios in upper division writing courses (including writing
in the disciplines courses, writing in the professions courses, writing experience
courses, and senior-level, discipline-based seminars with significant writing re-
quirements) allows the creation of a text corpora where we can analyze the ways
in which students revise texts, use evidence, adapt their writing for specific
audiences and purposes, and effectively employ different writing styles and cor-
rect usage conventions. Comparing students' performances in lower division,
general education writing environments and upper division, discipline-specific
writing experiences allows us to map how knowledge about particular areas
of writing moves with students as they advance in their academic careers. The
Ohio State (Acker & Halasek, 2008) and Wollongong (Lambert & Corrin,
2007) studies suggest that knowledge transfer can not only be measured but
also be encouraged by using an ePortfolio system; using the OSP tool within
Sakia at UC Davis will allow us to test these findings about knowledge transfer.

   While our proposed system focuses on writing skills, ePortfolios offer the
potential to track other forms of knowledge transfer. By collecting a series of
learning artifacts, ePortfolios can be used to measure how students' skills in
areas such as critical thinking, problem solving, or teamwork develop in their
general education coursework. The learning artifacts could include multimodal
compositions, more traditional forms of assessments such as exams, and writ-
ing samples. If used on a university-wide level, ePortfolios could be used to
compare how student growth and achievement in these areas in lower division
courses transferred to discipline-specific competencies in their upper division,
discipline-specific course work.

KNOWLEDGE TRANSFER, INVOLVED STUDENTS,
AND COLLABORATIVE LEARNING

   Tracking the knowledge transferred from lower division writing courses to
upper division writing courses on a university-wide level is not about the as-
sessment of individual students' abilities, but rather a systemic and program-
matic assessment. Measuring how knowledge about revision, use of evidence,
audience/purpose and style/usage moves (or does not move) with students is a
question of the aggregate. Studies of Computer Supported Collaborative Learn-
ing (CSCL) (Dillenbourg, Eurelings, & Hakkarainen, 2001; Koschmann, Hall,
& Miyake, 2002; Stahl, 2002; Van Aalst & Chan, 2007) provide models for
ePortfolio developers and researchers interested in explicitly involving students
in their own knowledge building activities. However, this research tends to em-
phasize collaborative processes and overlook learning outcomes. Van Aalst and

                                                                                                215
Whithaus

Chan's (2007) work aims to incorporate learning outcomes within a CSCL
model where student designed ePortfolios play a significant role; drawing on
three classroom studies they examine the evolution and roles of that student
knowledge building plays in the ePortfolios.

   In most ePortfolio systems, the framework for the portfolio is created by the
classroom teacher or by the institution setting up the portfolio system and not
by the students participating in the project. In Van Aalst and Chan's (2007)
studies of ePortfolio and CLCS systems in Canada and Hong Kong, the stu-
dents engage in knowledge building within frameworks that they have defined
for themselves:

         The goal is to enable the class to articulate questions and
         ideas they have about the topic and to delineate the general
         scope of what they attempt to accomplish. Students may
         contribute their ideas to the database and talk to each other
         about them. With some assistance from the teacher, the class
         may settle on a general plan for what it hopes to accomplish
         in the unit. (pp. 178-179)

   The idea of constructing an ePortfolio system where the participants are
active builders of the ePortfolio's framework returns to early debates in writ-
ing studies ePortfolios about the differences between student-designed (webfo-
lios) and database-driven, institutionally-designed (ePortfolios) (Batson, 2002;
Whithaus, 2005). Van Aalst and Chan's (2007) model demonstrates the pos-
sibilities for integrating these models of ePortfolios into systems that incorpo-
rate databases, but allow students significant influence on the shape of their
portfolios and the assessment of the learning taking place in them. These shifts
not only affected the ePortfolios, but also the way that inquiry proceeded in the
courses. In the classes, "instead of focusing on readings and topics, sustained
inquiry and progressive problem solving could be facilitated by providing au-
thentic problems and encouraging questions to emerge from student-directed
inquiry" (p. 209).

   For ePortfolio developers concerned with improving the alignment of lower
division courses that focus on information skills and writing with the compe-
tencies required of students for work within their majors, this model implies
the potential of incorporating student input into a programmatic assessment.
How would students define the successful transfer of writing skills developed in
lower division courses into their upper level, discipline specific writing experi-
ences? In some studies, this question might be approached through student
surveys. Within an ePortfolio system--especially one that would incorporate

216
                                                                    Facilitating and Assessing Knowledge

Van Aalst and Chan's (2007) work on active student participation in knowledge
building--the students would be invited to address these connections with the
courses and the ePortfolio system themselves. Operationalizing a vision of stu-
dents as active agents in the measuring of knowledge transfer is a difficult task.
A large-scale ePortfolio system could be designed to measure how well discrete
writing skills (such as revision, use of evidence, awareness of audiences and pur-
poses, and the ability to use different writing styles and correct usage conven-
tions) aligned in writing samples drawn from lower division courses and upper
division courses. Having such a system incorporate the potential knowledge
building functions of ePortfolios would require that the reflective element(s)
used in the upper division courses associated with the ePortfolios explicitly
asked students to consider how their earlier college writing experiences im-
pacted their later work. In this way, data could be gathered that would include
student perspectives on the knowledge about writing that transferred from their
earlier college writing experiences to their later experiences. This data would be
associated with writing samples, so that researchers could verify and investigate
further the student perceptions. This follow up activity would create data with
a greater depth and a greater validity than data gathered through a more tra-
ditional student survey. Light, Chen, and Ittelson (2012) describe qualitative
and quantitative triangulation techniques through ePortfolio pedagogy in their
recent book, Documenting Learning with ePortfolios (pp. 7-24).

CLOSING: USING EPORTFOLIOS TO
MEASURE KNOWLEDGE TRANSFER

   When applied to learning about writing in secondary and postsecondary
contexts, the concept of thirdspaces (Grego & Thompson, 2008; Soja, 1996)
suggests that students not only learn about writing in official "sanctioned," for-
credit, writing-focused courses, but also have the potential to learn even more
effectively through a variety of opportunities connected with research activities
in their own disciplines. The concept of thirdspaces then is useful if we want to
rethink traditional modes of delivering writing instruction. When ePortfolios
operate on an institution-wide level, they can become a vehicle of measuring
the learning about writing that occurs in these thirdspaces. They can also mea-
sure how specific writing skills acquired in one context (lower division writ-
ing courses) do, or do not, transfer into other contexts (e.g., upper division,
disciplinary courses where there is a significant amount of writing required).
These measures of knowledge transfer should include how students are using
information literacies and multimodal composing skills as part of the develop-

                                                                                                217
Whithaus

ing abilities as writers. Finally, ePortfolios may even be designed in ways that
incorporate the latest developments in computer supported collaborative learn-
ing (CSCL). By incorporating reflective cover letters or other reflective pieces of
writing that ask students about how earlier course work informed the choices
they made about their writing in later courses, a set of data can be collected
that incorporates students' knowledge about their learning and their emerging
knowledge base about writing (Goodwin-Jones, 2008). Combining the stu-
dents' reflections with outcomes-based assessment tied to multiple samples of
student writing from different course levels creates a rich matrix of data-driven
assessments that can work as a feedback loop and help inform curriculum de-
velopment and the faculty's pedagogical choices.

REFERENCES

Acker, S. R., & Halasek, K. (2008). Preparing high school students for college-
   level writing: Using ePortfolio to support a successful transition. The Journal
   of General Education, 57(1), 14.

Argyris, C., & Schön, D. A. (1974). Theory in practice: Increasing professional
   effectiveness (1st ed.). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Bartholomae, D., & Petrosky, T. (1986). Facts, artifacts, and counterfacts: Theory
   and method for a reading and writing course. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook.

Batson, T. (2002, November 26). The electronic portfolio boom: What's it all
   about? Campus Technology. Retrieved from http://campustechnology.com/
   articles/2002/11/the-electronic-portfolio-boom-whats-it-all-about.aspx

Butcher, J. (2009). Off-campus learning and employability in undergraduate
   design: The "Sorrell Young Design Project" as an innovative partnership. Art,
   Design and Communication in Higher Education, 7(3), 13.

Desmet, C., Church Miller, D., Griffin, J., Balthazor, R., & Cummings, R. E.
   (2008). Reflection, revision, and assessment in first-year composition ePort-
   folios. The Journal of General Education, 57(1), 15.

Dillenbourg, P., Eurelings, A., & Hakkarainen, K. (Eds.). (2001). European
   perspectives on computer-supported collaborative learning: Proceedings of
   the first European conference on computer-supported collaborative learning. The
   Netherlands: University of Maastricht.

Goodwin-Jones, R. (2008). Emerging technologies web-writing 2.0: Enabling,
   document, and assessing writing online. Language and Technology, 12(2),
   7-13.

Grego, R., & Thompson, N. S. (2007). Teaching/Writing in thirdspaces: The
   studio approach. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.

218
                                                                    Facilitating and Assessing Knowledge

Humphreys, D. (2009). College outcomes for work, life, and citizenship. Lib-
   eral Education, 95(1), 7.

Kent, T. (1999). Post-process theory: Beyond the writing-process paradigm. Car-
   bondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.

Light, T. P., Chen, H. L., & Ittelson, J. C. (2012). Documenting learning with
   eportfolios: A guide for college instructors. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Koschmann, T. D., Hall, R., & Miyake, N. (Eds.). (2002). CSCL 2: Carrying
   forward the conversation. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Lambert, S., & Corrin, L. (2007). Moving towards a university wide imple-
   mentation of an ePortfolio tool. Australasian Journal of Educational Technol-
   ogy, 23(1), 16.

Lopez-Fernandez, O., & Rodriguez-Illera, J. (2009). Investigating university
   students' adaption to a digital learner course portfolio. Computers and Educa-
   tion, 52, 608-616.

Massey, D. B. (2005). For space. London/Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Massey, D. B. (1994). Space, place, and gender. Minneapolis: University of Min-

   nesota Press.
Mauk, J. (2003). The "Real" (e)states of being, writing, and thinking in com-

   position. College English, 65(4), 21.
Ostorga, A., & Estrada, V. (2009). Impact of an action research instructional

   model: Student teachers as reflective thinkers. Action in Teacher Education,
   30(4), 9.
Petraglia, J. (1998). Reality by design: The rhetoric and technology of authenticity
   in education. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Pinto, M., & Sales, D. (2008). Knowledge transfer and information skills for
   student-centered learning in spain. Portal: Libraries and the Academy, 8(1).
Reynolds, N. (2004). Geographies of writing: Inhabiting places and encountering
   difference. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.
Schneider, C. G. (2008). A different take on excellence. Liberal Education,
   94(1), 2.
Schön, D. A. (1987). Educating the reflective practitioner (1st ed.). San Francisco:
   Jossey-Bass.
Schön, D. A. (1983). The reflective practitioner: How professionals think in action.
   New York: Basic Books.
Schön, D. A. (1991). The reflective turn: Case studies in and on educational prac-
   tice. New York: Teachers College.
Shaughnessy, M. P. (1977). Errors and expectations: A guide for the teacher of
   basic writing. New York: Oxford University Press.
Shor, I. (1987). Freire for the classroom: A sourcebook for liberatory teaching (1st
   ed.). Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook.

                                                                                                219
Whithaus

Shor, I. (1996). When students have power: Negotiating authority in a critical
   pedagogy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Soja, E. W. (1996). Thirdspace: Journeys to Los Angeles and other real-and-imag-
   ined places. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.

Stahl, G. (Ed.). (2002). CompUPter support for collaborative learning: Founda-
   tion for a CSCL community. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Swartzendruber-Putnam, D. (2000). Written reflection: Creating better think-
   ers, better writers. The English Journal, 90(1), 6.

Thompson, N. S., Alford, E. M., Liao, C., Johnson, R., Matthews, M. A.
   (2005). Integrating undergraduate research into engineering: A communica-
   tions approach to holistic education. Journal of Engineering Education, 94(3),
   10.

Van Aalst, J., & Chan, C. K. K. (2007). Student-directed assessment of knowl-
   edge building using electronic portfolios. Journal of the Learning Sciences,
   16(2), 175-220.

Warnock, S. (2009). Methods and results of an accreditation-driven writing
   assessment in a business college. Journal of Business and Technical Communi-
   cation, 23(1), 24.

What general education courses contribute to essential learning outcomes
   (2009). The Journal of General Education, 58(2), 19.

Whithaus, C. (2005). Teaching and evaluating writing in the age of computers
   and high-stakes testing. Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Xiao, L. et al. (2008). Gerontological education in undergraduate nursing pro-
   grams: An Australian perspective. Educational Gerontology, 34(9), 18.

Yancey, K. B. (1998). Reflection in the writing classroom. Logan, UT: Utah State
   University Press.

220
CHAPTER 12.

BALANCING LEARNING AND
ASSESSMENT: A STUDY OF
VIRGINIA TECH'S USE OF
EPORTFOLIOS

Marc Zaldivar
Virginia Tech University

Teggin Summers
Virginia Tech University

C. Edward Watson
Virginia Tech University

This chapter explores the case of ePortfolio adoption at Virginia Tech.
The idea that ePortfolios are useful reflective devices is a well-explored
concept. The impact of ePortfolios on assessment of student learning is
becoming an important ground for new research in ePortfolio usage.
At Virginia Tech, we are finding ways to work on ePortfolios, both as a
reflective medium for learning and as a tool for improving assessment
of that learning, in order to deploy this learning technology across a
large and varied student and faculty population.

   Portfolios in educational settings are certainly not a new concept. Many
disciplines, including English, art, and education, have made portfolios integral
to their pedagogical process for years (Devanney & Walsh, 2002, Greenberg,
2004, Weimer, 2002); however, a number of technological innovations, as well
as specific trends in academic and programmatic assessment, have brought eP-
ortfolios to the forefront of recent discussion in higher education.

   Like traditional portfolios, ePortfolios contain students' work collected
over time (Hutchins, 1990). They foster dialogue and "interaction with teach-
ers, mentors, peers, colleagues, friends, and family" (Greenberg, 2004, p. 30).
This process and resulting product of co-working provide a context and op-
portunity for student reflection and revision and results in behaviors that are

DOI: https://doi.org/10.37514/PER-B.2013.0490.2.12                          221
Zaldivar, Summers, and Watson

related to deep learning. The key difference between traditional and electronic
portfolios, then, is the use of technology to collect, organize, manage, store,
retrieve, and share a variety of information, including artifacts of learning,
audio/visual files, and student reflections. In an ePortfolio, "all artifacts have
been transformed into computer-readable form. An electronic portfolio is not
a haphazard collection of artifacts (i.e., a digital scrapbook or multimedia pre-
sentation) but rather a reflective tool that demonstrates growth over time"
(Barrett, 2000). Because of this archival nature, however, a new interest in
ePortfolios has emerged from a variety of institutional stakeholders (Batson,
2009, Lorenzo & Ittleson, 2005).

   In addition to encouraging students' reflection and learning, ePortfolios are
currently celebrated as a way to facilitate and document more authentic forms
of assessment. With increased calls for accountability at the state, regional and
national workplaces, the collection and management of student learning out-
comes has emerged as a complex and immediate challenge for colleges and
universities. As a result, many programs see ePortfolios solely as an archival
tool to document student learning which can then be mined for assessment
purposes to respond to the aforementioned assessment pressures. The question
then becomes how programs or institutions can structure their activities to take
advantage of the learning benefits of the ePortfolio process yet meet the as-
sessment needs best met by a product approach to ePortfolios. This chapter
describes these two seemingly opposing ePortfolio approaches and suggests a
method for putting the two in balance in order to achieve the best outcomes
from both approaches.

EPORTFOLIO: PRODUCT VS. PROCESS

   With electronic portfolios gaining more and more national and internation-
al attention in the field of higher education, many valuable questions concern-
ing challenges and implications of ePortfolio adoption need to be addressed.
Amongst these questions lie issues of standardization, ownership, and perhaps
at the heart of the debate: the tension between process- and product-orientated
portfolios. Shavelson, Klein, and Benjamin (2009) have argued that ePortfolios
lack standardization, scalability, and objectivity. Batson, a stout proponent of
ePortfolios, has also acknowledged that one factor preventing ePortfolio adop-
tion is the "lack of standards for the data being maintained in the ePortfolio
repository" (Batson, 2009a). Additionally, Batson has argued that for students
"portfolio-for-the-matrix has left them estranged from their own work and the
student-centered technology that was supposed to be has lagged behind ac-

222
                                                                      Balancing Learning and Assessment

creditation management technology ... If there is only one ePortfolio platform
on campus, it is bound to become an institutional ePortfolio" (Batson, 2009b).
Some of these issues stem from the tension between process- and product-ori-
ented portfolios and the pedagogical values and concepts different people attach
to these various types of portfolios.

   Some view product-based portfolios as being purely assessment-driven,
which can in turn inhibit reflective, authentic facilitation of learning. Others
view process-based portfolios as being too loose, too flexible and hence pre-
venting scaffolded, guided facilitation of learning. Opponents of ePortfolios
claim that this can create a hodgepodge of standards, which lack coherency.
Since types of electronic portfolios are as diverse as the people who create them,
the suggestion that there is a bifurcation between portfolios that are adopted
for the collection of assessment data, product portfolios, and those that are
instituted for the facilitation of learning, process portfolios, should not come
as a surprise. Additionally, these two types of portfolios can simultaneously be
thought of as wholly different, serving different purposes and different audi-
ences, and as being one and the same. For instance, each of us comes to the
concept of portfolios with our own ideas as to what they are and what audiences
and objectives they serve. Some view ePortfolios as nuanced educational tools,
used for encouraging student growth and self-assessment, for assessing learning
across groups of students, and for developing a culture of assessment between
faculty, students, and administrators; however, all too often people develop one
set opinion on what an ePortfolio is and how it can best be used to meet their
needs. Because of this somewhat homogenizing approach, we often fail to see
the value of utilizing electronic portfolios for different purposes. This perspec-
tive applies to the dichotomization sometimes existing between product and
process portfolios. While these types of portfolios have been referred to under
various terms--such as showcase and workspace (Barrett, 2009) and process
and showcase (Abrami & Barrett, 2005), for example--from here on we will
refer to them as product and process portfolios. When a curriculum or pro-
gram only approaches portfolios from a product perspective, it runs the risk of
turning a valuable learning tool into an electronic storage closet. At the same
time, product-oriented portfolios can add a layer of qualitative richness to the
types of information gleaned from student activity and applied to improve-
ments in teaching and student learning. Therefore, it can be helpful to discuss
the relevant merits in the academy and other workplaces of both process- and
product-oriented ePortfolios.

   This section will provide overviews of product- and process-oriented ePort-
folios. Additionally, it answers a question posed by Helen Barrett: "How do we
match the needs of the institution for valid and reliable data for accreditation

                                                                                                223
Zaldivar, Summers, and Watson

and accountability while still meeting the needs of learners for formative as-
sessment to enhance and support the learning process?" (2004). At Virginia
Tech we are able to engage in this process successfully, using a single ePortfolio
platform system. Our system is one that embraces eFolio thinking as a way to
synthesize process- and product-based portfolios. Whether a portfolio initiative
places overarching value on product or process, as long as the project is imbued
with "eFolio thinking," the process is likely to be successful and result in valu-
able learning.

   Meyer and Tusin (1999) describe process portfolios as those that emphasize
the learning of new skills, understanding, and progress. Students using port-
folios for this purpose are more interested in improvement and learning from
mistakes. Conversely, product portfolios have more emphasis on how outcomes
reflect ability. Students using portfolios for this purpose are more interested in
comparing themselves to and scoring better than others (Meyer & Tusin, 1999,
p. 131). Helen Barrett (2009) describes process ePortfolios as being workspace
portfolios, oriented to learning and reflection. With process portfolios, feed-
back is formative, assessment for learning. Product ePortfolios are described as
being showcase portfolios, oriented to presentation and accountability. With
product portfolio, feedback is summative, assessment on learning. Both types
of portfolio have positive attributes they can bring to the classroom; both pose
challenges as well.

   While product-oriented portfolios hold value for the classroom, there is
concern that when overemphasized, they can detract from the learning process.
Johnson and Rose (1997) remind us, "When we only focus on portfolios as a
product, we've missed their potential power, which comes from the process of
creating them" (p. 8). In addition, Yagelski (1997) speaks of the integration of a
reflective portfolio into a pre-service English course at Purdue University:

         Unwittingly, in trying to make the portfolio a comprehensive
         portrait of the students' work in high school classrooms over
         the semester, we had squelched the opportunity for careful
         reflection and ended up with what amounted to a collec-
         tion of documents; moreover, what reflection did occur was
         largely ... students ... evaluating their work for the portfolio
         after the fact and not in an ongoing fashion. (p. 230)

   Because course teachers initially asked for a collection of a series of docu-
ments, of which most were specified course assignments, they were unable to
achieve their desired goal of critical reflection. These arguments are not without
merit. Certain challenges exist within product-oriented portfolios. Because of

224
                                                                      Balancing Learning and Assessment

their product-based nature, these portfolios may allow more room for materials
to be submitted at the last minute, and if this happens, students may not have
as much critical reflection on how their materials meet their different learning
outcomes. Wagner and Lamoureux (2006) note when implementing their out-
come-based assessment ePortfolios, that "while students are currently encour-
aged to begin uploading to their ePortfolios early ... many seem to `wait until
the end'" (p. 545). An additional complication to assessment-driven, product-
based portfolios is the fact that many students feel little ownership over their
portfolios. This is a challenge Wagner and Lamoureux (2006) faced when a
focus group student stated "We know it will help the program, but what's in it
for us?" (p. 548). There is potential, with these types of portfolios, to place so
much emphasis on the outcomes that students lose the importance of progres-
sive reflection and engagement with their own learning processes.

   On the contrary, product-oriented, assessment-based, and showcase port-
folios can hold great pedagogical potential for courses, programs, and students
alike. For students, showcase portfolios, which are also product-oriented, can
facilitate ownership and engagement with programmatic outcomes and profes-
sional communities of practice. For example, when students are selecting their
best pieces of work to showcase in a professional portfolio, with a prospective
employer in mind as an audience, the student can feel more ownership over
the materials and a stronger sense of involvement and value from the creation
process. As they prepare these portfolios, students have the opportunity to see
the connections between all they have learned in their courses and program and
their intended professional communities. Additionally, in these types of portfo-
lios, students also often have more opportunities to customize their portfolios
and make them more personal, something that often contributes to ePortfolio
motivation. As one student noted, "I also wondered if there was a way to make
it more customized. I think that students are more attracted to things that they
can make personal, as in color, font, background, etc" (Hakel, Gromko, &
Blackburn, 2006, p. 395).

   Beyond their ability to guide a student's professional development, product-
focused ePortfolios are able to collect effective data that can give long-term,
comparative information leading to curricular improvement. This can be done
in ways that are more authentic and student-centered than traditional test-based
assessment formats. In addition to some of the challenges of their outcomes-
based assessment ePortfolio, Wagner and Lamoureux (2006) also note that fac-
ulty felt they were becoming more intentional in their assessment, and students
saw the ways in which the assessment of ePortfolios contributed to the improve-
ment of the program: "I see program changes as a reward. I'm only a sophomore
and will reap the benefits from the revisions in the program" (p. 548).

                                                                                                225
Zaldivar, Summers, and Watson

   Similarly, while product-focused portfolios have much to contribute to
the pedagogical environment, the very process of creating these products that
make up the portfolios, especially portfolios that emphasize learning-focused
outcomes, can contribute to students making deeper connections between
their programs of study and their professional communities of practice within
various workplaces. Process-focused portfolios tend to be the ones most associ-
ated with reflection, self-assessment, and growth of learning. As Yancey (2001)
states, portfolios make learning visible:

         Portfolios bring together visibility, process, and reflection as
         students chart and interpret their own learning. Students are
         responsible ... for explaining what they did and did not learn,
         for assessing their own strengths and weaknesses as learners,
         for evaluating their products and performances, for showing
         how that learning connects with other kinds of learning (in
         the classroom and without), and for using the review of the
         past to think about paths for future learning. (p. 19)

   While process portfolios do not necessarily represent the type of presenta-
tion a student would want to introduce to a prospective employer, they do
represent the types of learning and vehicles for authentic feedback that students
would want to show their instructors, exam committees, and programmatic ad-
ministrators. Additionally, there may be some documents within these portfo-
lios that students might want to display within a showcase, and the progressive
reflections embedded throughout such portfolios better help students to not
only know which materials they might want to display, but also how they want
to portray themselves to their intended audiences.

   A useful way to think of these two ePortfolio paradigms is from a perspec-
tive that blends the two approaches. Meyer and Tusin (1999) say as much when
they note that, "Within the average cases, we found preservice teachers' knowl-
edge about and experience with portfolios to be complex mixtures of process
and product" (p. 135). After studying the relationship between preservice and
inservice teachers' pedagogical values, along with their knowledge of and expe-
rience with portfolios, Meyer and Tusin (1999) concluded that using portfolios
in methods courses seemed to elicit more use of portfolios for professional de-
velopment purposes, as opposed to the desired outcome of using portfolios for
learning processes. They suggest that "Faculty must ask all preservice teachers
to reflect upon all the different forms and purposes of portfolios, and to syn-
thesize what is similar and different among their methods portfolios, students'
portfolios, and professional portfolios" (p. 137). See also Carl Young's (2009)

226
                                                                      Balancing Learning and Assessment

more recent work. This advice is applicable to all who embark on an ePortfolio
initiative: it is important to strike a balance between product and process port-
folios in order to maximize their learning and professional potentials. David
W. Denton conducted an Eportfolio study along these lines measuring writing
reflection improvement after an intervention with preservice teachers (2012).
See also C. E. Shepherd and M. Hannafin's (2011) work on the effects of ePort-
folio development on preservice teachers' inquiry and growth in the Journal of
Technology and Teaching Education.

   In her "Balancing the two faces of ePortfolio," Helen Barrett (2009) sys-
tematically and thoroughly displays the differences and relationships between
process and product ePortfolios, and suggests that balancing the two types of
portfolios enhances learner engagement with the portfolio process. The chal-
lenge, of course, is finding a way to balance all that ePortfolios have to offer: im-
mersion in learning processes, formative and summative assessment, curricular
and programmatic development and improvement, and professional develop-
ment. Each program must determine for itself its own needs and goals, priori-
ties, resources, and timelines.

   At Virginia Tech, the ePortfolio Initiatives office is working with faculty
to slowly evolve a process in which ePortfolios can facilitate product-oriented
collection of data and process-oriented critical reflections on growth over time.
Through our use of the Open Source Portfolio tools in our instance of the Sakai
collaborative learning environment, we have devised a way for faculty and pro-
gram administrators to collect student documents for summative assessment
of learning and of the overall program. In addition, we can embed reflection
prompts and students are able to reflect on their progress in their courses and
programs throughout their duration. Finally, through the flexible nature of our
tool set, students are able to create ePortfolios for assessment that balance pro-
cess- and product-oriented approaches. Additionally, students can also easily
reuse specific documents to create professional ePortfolios that they then use
to gain competitive jobs and internships. Though we are just at the beginning
of these efforts, we have already seen exemplary levels of student engagement
with this blended approach. Faculty are able to collect the data they need for
assessment and accreditation purposes, and students are able to see the ways in
which their learning and development as professionals have grown throughout
their academic career. Students have additional ownership over their work and
related reflections, as they are able to customize these pieces to further their
professional development. In fact, many students are recognizing that even if
prospective employers do not actually see their electronic portfolios, the very
act of creating their portfolios helps prepare them for the rigorous process of
acceptance and eventual membership in their professional communities. When

                                                                                                227
Zaldivar, Summers, and Watson

students see the connections between their learning processes and their out-
comes, we have truly achieved a synthesis of process and product.

FOLIO V. EFOLIO THINKING: EXTENDING
THE PORTFOLIO DISCUSSION

   Much of this discussion, which emphasizes the blending of process and
product, is encapsulated within the framework of "eFolio thinking." This is
a notion that we extended from Chen and Mazow's (2002) "folio thinking."
Their term focuses on the cognitive predilection of any type of learning-focused
portfolio to "encourage students to integrate discrete learning experiences; en-
hance students' self-understanding; promote students' taking responsibility for
their own learning; [and] support students in developing an intellectual identi-
ty" (Chen & Mazow, 2002, p. 2). Those goals are solid foundations upon which
to build an ePortfolio program. On the surface, these principles seem fairly
process-oriented. The focus is on students' processes of learning and growth,
responsibility and understanding. However, in order to sustain these processes,
student activities, complete with artifacts created along the way, will provide the
touchstones needed to assess the growth and learning touted in each portfolio.
Well-designed portfolio programs of any nature would do well to ground them-
selves in folio thinking.

   1. To extend that, we offer four additional enhancements based on the elec-
       tronic nature of ePortfolios:

   2. ePortfolios can offer an easier management of the collection, selection,
       and reflection process for students;

   3. ePortfolios can offer a greater variety of communication potentials--
       easier sharing with a greater variety of individuals in order to provide a
       greater breadth and depth of feedback;

   4. ePortfolios can offer a method of gaining more meaningful data analysis
       for the student, instructor, and administrator; and

   5. ePortfolios can offer a greater potential for long-term transportability,
       and more importantly, long-term growth and development.

   Without reviewing the obvious details of the differences between paper- and
electronic-based portfolios, the four propositions comprising "eFolio Think-
ing," highlight several significant differences.

   First, online management of portfolios, including those centralized in learn-
ing management systems, encourage students to take a long-term focus on the
collection, selection, and reflection on the contents of their portfolio. Central-
ized storage encourages students to reuse materials and to do so more easily,

228
                                                                      Balancing Learning and Assessment

extending initial reflections with deeper understandings at a later time. The
integration of common blog-type elements, replete with full search engines
greatly expands the "cataloging" capabilities of portfolio authors.

   Second, as an extension of that concept, electronic environments offer port-
folio creators a greater ability to share their work with audiences. Traditional
audiences, such as instructors or academic committees, can be reached more
easily, often with just an email containing a link. And that same email can si-
multaneously reach professionals working in the field, management considering
applicant pools, family members, and interested other parties, all with the same
amount of effort. With the integration of social networking tools, electronic
portfolios can turn from pure product-oriented containers to discussion spaces
surrounding touchstones of an individual or group's work, such as in the case
of Margo Tamez' electronic portfolio created for her dissertation which quickly
became a central point of focus in a national debate on immigration (Schaff-
hauser, 2009).

   Third, electronic portfolios offer the ability for many different audiences
to have access to an array of data for analysis of student learning. As we have
known for years, ePortfolios offer individual students a way to track their de-
velopment over time (Cambridge, 2001; Doig, Illsley, McLuckie, & Parsons,
2006; Hutchings, 1990; Michelson & Mandell, 2004; Steffani, Mason, &
Pegler, 2007; Zubizaretta, 2004). In addition, ePortfolios that are designed well
offer course instructors, program advisors, and academic assessment teams an
enormous amount of direct evidence of student learning (Schneider, 2009),
especially if the students' reflective voices are given a role in that assessment
(Batson, 2009b). By carefully aligning the reflective learning process with the
collection of artifacts that demonstrate that learning, students can measure their
own progress against departmental or institutional requirements. At the same
time, course instructors are gathering representative work from early, middle,
and late in the term by which, with rubrics or other measuring scales, they
should be able to detect the amount of growth that a student has undertaken
in the course. Accumulating over several terms, departments can then assess the
work that is being done in key courses by sampling from an array of students'
portfolios demonstrating work and reflections on that work in those courses.
This can be the grounding for continuous programmatic development. That
sort of effort is one that the program or institution can use to demonstrate to
accrediting bodies the on-going effort at programmatic improvement as well as
achievements already made. Pure product-focused portfolios would not achieve
these multi-layered goals. Institutions may collect key assessment data, but if
they are only looking at lists of student-generated artifacts, they lose a signifi-
cant voice in the assessment process: the student's own acknowledgement of

                                                                                                229
Zaldivar, Summers, and Watson

learning. Similarly, pure process-focused portfolios, those based only on reflec-
tion and not as interested in core, guided products for programmatic portfolios,
can inhibit the student's ability to measure his/her own success at achieving
departmental goals. The sheer collection of exemplars by promoting success-
ful portfolios can enhance each student's ability to meet departmental learning
requirements and to grow beyond them.

   That last aspect, the ability to break out of guided learning and to take on
values of lifelong learning is the fourth aspect of eFolio thinking. This aspect
links back to the first, in that ePortfolios encourage the author to take a long-
term view of their development, but it extends the first in the affordance of
transportability and the facilitation of lifelong development (Barrett & Garrett,
2009; Cambridge, 2009). Cambridge (2009), in his analysis of the potential of
electronic portfolios to offer lifelong and integrative learning, focuses on two
types of "selves" that can be created more easily with electronic portfolios: the
"networked" and the "symphonic" self. In each case, the portfolio author has
the opportunity to use the materials and reflections created over years to build
a growing picture of him/herself as a learner, as one engaged in growth. While
not fully technologically resolved, many elements of a portfolio are transport-
able if created with "eFolio thinking," that is, if the artifacts and reflections of a
portfolio are created using technologies that show promise for long term read-
ability, such as the Portable Document Format, then there is a good chance that
the electronic portfolio can follow the student throughout life, gathering sig-
nificance and meaning as the author grows. With even a simple Internet search,
one can find dozens of examples of portfolios begun as early as kindergarten.
With a proper approach, these kindergarten authors can continue to set goals
and to mature as learners throughout their lives. (See also Lunsford, 2006 on
writing technologies and the fifth canon.)

   The four elements of eFolio Thinking focus on the electronic portfolio's
ability to connect, reflect, and synthesize students' learning so that different
audiences can benefit from the work contained therein. By designing ePortfolio
programs with the principles of Folio and eFolio Thinking at the center, we can
all improve our learning, both as students and as instructors.

TOWARD A BALANCE: TWO EXAMPLES
AND A CONCLUSION

   In order to wrap up this chapter, two examples will be offered from work
done at Virginia Tech, in two very different departments. Through these ex-
amples, we hope to show how eFolio Thinking can be put into the design of a

230
                                                                      Balancing Learning and Assessment

successful, and sustainable, portfolio program which meets needs of academic
and workplace environments. Both departments are radically different in their
needs and outlook, yet both departments were able to design a successful eP-
ortfolio program.

   The first example is from the Didactic Program in Dietetics, based in the
Department of Human Nutrition, Food, and Exercise (see Figures 1 and 2).
This program has approximately 80 majors, accredited by the Commission on
Accreditation for Dietetics Education. In that capacity, they have had a long-
standing paper portfolio process in their department. This portfolio was a
"product-focused" portfolio, asking each graduating senior to submit a collec-
tion of 10 key assignments from their course of study, ranging from materials
created in their sophomore year to assignments created in their senior year.
These binders were collected, year after year. In January 2008, the program co-
ordinator, Dr. Susan Clark, contacted the authors of this chapter, who all work
for Learning Technologies, more specifically, for the ePortfolio Intiatives office.
Dr. Clark was interested in the ePortfolio approach, initially to facilitate the
easier collection and dissemination of the ten required artifacts. After recreating
their paper-based, product-focused portfolio program in an electronic format,
Dr. Clark recognized that there was a greater potential to the portfolio program

Figure 1. Dietetics' Program Assessment Matrix.

                                                                                                231
Zaldivar, Summers, and Watson

if we adopted more of a process-focused stance and incorporated some more
reflection and student-centered learning in the ePortfolios.

   To accomplish this, we formed a student-led "Student Management team,"
which initially consisted of a dozen hand-picked students, chosen for their en-
gagement with the dietetics curriculum and at least an initial interest in portfo-
lios. For the most part, none of the team had a particular technological interest
or ability, but all had basic capabilities with the computer. This team, again led
by the students, helped to reshape the assessment-focus of the ePortfolio from
the product-focused "10 artifacts in a binder" portfolio, to a process where
the students can pick and choose which work of theirs best meets the national
standards indicated by the professional accrediting agencies. Though the 10 ar-
tifacts are still collected, in order to provide some consistency among the port-
folios, the students also outlined several options from the curriculum that each
dietetics student should consider for inclusion as evidence for one of the six
learning domains that they identified. The students also focused on designing a
more satisfying and useful web-interface that the individual students could use
for applying to internships, which most dietetics students do after their senior
years. These internships are highly competitive, and the students all felt that an
electronic, easy-to-access portfolio would give them a competitive edge in the
application process.

Figure 2. Sample Dietetics Student Presentation Portfolio.

232
                                                                      Balancing Learning and Assessment

   After the initial development process, the student-led team continued to ex-
pand the culture of eFolio Thinking within their student body. They published
papers and attended conferences to make presentations to other dietetics faculty
about the significance of their work (Clark & Bailey, 2008; Clark et al., 2008,
2009a, 2009b). They also began a "Peer Mentoring" program that provides new
dietetics portfolio students to gain advice and technological support from the
students that have been engaged in eFolio thinking already. In this, they have
created a student-centered, sustainable model for ePortfolio adoption in their
program. In addition, their ePortfolios have shifted from one of pure product-
gathering to one that incorporates reflections on key aspects of the dietetics
professions and allows student choice of artifact to guide the collection and
"evidence" of assessment that the program is using to gain accreditation.

   The second program that we wish to discuss took a similar approach, in that
it included student voices in the creation and adoption of the ePortfolios early
on in their process. In this case, however, the Department of English at Virginia
Tech does not have a professional accrediting agency to which they have to re-
port. They had to begin by defining learning outcomes for their three primary
options to the major: Creative Writing, Professional Writing, and Literature,
Language, and Culture, in the process of outlining reasonable student learning
outcomes, mostly to stay ahead of the curve of assessment that was gaining hold
on campus. They wanted to be a department that took seriously the charges of a
culture of assessment, namely that of a mode of continuous curricular improve-
ment. To this end, they also began with a product-focused portfolio, centered
mostly on programmatic assessment (see Figures 3 and 4).

   However, early feedback from students indicated that they had no interest
in or understanding of the dimensions of programmatic assessment, and their
reflections made this clear. At this point, the English Department engaged a
"Student ePortfolio Leadership team," whose task it was to consider what it
would take for English majors to build more successful ePortfolios. For the
various creative outputs of the students, a student-focused process ePortfolio
was developed. Though anchored by key assignments throughout the English
major's three years (beginning in the sophomore year with a course entitled "In-
troduction to English Studies," and which has now been renamed the "English
Studies ePortfolio), the focus of this portfolio was on the learning processes that
were central to the English degree. See Schnurr (2013) for more examples of
leadership discourse and interaction cases through media (pp. 150-174).They
created spaces for students to reflect on why they picked a particular option out
of the three, on what they planned to do with the degree after graduation, on

                                                                                                233
Zaldivar, Summers, and Watson

how they use the skills of an English major outside of the classroom (perhaps in
a service learning or internship experience), and on how they see the synthesis
of the English skills culminating in a picture of themselves as an English major
(this last is accomplished through a synthesis reflection in the student's senior
seminar). The students also are able to provide examples of artifacts that meet
the six learning outcomes for graduation. The department uses these submis-
sions for their annual "assessment day" activities, where they get a chance to look
across the curriculum to see how their students are self-identifying the learning
outcomes that they are achieving. This gives the department a chance to review
curricular design, and to plan for a continual mode of improvement of their
curriculum. However, this is no longer the only activity of the ePortfolio. Stu-
dents are engaged in conversations about the curriculum and their individual
plans with advisors, course instructors, and peer mentors. They are engaged in
long- and short-term planning, and focused on the learning they are doing in
the department. All of those are facilitated by new technology-enhanced assign-
ments, such as a digital narrative, that take the students to new understandings
of the contemporary English major. Similar to the dietetics group, this program
shifted their focus from one of pure product-based assessment to include more
eFolio thinking on synthesis, reflection, and connection between the curricu-
lum and their lived experience.

   Both of these examples show that ePortfolio projects need to balance pri-
orities of learning and assessment, in-the-moment experience with archival re-
cords, needs of students with those of faculty and administrators. Following the

Figure 3. English Department Assessment Matrix.

234
                                                                      Balancing Learning and Assessment

principles of Folio and eFolio Thinking, this can be done through careful design
and curriculum matches. Ultimately, this gives us all a win-win situation: stu-
dents learn more, and we learn more about what and how students are learn-
ing. In addition to this sort of internal transfer of knowledge, such thinking is
important for students matriculating to workplaces.

   Programs such as these show that, through eFolio thinking, the notions
of communication, dialogue, and synthesis are central to creating sustainable
portfolio programs. At Virginia Tech, we have found that successful ePortfolio
programs, in other words, those that embrace both process and product, reflect
eFolio thinking. Through open dialogue with all participating parties, teaching
faculty, assessment committees, advisors, administrators, and yes, even students

Figure 4. Sample English Major's ePortfolio.
                                                                                                235
Zaldivar, Summers, and Watson

are brought into dialogue through the ePortfolio development. Concerns re-
volve around capturing useful assessment data yet giving the students voice
and room for authentic learning. However, if the dialogue is truly open and
admitting, especially from the perspectives of the students who will be creat-
ing the ePortfolios, these concerns can be brought into balance. Additionally,
the notion of synthesis between experience and learning or between artifact
and reflection, which is central to ePortfolios and eFolio thinking, also reflects
the synthesis employed by bringing together both process and product sides of
ePortfolios. Because ePortfolios exist electronically, they provide for more syn-
thesis, for example, synthesis of other types of assessment data and authentic
learning activities, or synthesis of learning outcomes and professional ePortfo-
lio presentations. eFolio thinking encourages students to engage in a process
to create a product that will aid their learning and professional development,
and when done well, aid all of us in assessing the individual's learning in more
meaningful, useful ways.

REFERENCES

Abrami, P. C., & Barrett, H. (2005). Directions for research and development
   on electronic portfolio. Canadian Journal of Learning and Technology. Re-
   trieved from http://www.cjlt.ca/index.php/cjlt/rt/printerFriendly/92/86

Barrett, H. (2000). Create your own electronic portfolio. Learning & Leading
   with Technology, 27(7), 14-21.

Barrett, H. (2009). Balancing the two faces of ePortfolios. Retrieved from
   http://electronicportfolios.org/balance

Barrett, H. C., & Garrett, N. (2009). Online personal learning environments:
   Structuring electronic portfolios for lifelong and life-wide learning. On the
   Horizon, 17(2), 142-152.

Barrett, H. & Wilkerson, J. (2004). Conflicting paradigms in electronic portfo-
   lio approaches: Choosing an electronic portfolio strategy that matches your
   conceptual framework. Retrieved from http://electronicportfolios.com/sys-
   tems/paradigms.html

Batson, T. (2009a). Where is the student voice in assessment? Campus Tech-
   nology. Retrieved from http://campustechnology.com/articles/2009/11/04/
   where-is-the-student-voice-in-assessment.aspx?sc_lang=en

Batson, T. (2009b, July 1). Why do we assess? Campus Technology. Retrieved
   from http://campustechnology.com/articles/2009/07/01/why-we-assess.
   aspx

236
                                                                      Balancing Learning and Assessment

Batson, T. (2011). Situated learning: A theoretical frame to guide transforma-
   tional change using electronic portfolio technology. International Journal of
   ePortfolio, 1(1), 107-114.

Cambridge, B., Kahn, S., Tompkins, D. P., & Yancey, K. B. (Eds.). (2001).
   Electronic portfolios 2.0: Emergent research on implementation and impact.
   Sterling, VA: Stylus.

Cambridge, D. (2009). Layering networked and symphonics: A critical role
   for e-Portfolios in employability through integrative learning. Campus-Wide
   Information Systems, 25(4), 244-262.

Chen, H. L., & Mazow, C. (2002). Electronic learning portfolios and student
   affairs. Net Results. Retrieved from http://www.naspa.org/netresults/article.
   cfm?ID=825

Clark, S. F., & Bailey, J. (2008). Developing an e-portfolio system through
   student-faculty collaboration. Dietetics Educators of Practitioners, (Fall), 15.

Clark, S. F., Bailey, J., Holmes, A., Johnson, L., Hendricks, M., Willis, G., ...
   Zaldivar, M. (2008). Student collaboration integrating the electronic portfo-
   lio with Sakai online learning technology to assess student learning outcomes
   for the Didactic Program in Dietetics. Journal of the American Dietetic As-
   sociation, 108, A66.

Clark, S. F., Holmes, A., Hendricks, M., Willis, G, Miller, R., Griffin, E., ... Zaldi-
   var, M. (2009a). Dietetic students collaborate to design an assessment based elec-
   tronic portfolio. Journal of the American Dietetics Association, 109, A17.

Clark, S. F., Holmes, A., Hendricks, M., Willis, G, Miller, R., Griffin, E., ...
   Zaldivar, M. (2009b). Students collaborate with faculty to design an elec-
   tronic portfolio system to measure student learning outcomes and profes-
   sional development. North American College and Teachers of Agriculture, 53.
   Retrieved from http://www.nactateachers.org/attachments/article/1854/
   NACTA%20Journal%20vol%2053%20supplement%201.pdf

Denton, D. D. (2012). Improving the quality of evidence-based writing entries
   in electronic portfolios. International Journal of ePortfolio, 2(2), 187-197.

Devanney, G., & Walsh, P. (2002). Collect, select and reflect: Using the elec-
   tronic portfolio in teacher preparation. In C. Crawford et al. (Eds.), Proceed-
   ings of Society for Information Technology and Teacher Education International
   Conference 2002 (p. 593). Chesapeake, VA: Association for the Advancement
   of Computing in Education.

Doig, B., Illsley, B., McLuckie, J., & Parsons, R. (2006). Using ePortfolios to
   enhance reflective learning and development. In A. Jafari, & C. Kaufman
   (Eds.), Handbook of research on ePortfolios (pp. 158-167). Hershey, PA: Idea
   Group Reference.

                                                                                                237
Zaldivar, Summers, and Watson

Greenberg, G. (2004). The digital convergence: Extending the portfolio model.
   EDUCAUSE Review, 39(4), 28-37.

Hakel, M. D., Gromko, M. H., & Blackburn, J. L. (2006). Implementing
   electronic portfolios at Bowling Green State University. In A. Jafari, & C.
   Kaufman (Eds.), Handbook of research on ePortfolios (pp. 388-397). Hershey,
   PA: Idea Group Reference.

Hutchings, P. (1990). Learning over time: Portfolio assessment. AAHE Bulletin,
   42(8), 6-8.

Lorenzo, G., & Ittelson, J. (2005). An overview of institutional e-portfolios.
   EDUCAUSE Learning Initiative, 2005. ELI Paper 1. Retrieved from http://
   www.educause.edu/ir/library/pdf/ELI3001.pdf

Lunsford, A. (2006). Writing, technologies, and the fifth canon. Computers and
   Composition, 23(2), 169-177.

Meyer, D., & Tusin, L. (1999). Preservice teachers' perceptions of portfolios:
   Process versus product. Journal of Teacher Education, 50(2), 131-139.

Michelson, E., & Mandell, A. (Eds.). (2004). Portfolio development and the as-
   sessment of prior learning. Sterling, VA: Stylus.

Schaffhauser, D. (2009, November 1). Here, there, and everywhere. Cam-
   pus Technology. Retrieved from http://campustechnology.com/Arti-
   cles/2009/11/01/ePortfolios.aspx

Schnurr, S. (2013). Exploring professional communication: Language in action.
   London: Routledge.

Shavelson, R. J., Klein, S., & Benjamin, R. (2009). The limitations of port-
   folios. Inside Higher Ed. Retrieved from http://www.insidehighered.com/
   views/2009/10/16/shavelson#Comments

Shepherd, C. E., & Hannafin, M. (2011). Supporting preservice teacher in-
   quiry with electronic portfolios. Journal of Technology and Teacher Education,
   19(2), 189-207.

Stefani, L., Mason, R., & Pegler, C. (Eds.), (2007). The educational potential of
   e-Portfolios: Supporting personal development and reflective learning (Connect-
   ing With E-Learning). New York: Routledge.

Wagner, M., & Lamoureux, E. (2006). Implementing an outcome-based assess-
   ment ePortfolio. In A. Jafari, & C. Kaufman (Eds.), Handbook of research on
   ePortfolios (pp. 539-550). Hershey, PA: Idea Group Reference.

Weimer, M. (2002). Learner-centered teaching: Five key changes to practice. San
   Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Yagelski, R. P. (1997). Portfolios as a way to encourage reflective practice among
   preservice English teachers. In K. B. Yancey, & I. Weiser (Eds.), Situating
   portfolios: Four perspectives (pp. 225-244). Logan, UT: Utah State University
   Press.

238
                                                                      Balancing Learning and Assessment

Yancey, K. B. (2001). Introduction: Digitized student portfolios. In B. Cam-
   bridge (Ed.), Electronic portfolios: Emerging practices in student, faculty, and
   institutional learning (pp. 15-30). Washington, DC: American Association
   for Higher Education.

Young, C. The MAEd English education electronic portfolio experience: What
   preservice English teachers have to teach us about EPs and reflection. In D.
   Cambridge, B. Cambridge, & K. B. Yancey (Eds.), Electronic portfolios 2.0:
   Emergent research on implementation and impact (pp. 181-192). Sterling, VA:
   Stylus.

Zubizarreta, J. (2004). The learning portfolio: Reflective practice for improving
   student learning. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

                                                                                                239
EPORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE SUPPORT SYSTEMS

ePortfolio Performance Support Systems: Constructing, Presenting, and Assessing
Portfolios addresses theories and practices advanced by some of the most in-
novative and active proponents of ePortfolios. Editors Katherine V. Wills and
Rich Rice interweave twelve essays that address the ways in which ePortfolios
can facilitate sustainable and measureable writing-related student develop-
ment, assessment and accountability, learning and knowledge transfer, and
principles related to universal design for learning, just-in-time support, inter-
action design, and usability testing.

Katherine V. Wills is Interim Division Head of Liberal Arts and Associate
Professor in the English program at Indiana University Purdue University at
Columbus, Indiana (http://www.iupuc.edu/liberalarts/katherinewills). Recent
publications explore uses of reflective practice in writing across curriculum,
ePortfolios, and international service learning. With J. Blake Scott and Berna-
dette Longo, she co-edited Critical Power Tools: Technical Communication and
Cultural Studies (SUNY, 2006), which received the national award for Best
New Collection in Technical and Scientific Writing by the National Council
of Teachers of English (2007).

Rich Rice is Associate Professor in the Technical Communication and Rhetoric
program at Texas Tech University where he serves as Director of the Multilit-
eracy Lab (http://richrice.com). He is a member of the Conference on College
Composition and Communication's Committee on Best Practices for Online
Writing Instruction. His recent articles are in the areas of ePortfolios, new
media knowledge creation, mobile medicine, basic writing and photo essays,
remediated film, nontraditional graduate support systems, and media labs.

Perspectives on Writing         W
Series Editor, Susan H. McLeod

The WAC Clearinghouse

Fort Collins, CO 80523
http://wac.colostate.edu

Parlor Press

Anderson, SC 29621
w w w.parlorpress.com

ISBN 978-1-64215-049-0
