Ethical Use of Technology in Digital Learning Environments: Graduate Student Perspectives
   Ethical Use of Technology in Digital Learning
   Environments: Graduate Student Perspectives

BARBARA BROWN, VERENA ROBERTS, MICHELE JACOBSEN, CHRISTIE
     HURRELL, KOURTNEY KERR, HEATHER VAN STREUN, NICOLE

  NEUTZLING, JEFF LOWRY, SIMO ZARKOVIC, JENNIFER ANSORGER,
        TERRI MARLES, EMMA LOCKYER, AND DEAN PARTHENIS

             MIA TRAVERS-HAYWARD AND NICOLE NEUTZLING

                                                                    UNIVERSITY OF CALGARY
                                                                                  CALGARY
Ethical Use of Technology in Digital Learning Environments: Graduate Student Perspectives by Authors and Editors is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

The CC-BY license allows reusers to distribute, remix, adapt, and build upon the material in any medium or format, so long as
attribution is given to the authors of the chapters. The license allows for commercial use.

This book was produced with Pressbooks (https://pressbooks.com) and rendered with Prince.
Contents

Acknowledgements                                                                                               vii

Introduction: Co-Design in an Ethics and Technology Graduate Course                                            1

Verena Roberts, Barbara Brown, Michele Jacobsen, and Christie Hurrell

Part I: Underlying Ethical Issues and Value of Technologies: Artificial Intelligence, Social Networking
Services, 3D Printing

Chapter 1: Ethical Considerations When Using Artificial Intelligence-Based Assistive Technologies in           9

Education

Kourtney Kerr

Chapter 2: Beware: Be Aware - The Ethical Implications of Teachers Who Use Social Networking Sites (SNSs)      29

to Communicate

Heather van Streun

Chapter 3: From Consumers to Prosumers: How 3D Printing is Putting Us in the Driver's Seat for Creation        44

and the Ethical Considerations that Accompany this Shift.

How 3D Printing is Putting Us in the Driver's Seat for Creation and the Ethical Considerations that Accompany
this Shift

Nicole Neutzling

Part II: Promoting Equity in Personalized Learning Contexts: Academic Resource Sharing, Adaptive
Learning Systems, STEM, Assistive Technologies

Chapter 4: Ethical Issues in Academic Resource Sharing                                                         63

Jeff Lowry

Chapter 5: Adaptive Learning Systems in Modern Classrooms                                                      74

Simo Zarkovic

Chapter 6: STEM Beyond the Acronym: Ethical Considerations in Standardizing STEM Education in K-12             87

Jennifer Ansorger

Chapter 7: Considerations of Equitable Standards in the Implementation of Assistive Technology                 104

Terri Marles

Part III: Nurturing Ethical Awareness in Institutional Contexts: Admissions and Communications

Chapter 8: Who Gets In? Examining Ethics and Equity in Post-Secondary Admissions                               119

Emma Lockyer

Chapter 9: To What Extent Does Fake News Influence Our Ability to Communicate in Learning                      128

Organizations?

Dean Parthenis
Acknowledgements

We would like to thank the Taylor Institute of Teaching and Learning at the University of Calgary for providing a
scholarship of teaching and learning grant to support this pilot project and develop an open educational resource.
We appreciated the project team from the University of Calgary, including Christie Hurrell, Director Lab NEXT, Libraries
and Cultural Resources, for her expertise in Open Education and Pressbooks; Dr. Michele Jacobsen, professor, Werklund
School of Education, for her expertise in educational technologies and book publications; Dr. Verena Roberts, course
instructor who took the lead in chapter development and co-design with students in her class; and Dr. Barbara Brown
for the design of the program and for promoting authentic learning opportunities and encouraging innovative pedagogy.
We are indebted to Mia Travers-Hayward and Nicole Neutzling for working tirelessly as research assistants for over
eight months and managing the editing and publication process.
We were pleased to involve a professional copyeditor to review the book prior to publication. Thank you to Robert Brown
for creating the book cover. The Cover Photo: Colourbox.com was selected to illustrate the balance that is needed when
navigating multiple ethical perspectives and technological advancements.
Finally, this project would not have been possible without the dedication and perseverance of the students in the
Master's of Education, Leading and Learning in a Digital Age Program (2019-20) who contributed chapters to this book
and found time even after they finished the program to engage in the process of reviewing, updating and editing their
chapter contributions. Thank you to all of the authors for their chapters, and everyone who contributed to this open
educational resource!

                                                                                                                                                          Acknowledgements | vii
Introduction: Co-Design in an Ethics and

Technology Graduate Course

VERENA ROBERTS, BARBARA BROWN, MICHELE JACOBSEN, AND CHRISTIE HURRELL

Leading and Learning in a Digital Age (also referred to as the digital age program) is a four-course graduate certificate
offered at the Werklund School of Education that can be completed as a stand-alone credential or as one of the steps
towards a Master of Education Interdisciplinary degree. The digital age program provides students with opportunities
to examine the complexities of leading and learning in inclusive and high-quality digital learning environments. While
completing this graduate certificate, students must develop and critically assess authentic interdisciplinary and
technology-rich learning designs and environments, demonstrate technological fluency and competencies in
technological literacies, advocate for high-quality digital learning environments informed by understanding of current
trends and issues in the field, and develop teaching and learning practices in school and other workplace contexts
that engage and empower learners and promote active citizenry in a participatory and digital age. The four courses
in this graduate certificate are offered in the following sequence: (1) Interdisciplinary Learning and Technology, (2)
Technological Literacies, (3) Ethics and Technology, and (4) Leading in a Digital Age. The courses are interconnected
and provide a scaffolded pathway for learning within an online community based on Scardamalia and Bereiter's (2014)
knowledge-building principles. The chapters in this book result from an assignment that was part of the third course in
the program; however, the development of the knowledge-building community started in the first course and continued
through to the third, when the students started to co-design this e-book. Following the completion of the digital age
program, the students, their instructors, the academic coordinator for the program, and a research team remained
dedicated to helping the students share the products of their co-design and learning in an open access format.

The Concept of Co-Design

The foundations of co-design can be attributed to Gee's principles of learning design, which empower learners as active
agents (producers) of knowledge rather than viewing them as recipients (consumers) of knowledge. According to Jahnke
et al., (2020), the term `co-design' connects to co-operative design, and in their study exploring student engagement in
group work in higher education contexts, they describe co-design as a way for students to become active agents of their
learning and to exceed the expectations of the instructor and the learning intentions outlined in the course. Similarly,
in the digital age program, we used `co-design' to describe the participatory pedagogy used by the instructors as well as
the expectation that students would be active agents of their learning.

Within current research literature, the oft-cited research on co-design focuses on small collaborative groups that
design for a class or professional learning experience (Roschelle et al., 2006). While limited in scope, current research
on co-designing digital open learning experiences does describe the importance of situated context when examining
co-designing learning processes, the influence of reflective learning practices, and the roles of instructors and students
in the learning process (Barbera et al., 2017). In addition, Sanders and Stappers (2008) describe the implications of the
shift from user-centred design to co-designing as a participatory pedagogical process.

Practical examples of co-design as an open participatory pedagogical practice are found in the literature (Barbera
et al., 2017; Paskevicius & Irvine, 2019; Roberts, 2019). Examples from practice on how instructors have co-designed
student learning experiences include DeRosa and Robison's (2017) case studies that describe authentic and meaningful
student projects and assignments and The Graduate Centre Learning Collective's (2017) handbook that describes
student-centred learning and teaching practices. The open-practice-focused literature identifies an increase in student

                                                                                                    Introduction: Co-Design in an Ethics and Technology Graduate
                                                                                                                                                                             Course | 1
engagement when students are active participants in the design and construction of a course syllabus, pressbook,
wikipedia entry, or video (Hilton & Wiley, 2019; Paskevicius & Irvine, 2019).

Characteristics of co-design that informed the learning activities in the ethics and technology course:

   Assignments are designed to intentionally involve students as participatory partners in the learning process and in
      creating final learning products.

   Educators and students collaboratively personalize and contextualize their learning pathways and connect their
      learning to the course/project learning outcomes.

   Educators and students share responsibility for the design of conditions for multiple forms of engagement,
      representation, and expression.

   Iterative and continuous feedback loops and processes, which are responsive to learner's needs while ensuring
      students meet the learning outcomes, are used by educators, peers, and other experts.

   Group memory and knowledge building are a collective responsibility and open endeavour (Bereiter & Scardamalia,
      2010; Hendricks et al., 2019; Jacobsen, 2010; Jacobsen & Friesen, 2011; Jenkins, et al., 2016; Thomas & Seely Brown,
      2011; Roberts, 2019).

In current SoTL research, there are examples of student-instructor partnerships that consider how to engage post-
secondary students in collaborative, authentic, and relevant participatory learning opportunities to promote shared
responsibility for learning (Cook-Sather et al., 2014; Hill et al., 2019). Researchers also demonstrate positive impacts of
open educational resources on student learning (Colvard et al., 2018). There is both promise and possibility in studying
co-design as a participatory pedagogy in higher education, whereby instructors build upon initial course designs
through collaborative engagement with graduate students to co-design individual learning pathways and to engage in
new approaches to knowledge building.

The Open Learning Design

In the Ethics and Technology course, students examined safe and ethical uses of technology in digital learning
environments. Students explored the ubiquitous influence and complexities of technology in a participatory culture and
the evolving issues that confront communities. Students also explored how elements of a participatory culture and the
ethical implications involved, can serve to support and change how curriculum outcomes are approached and how to
navigate and lead in a complex culture where the line between consumers and producers is blurring. At the beginning
of the course, graduate students were invited to choose a personally relevant issue in Ethics in Education to examine in
more depth. As the course proceeded, the students examined the literature, reflected on their readings and assignments
from earlier coursework, reflected on their professional practice and experience, and then started to develop their open
Pressbooks chapter.

The process for the co-design of the chapters in this book included the following iterative design, which took place
during the course and continued for six months following the completion of the course and program: instructor-
designed learning activity to model collaborative knowledge building, an initial individual student response, peer
feedback loops, reflection, instructor formative assessment, initial draft, external reviews, cycles of edits, and then final
publication.

2 | Introduction: Co-Design in an Ethics and Technology Graduate Course
Overview Framework for the Ethics of Open Education

Each author used a common framework as a lens for analyzing the ethical issue selected as the topic for their chapter. A
common theoretical frame for analysis provided a through line for the learning community. Farrow's (2016) comparison
of relevant and current ethical research policies and guidelines provides a framework in which to consider the ethics
of researching in open learning contexts, and this course used that framework as a guide to support the learners in
considering multiple ethical perspectives and specific ethical guidelines for completing research in academic contexts.

This graduate course focused primarily on the safe and ethical use of technology in digital learning environments. The
course was organized according to four topics based on Farrow's (2016) Framework for the Ethics of Open Education.

The four topics were:

Topic 1: Full Disclosure of Ethical Topics in Digital Learning Environments.

Topic 2: Privacy, Data and Personal Security, and Informed Consent.

Topic 3: Avoiding Harm, Minimizing Risk and Integrity.

Topic 4: Respect for Participant Autonomy and Independence.

Students were asked to review, analyze, and synthesize each topic from three meta-ethical theoretical positions:
deontological, consequentialist, and virtue ethical (Farrow, 2016).

A deontological ethical position focuses on duties and responsibilities, and it emphasizes moral obligation and the rule-
based nature of morality. As a result, deontological theories focus on the rules, cultural expectations, and consequences
of these guiding principles. Some examples of the deontological position include religious rules about unacceptable and
acceptable behaviour. Non-religious examples of this position include respecting authority and participant rights to
informed consent.

A consequentialist ethical position focuses on doing what is objectively `right' in terms of the wider context rather
than what is necessarily best for oneself. There are different perspectives about which `right' consequence is actually
desirable. Hence, consequentialism focuses on the perceived outcomes of one's conduct and a greater balance of good
over evil. Some examples of the consequentialist position include legalizing public education policies to send children
back to school during a pandemic.

Finally, a virtuous ethical position focuses on emphasizing the importance of virtue, character, and experience in acting
ethically and in accordance with one's nature and or character. As a result, a virtuous position emphasizes one's moral
character. Some examples of a virtues-based ethical position include those who recognize morality as a holistic and
developmental process, such as teachers who choose to use social media to share their classroom experiences and
practice with others.

Designing an Open Pressbook Chapter

Each student had the opportunity to create and co-design (with their instructor, peers, academic coordinator, and
other faculty members that were part of the project) one chapter in the collaborative open Pressbook. The chapters are
intended to inform other students and learners worldwide as a result of the addition of the creative commons license to
the chapters which make the Pressbook openly accessible to all. The chapters in this open educational resource (OER)
were co-designed using a participatory pedagogy with the intention to share and mobilize knowledge with a broader

                                                                                   Introduction: Co-Design in an Ethics and Technology Graduate Course | 3
audience. Pressbooks is a sustainable and openly shared digital publishing tool used to create an openly licensed digital
textbook that current and future students can reuse, revise, and remix with others.

This Pressbook was created with support from Libraries and Cultural Resources, University of Calgary and Open
Education Alberta, and may serve as a model that can be used in other graduate courses. Librarians can provide
guidance and instruction to students about the practical and theoretical issues involved in finding, using, and remixing
openly licensed materials, and can furnish students with an understanding of the links between intellectual property,
copyright, and licensing (Bradlee & VanScoy, 2019). These issues are crucial to building students' understanding of their
rights and responsibilities as participants in the scholarly conversation as both consumers and contributors, and also
help broaden their understanding of how scholarly works are produced. Additionally, libraries often have expertise in
providing repositories to house pressbooks, preserving them long term, and increasing their discoverability.

Pressbook Chapters

All the authors were students in the ethics and technology course that was part of the digital age program. The
authors engaged in knowledge-building discourse with their peers during the course, and this was strengthened by their
professional experiences and considerations for the ethical implications of technology use ranging from K-12 through
to university and professional settings.

Underlying Ethical Issues and Value of Technologies: Artificial Intelligence, Social Networking Services, 3D Printing

The first three chapters in the book discuss specific ethical considerations related to technologies such as Artificial
Intelligence (AI) , social networking services (SNS), and 3D printing. Kerr's chapter considers to what extent students
and teachers can be affected by Artificial Intelligence (AI) Based Assistive Technologies. Specifically, Kerr suggests the
potential benefits for students when AI is used judiciously and ethically by teachers in K-12 learning contexts. Then, van
Streum's chapter contextualizes the prevalent teacher use of social networking sites (SNS) as a means to communicate
with parents and community. This chapter examines why teachers might want to communicate with SNS, and what the
ethical implications can be for themselves and others. Finally, Neutzling challenges educators to consider the potential
of learners as creators, of using 3D printers as a catalyst for the shift away from consumption and towards creating
and collaboratively building knowledge. The authors all examine research and evidence-based practices with regard to
ethics and technology issues, and all reflect on the process of assessing the value of a web resource along with ways to
effectively engage users with the underlying ethical issues for any such resource.

Promoting Equity in Personalized Learning Contexts: Academic Resource Sharing, Adaptive Learning Systems,
STEM, Assistive Technologies

The next four chapters shift to a broader discussion of resource sharing, adaptive learning systems, STEM, and
assistive technologies. The authors in these chapters explore the challenges and opportunities, and the strategies, for
educational software; discuss links between designers, users, and other stakeholders; and identify the ethical issues that
emerge. Lowry's chapter illustrates how academic integrity may influence the concept of academic resource sharing
(ARS) in higher education contexts. This chapter highlights multiple ARS examples used primarily by students which has
ignited, and continues to ignite, tension over academic honesty, plagiarism, copyright laws, and collaborative learning.
Next, Zarkovic considers the ethical implications for adaptive learning systems. He asserts the importance of humans
in understanding how to integrate ALS in educational contexts. Then, Ansoger explores the past and future potential of
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM) in K-12 learning contexts. Finally, Marles describes the importance
of using Alberta's Learning and Technology Framework Policy to ensure equity when using Assistive Technologies
in K-12 schools. This chapter advocates for the affordances educational technology can provide to equalize learning
opportunities for students with special needs. The four chapters in this section amplify the need for more ethical

4 | Introduction: Co-Design in an Ethics and Technology Graduate Course
considerations of how to consider the potential for educational technologies in order to promote equity in personalized
learning contexts.

Nurturing Ethical Awareness in Institutional Contexts: Admissions and Communications

The final two chapters discuss admissions and communications that need to be considered from an institutional
perspective. First, Lockyer's chapter considers to what extent educational technology has influenced the current
admissions processes in higher education. She emphasizes the possible inequalities along with ethical considerations
to help future students and institutions. Finally, Partenis's chapter considers how fake news can influence educational
organizational culture and policy. This chapter considers how organizational leadership teams can communicate by
considering clear, transparent, and factual messages in order to promote factual shared knowledge within learning
communities. The authors of the final two chapters discuss how to nurture ethical awareness in educational
environments and the value of making use of digital media in relationship to admissions and news/communications.

In each of the nine chapters, the authors discuss the connection to the value of technology in education, and practical
possibilities of learning technologies for inclusive, participatory, democratic, and pluralistic educational paradigms.
Farrow's ( 2016) Framework for the Ethics of Open Education guided the learners with their writing as they consider
emerging topics in the ethics of educational technology. The chapters within this Pressbook were written by the
graduate students while they were in the #EdTechEthics course in the digital age program; however, the Pressbook
itself was edited and published as a result of the collaborative efforts of multiple researchers, educators, librarians, and
students from the Werklund School of Education, and Libraries and Cultural Resources. We are delighted to share these
ideas, and to model the process of open learning design by amplifying the potential of connecting open educational
resources (writing an open Pressbook) with the open participatory practices (co-designing Pressbook chapters). Enjoy!

References

Barbera, E., Garcia, I., & Fuertes-Alpiste, M. (2017). A co-design process microanalysis: Stages and facilitators of an
   inquiry-based and technology-enhanced learning scenario. International Review of Research in Open and Distributed
   Learning, 18(6), 104-126. https://doi.org/10.19173/irrodl.v18i6.2805

Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (2010) A brief history of knowledge building. Canadian Journal of Learning and Technology,
   36(1), 1-6. https://doi.org/10.21432/T2859M

Braddlee, D., & VanScoy, A. (2019). Bridging the chasm: Faculty support roles for academic librarians in the adoption of
   open educational resources. College & Research Libraries, 80(4), 426. https://doi.org/10.5860/crl.80.4.426

DeRosa R., & Robison S. (2017). From OER to open pedagogy: Harnessing the power of open. In: Jhangiani R. and Biswas-
   Diener R (eds.), Open. London: Ubiquity Press. https://doi.org/10.5334/bbc.i

Farrow, R. (2016). A Framework for the Ethics of Open Education. Open Praxis, 8(2), 93-109. https://openpraxis.org/
index.php/OpenPraxis/article/view/291

Gee, J. P. (2004). Learning by design: Games as learning machines. Interactive Educational Multimedia, 8, 15-23.

Gee, J. P. (2005). Learning by design: Good video games as learning machines. E-Learning, 2(1), 5-16.

Hendricks, C., Jhangiani, R., Rosen, J.R., Smale, M.A., DeRosa, R. Morris, S.M., Rorabaugh, P., Stommel, J., Open Education
   Group, & Wiley, D. (2019). Engaging learners with OER. In L. R. Lys and W. M. Meinke (Eds.), UH OER Publishing Guide
   (pp. 183-240). University of Hawaii. http://pressbooks-dev.oer.hawaii.edu/uhoerpubguide/

                                                                                   Introduction: Co-Design in an Ethics and Technology Graduate Course | 5
Hill, J. Thomas, C., & Brown, B. (2019). Research assistant as partner: Collective leadership to facilitate co-production.
   International Journal for Students as Partners, 3(2), 129-138. https://doi.org/10.15173/ijsap.v3i2.3674

Hilton, J., & Wiley, D. (2018). Defining OER-enabled pedagogy. The International Review of Research in Open and
   Distributed Learning. http://doi.org/19. 10.19173/irrodl.v19i4.3601.

Jacobsen, M., & Friesen, S. (2011). Web exclusive: Hands on vs. hands up: Technology-enabled knowledge building in high
   school. Education Canada, 51(3). https://www.edcan.ca/articles/web-exclusive-hands-on-vs-hands-up-technology-
   enabled-knowledge-building-in-high-school/

Jacobsen, M. (2010). Teaching in a participatory digital world. Education Canada, 50(3), 13-17. https://www.edcan.ca/
   articles/teaching-in-a-participatory-digital-world/

Jenkins, H., Ito, M., & Boyd, D. (2016). Participatory culture in a networked age: A conversation on youth, learning,
   commerce and politics. Polity Press.

Jahnke, I., Meinke-Kroll, M., Todd, M., & Nolte, A. (2020). Exploring artifact-generated learning with digital technologies:
   Advancing active learning with co-design in higher education across disciplines. Technology, Knowledge and
   Learning. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10758-020-09473-3

Martin, J., Spader, K., & Johnson, J. (2018). 13 principles of good learning in games--Applied to teaching. Montreal, QC:
   Pressbooks

Paskevicius, M., & Irvine, V., (2019). Open education and learning design: Open pedagogy in praxis. Journal of Interactive
   Media in Education, 2019(1), p.10. http://doi.org/10.5334/jime.512

Roberts, V. (2019). Open educational practices (OEP): Design-based research on expanded high school learning
   environments, spaces, and experiences. (Doctoral dissertation). PRISM Werklund School of Education, University of
   Calgary, Calgary, Canada.

Sanders, E.B.N., & Stappers, P.J. (2008) Co-creation and the new landscapes of design. CoDesign: International Journal of
   CoCreation in Design and the Arts, 4:1, 5-18. https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/15710880701875068

Sarmiento, P. (2015). Co-design: A central approach to the inclusion of people with disabilities. Revista de la Facultad de
   Medicina. 63. 149-154. http://doi.org/10.15446/revfacmed.v63n3sup.49345.

Thomas, D., & Seely-Brown, J. (2011). A new culture of learning: Cultivating the imagination for a world of constant change.
   CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform.

6 | Introduction: Co-Design in an Ethics and Technology Graduate Course
PART I: UNDERLYING ETHICAL ISSUES AND
VALUE OF TECHNOLOGIES: ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE, SOCIAL NETWORKING
SERVICES, 3D PRINTING

                                                                                                         Part I: Underlying Ethical Issues and Value of Technologies:
                                                                                                Artificial Intelligence, Social Networking Services, 3D Printing | 7
Chapter 1: Ethical Considerations When Using
Artificial Intelligence-Based Assistive Technologies
in Education

KOURTNEY KERR

Author Note

There are no conflicts of interest to disclose.
Correspondence concerning this chapter should be addressed to kourtney.kerr1@ucalgary.ca.

 Educational Assistive Technologies That Incorporate Artificial Intelligence

As a society, we want to simplify tasks whenever possible. Individuals who use technological devices to make life
easier are likely engaging with artificial intelligence (AI), which has computers performing tasks that traditionally
required human intelligence (Congressional Research Service, 2018). Educational technologies continue to develop to
assist student learning and achievement, and the integration of AI is becoming more common. The type of artificial
intelligence with which individuals regularly interact is called `weak AI,' as there are only one or two tasks that this AI
performs (Johnson, 2020), and it is often in the form of machine learning. A video from the organization Code.org [New
Tab] relays how AI operates and functions in terms of machine learning.

Machine learning relies on software to gain knowledge through experience. All machine learning programs are task
specific. Such a program analyzes thousands of data sets to build an algorithm from patterns that would be less obvious
to humans, and the algorithm is then adjusted based on whether or not the machine achieved its goal (HubSpot, 2017;
Zeide, 2019). This cyclical process is then repeated, and the data sets in the program expand, which some describe as
the program getting smarter. The algorithms on which many of these technologies operate are typically not disclosed to
the users, but often student data and information is used to run them. AI-based assistive technologies that use weak AI
are the ones that will be examined in this chapter, based on the question: What are the ethical considerations of using
AI in the form of assistive technologies, and how are teachers and students affected, both positively and negatively, by
the integration of these tools? This chapter will discuss different ethical concerns and possible solutions, along with the
precautions teachers can take before implementing them in the classroom, and the ways in which students and teachers
can use AI-based assistive technology tools to promote positive educational experiences.

Recent years have seen a marked increase in the number of products that use machine learning. AI is becoming more
accessible to students, as mobile devices contain a voice assistant, and many devices found in technology-filled homes
are programmed with similar functionality (Touretzky et al., 2019). As we continue to use them, the programs within
these devices are always learning and always monitoring our choices. (Popenici & Kerr, 2017). Even though these systems
are able to perform a wide array of functions to help make our lives easier, they do not have the ability to understand
why we request these tasks; however, if we plan to use these programs in an ethical manner, we should know why they
do what we ask of them (Atlantic Re:think, 2018). The ability of these programs to improve our lives is what makes them
a beneficial technology to our everyday experiences, as well as our education systems. Table 1.1 identifies how AI-based
assistive technologies incorporate multiple intelligences through the tasks they are able to perform.

                                                                                                               Chapter 1: Ethical Considerations When Using Artificial
                                                                                                         Intelligence-Based Assistive Technologies in Education | 9
Table 1.1 Summary of the multiple intelligences that AI-based assistive technology can and cannot perform, as described in Roberts
                                                                                     (2018).

Intelligences that AI-based assistive technology is capable of  Intelligences that AI-based assistive technology cannot
                                   performing                                                    perform

 Linguistic - writing and speaking                              Pedagogical - teaching others
 Logical/Mathematical - algorithms designed to solve            Intrapersonal - engaging in metacognition
                                                                 Existential - understanding themselves and the world
    problems
 Spatial - art creation; image recognition                         around them
 Musical - recognizing notes and composing
 Interpersonal - conversations with smart assistants

The inclusion of AI technology in the classroom can alleviate some aspects of a teacher's workload and can also benefit
student learning and achievement. Some AI that is available as assistive technology can be chosen and "tailored to fit
individual student rates and styles of learning . . . but not replace the work of human teachers" (Johnson, 2020, para.
17), because teachers are better equipped to determine which teaching methods will meet the needs of each student.
Teachers can work with machine learning technology to solve problems and challenges, and when used correctly, it
can help their students become better learners and members of society (Atlantic Re:think, 2018; HubSpot, 2017). The
following video examines how AI has developed to deliver personalized experiences and what considerations should be
made as this technology continues to advance.

                                      Video: Advanced Infographic, Hot Knife Digital Media Ltd., 2017

        A Vimeo element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
        https://openeducationalberta.ca/educationaltechnologyethics/?p=34

Appendix A is adapted from Farrow's (2017) "Uncompleted Framework" (p. 103), which focuses on normative ethics in
relation to educational research, and provides a summary of each section in this chapter. It can be used as a reference
for the ethical considerations that teachers should make when using AI-based assistive technology with their students
to promote enhanced learning experiences.

10 | Chapter 1: Ethical Considerations When Using Artificial Intelligence-Based Assistive Technologies in Education
   Full Disclosure for Using AI-Based Assistive Technology in Educational
                                         Settings

Identifying Assistive Technology Tools

Teachers are constantly searching for methods to enhance students' educational experiences, because all students have
different requirements for their learning. Teachers often use digital technologies to give students access to various
resources and materials to help them succeed and to support their diverse learning needs (McRae, 2015). Since assistive
technologies are available for all students, these tools can engage students and assist teachers in meeting curricular
goals, allowing them to be easily integrated into classroom environments (Sturgeon Public Schools, 2019). The majority
of current educational artificial intelligence is provided through various software formats, making this technology more
manageable and accessible in school settings (Zeide, 2019). Assistive technologies that use AI can also "significantly
enhance student learning compared with other learning technologies or classroom instruction" (Holstein et al., 2018,
p. 155), making them effective at improving student achievement. There are many different types of AI-based assistive
technology, including applications (apps), extensions, and web-based programs; this allows students and teachers to
choose the ones with which they prefer to work. Examples of these tools are identified in Figure 1.1.

                                                                                                                                                          Figure 1.1 Various options
                                                                                                                                                          for assistive technology
                                                                                                                                                          to direct personalized
                                                                                                                                                          learning. Created by K.
                                                                                                                                                          Kerr (2020).

All classrooms are diverse in the teaching and learning that occurs within them, and each one is personalized in
some way. The inclusion of assistive technologies is one method for diversifying instruction and creating personalized
learning environments; however, these tools cannot function in isolation and depend on teacher support (Bulger, 2016).
Although expert teachers may seamlessly find ways to utilize these assistive technologies to maximize learning and
resources, educators should remember that most of these "products are not field tested before adoption in schools and
offer limited to no research on [their] efficacy" (Bulger, 2016, p. 11). This notion can raise concerns about how student
data is being used or manipulated, and there is debate around the inclusion of AI-based assistive technologies in the
classroom; while they have the "potential to revolutionize learning" (Bulger, 2016, p. 3), there is uncertainty regarding

                           Chapter 1: Ethical Considerations When Using Artificial Intelligence-Based Assistive Technologies in Education | 11
whether or not they can improve educational experiences and student achievement. As a result, AI-based systems
should undergo more rigorous trials before being used in education, there should be standards in place for auditing
AI systems, and ethical codes for using AI should be held to a high standard of accountability (Regan & Jesse, 2018).
Teachers could also examine the following circumstances in which ethical concerns increase when using personalized
learning systems:

 1. Teacher control or understanding of the program, app, or extension decreases
2. Integration of the data collected by the company and classroom activities increases
3. The type and amount of student data collected by the company increases
4. Any data is used to refine software programs (Regan & Jesse, 2018)

Connecting with Policies and Procedures

School divisions in Alberta have policies and procedures that identify the need for students to have access to technology
through networks and devices, with the main goal being to enhance learning through curricular connections. Many
school divisions within Alberta are revising policies and procedures that are outdated or insufficient, to account for
continually evolving educational environments that incorporate technology to enhance student learning (Wild Rose
School Division, 2017). This acknowledgement is significant because of the ongoing modifications that could be made
to accommodate these changes in technology and the ways in which technology can be used in educational settings.
In some cases, school boards wish to collaborate with innovators in the technology sector to enhance the integration
of technology in education (Edmonton Public Schools, 2020b). School divisions should ensure that student and staff
security and privacy is maintained, and that data collection and usage is transparent, while integrating the use of
technology. In doing so, school divisions are validating that their intention is to provide authentic experiences and to
inform users out of respect for those using personal or division-approved devices within the classroom. This strategy
could also imply that any assistive technologies permitted for a division's use are scrutinized prior to their introduction,
but that those chosen by a classroom teacher may not likewise be approved. As a result, teachers who choose a variety of
assistive technologies for their classrooms may want to ensure that students and parents are fully aware of any privacy
or security issues that could arise.

Students are also learning strategies they can use to protect their personal information and to maintain their safety
when using division technology. This approach promotes independence and integrity in students as they become more
responsible for their own digital undertakings. The incorporation of a variety of assistive technologies in the classroom
promotes "ongoing support and opportunities for students to demonstrate their achievement" (Edmonton Public School
Board, 2020d, Expectations section, para. 8), which is why teachers may find their inclusion beneficial. Since no students
learn in exactly the same manner, teachers may want to apply their professional judgement to the various assistive
technologies they choose to use with students. This judgement often involves ethical considerations that promote
positive consequences within the classroom, such as allowing students to learn in a way that best suits their needs and
experiences.

Teachers Using Assistive Technologies

The use of technology to enhance planning, support teaching, and improve assessment is also supported by policy, and
could be a component of appropriate standards of practice for teachers in Alberta (Edmonton Public School Board,
2020c). Assessment policies often identify that assessments should be bias-free, "respectful of student differences,
and reflective of the diverse student population" (Edmonton Public School Board, 2020d, Purpose section, para. 1, 3).

12 | Chapter 1: Ethical Considerations When Using Artificial Intelligence-Based Assistive Technologies in Education
Assessments that improve instruction to enhance student learning are part of responsive and ethical teaching, and this
endeavour could be supported by the use of AI-based assistive technologies. Teachers can use these types of programs
to grade student work; however, these programs do not currently apply to higher-level thinking and analysis skills,
which means that the amount of time spent on these assessments cannot yet be adjusted (Johnson, 2020).

The ethical implications of allowing a computer to grade an assignment in which critical thinking is necessary are much
greater, given the subjectivity of most written responses. Teachers are responsible for ensuring fair and equal treatment
of all learners. Since assistive technologies would remove subjectivity and grade a written response assignment from
an objective perspective, students who apply the strategies that the program recognizes as exemplary could unfairly
benefit (Barshay, 2020). When using programs that grade multiple choice questions, the amount of input required varies.
Teachers can determine which program best suits their needs and meets ethical criteria. Programs that require minimal
personal information may be the better ones to choose in order to protect student information. Teachers often need
to create an account to keep a record of student names with their scores, item analysis, and answer keys for each test,
but the decision whether to use the program could be made by teachers, based on the terms of service or privacy
policy. Other programs require teacher-created questions to be entered directly into the program along with the keyed
response, and students need to log in to answer the questions before receiving a grade. This log-in data may be used
for the purpose of benefiting the creator, or it could be sold to third-party distributors; thus, teachers may want to
verify where this information is going and share these details with students before engaging with this form of AI-based
assistive technology.

    Maintaining Privacy, Data Security, and Informed Consent when Using
                            AI-Based Assistive Technology

Meeting Expectations

Teachers at all grade levels are expected to include appropriate digital technology to meet student learning needs
(Alberta Education, 2018), which means that all teachers should become familiar with the questions, concerns, and
"debates surrounding the security and privacy of digital data...as soon no future educator will ever be separated from
its presence" (Amirault, 2019, p. 59). AI-based assistive technologies are similar to many other digital services in that
they collect and store personal information. Attempts have been made to limit the length of time personal information
is stored, along with maintaining security measures and refraining from selling information as part of a voluntary
student privacy pledge (Congressional Research Service, 2018). Since educational assistive technologies are used with
students who are minors, the concerns that arise over privacy, data security, and informed consent are ones that should
be mitigated, but there are differing opinions on how educational technology companies could be held accountable
(Regan & Jesse, 2018). Information collected about an individual should be minimized to include only information that
is required for the intended purpose and outcome (Regan & Jesse, 2018). The collection of student data should then
occur only for the purposes of promoting student engagement and achievement. Further, student data collection should
commence only once the individual knows that it is occurring and they have consented to the data collection. In a study
conducted by Beardsley et al. (2019), nearly 75% of students are "actively sharing personal data with peers, companies
and, often, publicly," (p. 1030) even though the majority of these students "know they lack knowledge of responsible data
management" (Beardsley et al., 2019, p. 1030). As a result, many students consent to the terms of use presented by a
program or application without reading through the details contained within the document.

Teachers should ensure that students understand the consequences and outcomes they could experience when using
assistive technologies in order to protect their privacy and data. Figure 1.2 displays the six privacy concerns teachers

                          Chapter 1: Ethical Considerations When Using Artificial Intelligence-Based Assistive Technologies in Education | 13
and students should be familiar with prior to engaging with digital technologies. To help protect personal information,
teachers could also ask questions about data collection and security, especially if this information is unclear. They
would then be able to determine whether or not this data collection benefits instruction or whether it is intended for
surveillance (Bulger, 2016). This strategy can help promote transparency in terms of data collection and privacy and the
impact that it has on students using these educational tools.

                                                                                                                                                          Figure 1.2 Six privacy
                                                                                                                                                          concerns identified in
                                                                                                                                                          Regan and Jesse (2018).

Tracking Information

Students are often interacting with AI-based programs in ways that reveal details about their responses to questions,
how they process information, and their overall performance, and this collection may not attest to their achievement
of learning outcomes (Bulger, 2016; Regan & Jesse, 2018). As a result, student information can be tracked in ways
that do not enhance their educational experiences. Surveillance and tracking often require the collection of detailed
information, which suggests that increased monitoring of students' activities, and the usage of data generated from
those activities, could negatively affect student and teacher engagement with assistive technologies (Regan & Jesse,
2018). A risk associated with using assistive technologies that rely on AI is that a multitude of data is now available
to track students and their progress, which could lead to a focus on performance numbers and could impede overall
student engagement or call into question teacher performance and effectiveness (Bulger, 2016). This outcome would
not be in the best interest of students or teachers, which is why tracking information through AI-based assistive
technologies could be detrimental to student achievement.

Effects on Teaching and Learning

Digital technologies should be used to support teaching and improve learning outcomes rather than to determine
teacher effectiveness (Bulger, 2016). When teachers provide access to AI-based assistive technologies for their students,
teachers may want to consider how these technologies could be used to improve teaching strategies, and if, or how,
other students could benefit from these various supports. When using assistive technologies, there is often a lack of
14 | Chapter 1: Ethical Considerations When Using Artificial Intelligence-Based Assistive Technologies in Education
transparency and increased confusion over how data is collected and used, and who has permission to access this data
(Bulger, 2016). If the information contained within the data can benefit student learning and achievement or benefit
teaching strategies, then teachers should be able to access this previously collected data. Even though educational
technology companies may intend to improve student achievement through data collection, biases can often exist or
develop with AI technologies. Bulger (2016) mentions that "[d]iscussions of student data privacy address both data and
privacy, but rarely focus on students, [and] the expectations and goals of personalized learning may not necessarily
match the interests of students, parents, teachers, or even society" (p. 20). These concerns are valid, and teachers could
decide which assistive technologies to use based on the goals for each student. If the benefits outweigh the downfalls,
and allow students to develop skills that not only help them in the classroom, but in their personal lives as well, the
assistive technology is likely suitable to use with students.

As much as teachers should be concerned about protecting student information when using assistive technologies
in the classroom, there are some benefits to assistive technologies having this information. For example, while using
predictive text or speech-to-text extensions, a student's preferences can be saved, and the assistive technology can
develop to become more accurate based on the input it receives. This process can enhance educational experiences as
learning becomes more personalized for each student interacting with assistive technologies. School divisions can also
access this information to determine which programs, apps, or extensions should be permitted to use within schools
and on division-monitored devices. Where possible, teachers should take precautions to "protect [students'] personal
information by making reasonable security arrangements against such risks as unauthorized access, collection, use,
disclosure, or destruction" (Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act, 2000, p. 42). Although students and
teachers have concerns about privacy loss in the classroom, student data will likely continue to be collected on devices
that are owned by the school division (Regan & Steeves, 2019). Greater transparency should exist about the purpose
of this collection to identify whether information is collected and maintained by only the school division to improve
student learning, or if it is shared with educational technology companies to enhance their own programs (or both).

Security and Personal Devices

Students are often encouraged to bring their own devices to school, as they are typically more familiar with them, but
when using assistive technology programs or apps that have to be installed on the device, students' personal information
and data is likely much more accessible to educational technology companies. If students use their own devices, the
privacy protection and security provided by school divisions may not exist to the same extent as it would if students
were to use a device owned by the division; however, students who operate their own devices typically use the division's
internet. This access often allows certain apps, webpages, or extensions to be blocked to protect student information,
which helps minimize the risk of data and/or security breaches. Certain programs can also be installed to protect
student data and privacy from being obtained by unauthorized companies or users.

When students use AI-based assistive technologies, the data they generate on their personal device is "transmitted to a
company who collects and stores the data, [which is then] permanently retained and tied to [that] specific, identifiable
individual" (Amirault, 2019, p. 59). Teachers should allocate time to review terms of use documents with students, and
allow them to make the choice as to whether or not they wish to download and operate certain assistive technologies
on their personal devices. If the language used in any agreements is unclear, teachers may wish to speak with someone
from the school division's technology department to gain a better understanding. Teachers could then ensure that
this information is clearly shared with students, using words they understand, so that they also know what they are
consenting to prior to using assistive technologies. Teachers could also ask for parental input before moving forward. In
order to ensure that consent is valid, a description of the potential risks and benefits should be presented in a manner
that does not elicit a specific decision from those who could be affected by the use of these technologies (Beardsley et
al., 2019; Miller & Wertherimer, 2011).

                          Chapter 1: Ethical Considerations When Using Artificial Intelligence-Based Assistive Technologies in Education | 15
"Free" Usage and Data Collection

Many AI-based assistive technologies are free of charge for students and educators, but this unpaid usage may come at
the cost of data collection (Beardsley et al., 2019). In the United States, "[w]ebsites that are collecting information from
children under the age of thirteen are required to comply with the Children's Online Privacy Protection Act" (Bourgeois,
2019, p. 141), which means that they need to do all they can to determine the age of individuals who access their sites. If
an individual is under the age of thirteen, parental consent must be provided before any information about the individual
is collected. Teachers should be cognizant of the efforts that educational technology companies make to follow this
compliance, and should be more concerned about apps, programs, or extensions that collect student data but do not
make an attempt to determine the age of students accessing these tools.
Teachers should also be aware that many companies require users to opt out if they do not want their information
to be shared; therefore, by agreeing to use their tools, implied consent has been given to data collection and sharing
(Bourgeois, 2019). If the company owns student data and information, they can choose to use this information as
outlined in a usage agreement. The question arises of whether or not educational technology companies "should be able
to use data generated by students' use of their software programs to improve those programs" (Regan & Jesse, 2018, p.
173) and make students "test subjects for development and marketing of future edtech products" (Regan & Jesse, 2018, p.
173). Teachers should examine how student data is collected and used before allowing students to interact with AI-based
assistive technologies in the classroom. In their review of educational technology companies, Regan and Jesse (2018)
identified that "these companies are amassing quite detailed information on student demographic characteristics in
their databases, as well as detailed information on student learning records" (p. 175). Although determining exactly which
data points are collected and stored by companies who create programs, applications, or extensions for the purpose of
assisting student learning could be challenging, teachers could review the details stated in user agreements to identify
how data will be used before implementing them in the classroom. Figure 1.3 suggests questions that teachers could ask
in regards to privacy and data security prior to engaging with AI-based assistive technologies.

16 | Chapter 1: Ethical Considerations When Using Artificial Intelligence-Based Assistive Technologies in Education
                                                                                                                               Figure 1.3 An infographic
                                                                                                                               displaying questions for
                                                                                                                               educators to ask before
                                                                                                                               using assistive
                                                                                                                               technology, as described
                                                                                                                               in Amirault (2019).
Chapter 1: Ethical Considerations When Using Artificial Intelligence-Based Assistive Technologies in Education | 17
 Avoiding Harm and Minimizing Risk to Students Using AI-Based Assistive
                                      Technologies

Participating Anonymously

Students may wish to remain anonymous when using technology, to minimize risks that could bring them harm;
however, AI-based assistive technologies need to collect some student information and data to support students in
their learning, making anonymity difficult to procure. If students can use an assistive technology under a guest account,
rather than creating a personal profile, this option may provide students with the anonymity they desire. Many Alberta
school divisions assign students an account that includes their first and last name, followed by the school division's
domain. Each time students log in to a division-approved device with these credentials or run a program, app, or
extension on that device, their personal information is shared or accessed, whether by the division or by educational
technology companies. When students choose to use personal devices, their ability to remain anonymous in the eyes of
the school division may exist; however, restrictions put in place by the division, "meant to protect students are much
harder--if not impossible--to enforce when [personal] devices are involved and students no longer need the school
network for access" (Cramer & Hayes, 2010, p. 41). Students' private information may also be easily accessed by creators
of assistive technologies when these tools are used on personal devices, if students do not have the proper securities in
place. As a result, students could be harmed, as their personal details are being accessed.

Many students are unaware of strategies that exist to minimize their risks when participating in a digital environment
(Beardsley et al., 2019). Teachers might want to discuss with students the details of their interaction with these
technological tools, prior to having students sign up for assistive apps, programs, or extensions. Providing access to
student information can be beneficial to student learning because the AI-based assistive technology knowledge base will
continue to develop for each user as students engage with them; however, the benefits should outweigh the downfalls
and minimize the risk of data or security breaches that could negatively impact students. The recommendation could
also be made that neither teachers nor students create a personal profile for the purpose of using AI-based assistive
technologies, unless the tool is supported by the school division, or the creation of a personal profile has been
authorized by the students' parents or the students themselves (Regan & Jesse, 2018). Students would still be able to
benefit from the use of AI-based assistive technologies without the creation of a personal profile, but the personalization
features that these tools are known for may decline. Students would also then have a greater level of protection when
working with these online programs, apps, or extensions.

Recognizing Biases

AI-based technologies may be able to remove educator biases in regards to assessing student work, but there is still
the potential for biases to exist and be unknowingly embedded by the developers of the technology, which can affect
the way AI-based assistive technologies evolve (Regan & Jesse, 2018). These biases could include suggestions for other
assistive technologies that are available for students, which could impact students in ways that discriminate based on
various personal attributes, or those that are less obvious; therefore, these biases have the potential to put students
and their personal information at risk. If students are profiled or tracked as a result of developer biases, and if student
information is used in ways that are not transparent or are not beneficial to student learning, teachers may need

18 | Chapter 1: Ethical Considerations When Using Artificial Intelligence-Based Assistive Technologies in Education
to decide if the benefits of using the technology are worth the risks, and, if so, how these risks can be minimized
(Regan & Steeves, 2019). In order to "use these systems responsibly, teachers and staff must understand not only their
benefits but also their limitations" (Zeide, 2019, Promise and Perils section, para. 8), and clear procedures should be in
place when discrepancies arise between assistive technology recommendations and teacher professional judgement.
This recommendation suggests that teachers should be aware of the benefits and consequences of AI-based assistive
technologies, and the extent to which students could be impacted, while ensuring that their own biases are not coming
into play when determining what is best for their students. Along with biases related to assessment, teachers could
also have biases regarding the assistive technology programs, platforms, or developers that they choose to use, in spite
of the availability and accessibility of other options that could better support student learning. Teachers could spend
time engaging with a variety of technologies before allowing students to do the same, in order to examine the potential
consequences of various assistive technology tools. Although this process can become time consuming, it can also
minimize or eliminate unwanted risks to students.
Another concern arises when educational technology companies gain influence over the individuals who engage with
them (Popenici & Kerr, 2017) by providing limited options for assistance. This challenge is even more significant when
students -- who are typically minors -- become influenced by these technological tools. Teachers should consider this
shift in authority, as educational technology companies are often not held accountable for their biases toward student
learning and the ways in which their assistive technologies support students' educational experiences (Zeide, 2019). As a
result of educational technology company biases and possible motivations to benefit the development of their programs,
students could be using AI-based assistive technologies in ways that do not benefit their learning and instead make
learning and achievement more challenging. Before teachers choose to include assistive technologies as supports for
teaching and learning, they may want to consider the notion that students are not volunteering to provide analytics to
educational technology companies, and they could consider whether or not the technological tools might work against
student learning (Regan & Steeves, 2019). Either of these scenarios could place students' personal information at risk
and be detrimental to their learning experiences.

Are the Risks Worth the Rewards?

As with most teaching and learning strategies, teachers are asked to determine whether the benefits are greater than
the detriments prior to introducing new strategies as part of students' educational experiences. Provided that teachers
have made this decision to the best of their abilities and in the best interest of the students, the benefits that can result
from the incorporation of AI-based assistive technologies can be significant. Some of these include "more sophisticated
analyses of student learning and testing, more personalized learning, more effective delivery of educational materials,
improved assessment, and more responsiveness to student needs" (Regan & Steeves, 2019, "Tech Foundation Activities"
section, para. 1). Many assistive technology tools can create these outcomes, as long as procedures are in place to
protect students from damaging situations that could arise while using these tools.

                          Chapter 1: Ethical Considerations When Using Artificial Intelligence-Based Assistive Technologies in Education | 19
  Allowing for Student Autonomy and Independence when Using AI-Based
                                 Assistive Technologies

Considering Student and Teacher Choice

When students use AI in the form of assistive technology, they should be encouraged to set their own educational
goals, which would allow them to advocate for themselves and to take more responsibility for their learning. Assistive
technology tools are likely to become more effective when students use them to achieve these educational or learning
goals, and students are able to become more autonomous when they act in an intentional manner and understand their
choices (Beardsley et al., 2019). Teachers can provide many different options in terms of the assistive technology tools
that are available, but the usage of these tools should not be mandatory if one objective is to promote student autonomy.
Students should also be able to make choices for themselves regarding the assistive technology tools they choose to
use, so that greater autonomy can be supported (Regan & Steeves, 2019). One form of AI-based assistive technology may
work very well for one student, but may not provide the best assistance for another student. As a result, students should
be allowed to voice their concerns about the tools that are offered and then be able to choose the one(s) that will help
them achieve their goals.
Holstein et al. (2019) mention that "[i]f new AI systems are to be well-received in K-12 classrooms, it is critical that
they support the needs and respect the boundaries of both teachers and students" (p. 166). Not only should students
be given the choice of which assistive technologies they use; teachers should also be able to have their voices heard
regarding which assistive technologies could be supported and utilized by their school divisions. Teachers regularly
make decisions regarding which tools will best enhance their teaching practices and which will provide the best learning
opportunities for their students, so leaving the decision about which technological tools to use in the hands of those
who are not in the classroom may provide less than mediocre educational experiences. The ability to decide how much
integration of these tools is necessary to benefit both student achievement and teacher roles and responsibilities should
also be controlled by classroom teachers. Since teachers know how best to meet the needs of their own students, they
should be permitted to find a balance between over- and under-automation and autonomy within their classrooms,
which is reflected in Figure 1.4.

                                                                                                                                                          Figure 1.4 An infographic
                                                                                                                                                          demonstrating the
                                                                                                                                                          balance between
                                                                                                                                                          automation and
                                                                                                                                                          autonomy, as described
                                                                                                                                                          in Holstein, McLaren and
                                                                                                                                                          Aleven (2019).

20 | Chapter 1: Ethical Considerations When Using Artificial Intelligence-Based Assistive Technologies in Education
Promoting Independence and Participation

Many AI-based assistive technology tools make recommendations for students based on how others with similar
data profiles previously performed (Zeide, 2019), which suggests that students could be manipulated easily by these
technologies. Understanding how assistive technology tools make these determinations is not knowledge that could
be acquired easily by teachers and students. Consequently, teachers and students should be encouraged to work
with assistive technology tools that promote self-interest and avoid unfavourable outcomes (Regan & Jesse, 2018). The
opportunity to act in such a way would further promote student independence and may lead to students engage with
AI-based technologies outside of the classroom in a much more comfortable and confident manner (Cramer & Hayes,
2010). The skills students learn while using these tools could also increase student participation and engagement with
AI-based assistive technologies. Improving teacher and student understanding of how these technological tools operate
can promote higher-level thinking and achievement, and can empower teachers and students with more knowledge to
help them as technology continues to evolve (Milanesi, 2020). When students use assistive technologies to help them
achieve their educational goals, they can receive assistance from both the technological tool and the teacher, which can
further encourage active participation and support varying student needs.

                                       Conclusion

As technologies that use a form of artificial intelligence become more prevalent in society, the education system could
see a marked increase in the inclusion of AI-based technologies in the classroom. Assistive technologies that use a form
of AI may increase student engagement more than assistive technologies that do not include an AI component. Many
programs, apps, or extensions that constitute AI-based assistive technologies do not undergo rigorous trials before
being implemented in schools, so teachers and students are often test subjects for educational technology companies
that design and administer these tools.

Technology inclusion is becoming an increased priority in many school divisions, so the maintenance of teacher and
student privacy and security when interacting with AI-based assistive technologies should be a primary concern.
Student information that is collected or shared with educational technology companies should be minimized, and should
only include information that allows for improvements to be made to student engagement, learning, and achievement.

Teachers can help students protect their personal data by ensuring that personal profiles -- to which educational
technology companies have access -- contain as little identifiable information as possible. Parental support for the use of
assistive technologies could also be obtained, and school divisions could generate student log-in information that does
not expose students' identities. Students using personal devices should take additional measures to ensure that their
privacy and security is maintained. If student performance or information is tracked by school divisions or educational
technology companies, teacher effectiveness could be questioned, and biases based on profiling could prevent students
from achieving to the best of their abilities.

Allowing students to choose the assistive technology tools that could help them achieve their educational goals can
promote greater independence and autonomy. When students can act in ways that promote their self-interest and help
them achieve success, they are more likely to become engaged with technology and to have a better understanding
of how it can assist them in their lives beyond the classroom. Respecting student boundaries and limitations when
working with technology is important, as is allowing teachers to invoke their professional judgement when identifying
the assistive technology tools that work best for their students and in their classrooms. Before implementing assistive
technologies that operate with a form of artificial intelligence, the benefits to student learning should be clear, along
with the potential drawbacks to teaching and learning that could result.

                          Chapter 1: Ethical Considerations When Using Artificial Intelligence-Based Assistive Technologies in Education | 21
                            Questions for Future Research

   As teachers and school divisions gain valuable knowledge about the intentions of educational technology
      companies, should more control be given to learners and educators to make decisions about which AI-based
      assistive technologies are best for their own learning experiences?

   Considering the breadth of assistive technologies that are available, should school divisions or other educational
      bodies create a list of approved assistive technologies for teachers, in order to prevent teacher burn-out or
      lawsuits due to misuse?

   Many teachers are not experts in every educational technology used for learning, so in what ways can professional
      learning for teachers align with the ever-evolving world of AI in education?

   As AI continues to advance, what expectations will arise regarding the use of AI technology to run assistive
      programs, applications, or extensions in educational settings?

   In what ways can school divisions and educational technology companies provide greater transparency about the
      amount and type of data they collect, along with how/why it is collected and how this data is used?

   In what ways can teachers and students be empowered to make decisions about the collection of data, and also to
      challenge the data that has been collected on them?

                                        References

Alberta Education (2018). Teaching quality standard. https://education.alberta.ca/media/3739620/standardsdoc-tqs-
   _fa-web-2018-01-17.pdf

Amirault, R.J. (2019). The next great educational technology debate: Personal data, its ownership, and privacy. The
   Quarterly Review of Distance Education, 20(2), 55-70. http://search.ebscohost.com.ezproxy.lib.ucalgary.ca/
   login.aspx?direct=true&db=ehh&AN=139819560&site=ehost-live

Atlantic Re:think. (2018, June 29). Hewlett packard enterprise -- Moral code: The ethics of AI [Video]. YouTube.
   https://youtu.be/GboOXAjGevA

Barshay, J. (2020, January 27). Reframing ed tech to save teachers time and reduce workloads. The Hechinger Report.
   https://hechingerreport.org/ai-in-education-reframing-ed-tech-to-save-teachers-time-and-reduce-workloads/

Beardsley, M., Santos, P., Hernandez-Leo, D., & Michos, K. (2019). Ethics in educational technology research: Informing
   participants on data sharing risks. British Journal of Educational Technology, 50(3), 1019-1034. https://doi.org/10.1111/
   bjet.12781

Bourgeois, D. (2019). The ethical and legal implications of information systems information systems for business and
   beyond. In D. Bourgeois (Ed), Information Systems for Business and Beyond. Pressbooks: Open Textbook Site.
   https://bus206.pressbooks.com/chapter/chapter-12-the-ethical-and-legal-implications-of-information-systems/

Bulger, M. (2016). Personalized learning: The conversations we're not having. Data and Society Research Institute.
   https://datasociety.net/pubs/ecl/PersonalizedLearning_primer_2016.pdf

Code.org. (2019, December 2). AI: What is machine learning? [Video]. YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/
   watch?v=OeU5m6vRyCk

22 | Chapter 1: Ethical Considerations When Using Artificial Intelligence-Based Assistive Technologies in Education
Congressional Research Service. (2018). Artificial intelligence (AI) and education. https://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/
   IF10937.pdf

Cramer, M., & Hayes, G. R. (2010). Acceptable use of technology in schools: Risks, policies, and promises. IEEE Pervasive
   Computing, 9(3), 37-44. https://doi.org/10.1109/mprv.2010.42

Edmonton Public School Board. (2020a, January 29). Appropriate use of division technology. https://epsb.ca/ourdistrict/
   policy/d/dkb-ar/

Edmonton Public School Board. (2020b, January 29). Division technology. https://epsb.ca/ourdistrict/policy/d/dk-bp/

Edmonton Public School Board (2020c, January 29). Division technology standards. https://epsb.ca/ourdistrict/policy/
   d/dk-ar/

Edmonton Public School Board. (2020d, January 29). Student assessment, achievement and growth. https://epsb.ca/
   ourdistrict/policy/g/gk-bp/

Farrow, R. (2016). A framework for the ethics of open education. Open Praxis, 8(2), 93-109. https://doi.org/10.5944/
   openpraxis.8.2.291

Freedom of information and protection of privacy act. Revised Statutes of Alberta 2000, Chapter F-25.
   https://www.qp.alberta.ca/documents/Acts/F25.pdf

Holstein, K., McLaren, B., & Aleven, V. (2018). Student learning benefits of a mixed reality teacher awareness tool in
   AI-enhanced classrooms. In C. P. Ros, R. Martnez-Maldonado, H. U. Hoppe, R. Luckin, M. Mavrikis, K. Porayska-
   Pomsta, B. McLaren, & B. du Boulay (Eds), Artificial Intelligence in Education Part 1 (pp. 154-168). Springer International.
   https://doi.org/10.1007 /978-3-319-93843-1

Holstein, K., McLaren, B., & Aleven, V. (2019). Designing for complementarity: Teacher and student needs for
   orchestration support in AI-enhanced classrooms. In S. Isotani, E. Milln, A. Ogan, P. Hastings, B. McLaren, & R.
   Luckin (Eds), Artificial Intelligence in Education Part 1 (pp. 157-171). Springer International. https://doi.org/10.1007/
   978-3-030-23204-7

Hot Knife Digital Media ltd. (2017, May 12). Advanced infographic [Video]. Vimeo. https://vimeo.com/217148732

HubSpot. (2017, January 30). What is artificial intelligence (or machine learning)? [Video]. YouTube. https://youtu.be/
   mJeNghZXtMo

Johnson, G. (2020, January 12). In praise of AI's inadequacies. Times Colonist. https://www.timescolonist.com/opinion/
   op-ed/geoff-johnson-in-praise-of-ai-s-inadequacies-1.24050519

McRae, P. (2015). Growing up digital: Teacher and principal perspectives on digital technology, health and learning

[Infographic].  https://www.teachers.ab.ca/SiteCollectionDocuments/ATA/About/Education%20Research/

Promise%20and%20Peril/COOR-101-10%20GUD%20Infographic.pdf

Milanesi, C. (2020, January 23). Can AI drive education forward? Forbes. https://www.forbes.com/sites/
   carolinamilanesi/2020/01/23/can-ai-drive-education-forward/#57b976ea7964

Miller, F. G,. & Wertheimer, A. (2011). The fair transaction model of informed consent: An alternative to autonomous
   authorization. Kennedy Institute of Ethics Journal, 21(3), 201-218. https://search-proquest-
   com.ezproxy.lib.ucalgary.ca/docview/903663594?accountid=9838&rfr_id=info%3Axri%2Fsid%3Aprimo

Popenici, S.A.D., & Kerr, S. (2017). Exploring the impact of artificial intelligence on teaching and learning in higher
   education. Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning 12(22). https://doi.org/10.1186/s41039-017-0062-8

                Chapter 1: Ethical Considerations When Using Artificial Intelligence-Based Assistive Technologies in Education | 23
Raj, M., & Seamans, R. (2019). Primer on artificial intelligence and robotics. Journal of Organizational Design, 8(11), 1-14.
   https://doi.org/10.1186/s41469-019-0050-0

Regan, P. M., & Jesse, J. (2018). Ethical challenges of edtech, big data and personalized learning: Twenty-first century
   student sorting and tracking. Ethics and Information Technology, 21(3), 167-179. https://doi.org/10.1007/
   s10676-018-9492-2

Regan, P. M., & Steeves, V. (2019). Education, privacy, and big data algorithms: Taking the persons out of personalized
   learning. First Monday, 24(11). http://dx.doi.org/ 10.5210/fm.v24i11.10094

Roberts, R. (2018, April 8). A.I. and multiple intelligences. Scribal Multiverse. http://www.scribalmultiverse.com/a-i-and-
   multiple-intelligences/

Sturgeon Public Schools. (n.d.). Digital resources for learning. https://www.sturgeon.ab.ca/Digital%20Resources.php
Touretzky, D., Gardner-McCune, C., & Martin, F., & Seehorn, D. (2019). Envisioning AI for K-12: What should every child

   know about AI? Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence, 33(1), 9795-9799. https://doi.org/10.1609/
   aaai.v33i01.33019795
Wild Rose School Division. (2017). Administrative procedure 143 technology standards - Computer/peripheral hardware
   standards. https://www.wrsd.ca/our-division/administrative-procedures
Zeide, E. (2019). Artificial intelligence in higher education: Applications, promise and perils, and ethical questions.
   EDUCAUSE Review. https://er.educause.edu/ articles/2019/8/artificial-intelligence-in-higher-education-
   applications-promise-and-perils-and-ethical-questions

24 | Chapter 1: Ethical Considerations When Using Artificial Intelligence-Based Assistive Technologies in Education
                          Appendix A

Chapter 1: Ethical Considerations When Using Artificial Intelligence-Based Assistive Technologies in Education | 25
Table 1.2 Completed ethical framework for using artificial intelligence in the form of assistive technology for teaching and
                learning, in relation to normative ethical theories, based on Farrow's (2016) Uncompleted Framework

Principle                Duties & Responsibilities                   Outcome              Personal Development
                           (deontological theory)         (consequentialist theory)            (virtue theory)

Full disclosure           To provide access to            Meets the educational          Allows students to learn in
                             assistive technologies and       needs of all students.          ways that best suit their
                             understanding the                                                needs.
                             breadth of what is            Makes learning
                             available.                       personalized.                Promotes skill
                                                                                              development for the 21st
                          To understand the               Differentiates instruction.       century.
                             benefits and drawbacks of     Data may be used by third
                             the technology prior to                                       Allows students to take
                             implementation.                  party developers.               learning into their own
                                                                                              hands.
                          To ensure that students
                             know and understand how                                       Teachers become
                             to use the technology.                                           technology navigators by
                                                                                              deciding which ones to
                          To allow students to                                               use.
                             choose whether or not to
                             use assistive technologies.                                   Promotes continuous
                                                                                              learning/professional
                                                                                              development for teachers.

Informed consent          To use language that is         Gain ability to determine      Allows students and
                             easily understood to             the potential risks or          teachers to transfer their
                             clearly identify how             rewards of using assistive      knowledge of user
                             students could be affected       technologies.                   agreements to situations
                             by using the technology.                                         and experiences outside
                                                           Decide whether or not the         of the classroom.
                          To allow students to               benefits are worth the
                             decide whether or not            potential risks or           Allows students and
                             they want to use assistive       concerns.                       teachers to become
                             technologies based on                                            familiar with jargon used
                             user agreements.              Gain a better                     in agreements.
                                                              understanding of user
                                                              agreements.

Privacy & data security   To identify whether or not      Allows for further             Allows students and
                             personal information is          personalized learning with      teachers to become more
                             being collected, stored          the program/app/                aware of their online
                             and/or shared.                   extension.                      presence.

                          To become critical of           Enhances availability of       Allows students and
                             educational technology           assistive technologies.         teachers to decide what
                             companies that do not                                            personal information to
                             attempt to identify           Storage and sharing of            provide once intentions
                             students' ages.                  data may include biases.        are identified and are
                                                                                              considered valid.
                          To ensure that                  Details of data collection
                             information is collected to      or usage may be unclear.     Promotes scrutinization
                             benefit student                                                  of agreements students
                             achievement and learning      Privacy and security              and teachers could enter
                             outcomes.                        breaches may occur and          into with other
                                                              personal information may        companies.
                                                              be distributed

26 | Chapter 1: Ethical Considerations When Using Artificial Intelligence-Based Assistive Technologies in Education
Avoid harm/               To understand the              Student information is         Allows students to
minimize risk                intentions of the               often shared with the           become aware of the
                             educational technology          school division while           information they share
Respect for participant      company that created the        students are using              online.
autonomy                     assistive technology in         assistive technologies at
                             terms of developing and         school, regardless of        Students can become
Integrity                    promoting student               whether or not they want        better learners in and out
                             learning, and in terms of       their information to be         of the classroom, with
                             collecting personal             accessed.                       tools that they know are
                             details.                                                        safe for them to use and
                                                          Student information can           access
                          To help students protect          be accessed by the
                             themselves through              educational technology
                             limited sharing of              company and used in
                             personal information.           ways that students and
                                                             teachers may not clearly
                                                             understand.

                                                          Biases in the
                                                             programming of AI-based
                                                             assistive technology can
                                                             prevent students from
                                                             achieving to their full
                                                             potential.

                                                          Student learning and
                                                             engagement can benefit
                                                             when students and their
                                                             information are not put at
                                                             risk.

                          To ensure that students        Participation with             By using assistive
                             know that they can              AI-based assistive              technology, students can
                             choose to use, or not use,      technology benefits             learn more about
                             assistive technologies to       student achievement             themselves as learners.
                             enhance their learning.         through additional
                                                             opportunities for students   Students can contribute
                          To identify that students         to become engaged in            to and take control of
                             will not be penalized           their studies                   their own learning
                             should they choose to opt                                       opportunities.
                             out of opportunities to      Should students choose
                             use assistive technology.       not to participate, they     Skills students learn in
                                                             may not see a benefit in        working with AI assistive
                                                             their educational               technology can transfer to
                                                             experience.                     other areas of their lives,
                                                                                             which can benefit them
                                                                                             beyond their educational
                                                                                             experiences.

                          To provide access to           Students' educational          Students are more likely
                             AI-based assistive              experiences become more         to understand acceptable
                             technologies that               engaging with the               standards of practise
                             promote learning and            integration of AI               when using assistive
                             achievement.                    components.                     technologies.

                          To ensure that biases for      Students become more           Students can use their
                             personal benefit are            prepared for a                  critical analysis skills to
                             minimized, whether from         technological future.           determine the intentions
                             the educational                                                 of educational technology
                             technology company that      Learning occurs in and            companies that
                             created the assistive           out of the classroom while      incorporate the use of AI
                             technology tool or from         integrating AI-based            within their personal lives.
                             the teacher or school           assistive technology into
                             division implementing the       their lives.                 Students can share this
                             use of these tools in the                                       knowledge with others to
                             classroom.                   Students become more              promote informed user
                                                             critical of the intentions      engagement with
                                                             of educational technology       AI-based assistive
                                                             companies.                      technologies.

Chapter 1: Ethical Considerations When Using Artificial Intelligence-Based Assistive Technologies in Education | 27
Independence   To allow students to           A greater variety of           Students develop their
                  access AI-based assistive       assistive technologies may      abilities to work with
                  technologies when they          need to be explored by          AI-based technologies and
                  choose the access or find       teachers to ensure their        may become more
                  it worthwhile.                  usage is appropriate.           comfortable working with
                                                                                  these technological tools.
               To accept suggestions          Teachers may need to be
                  from students for               more in control in the       Students have their voices
                  different assistive             beginning to help               heard and know that their
                  technology options.             students make                   suggestions are valued,
                                                  appropriate choices, but        promoting greater
               To encourage students to          then their role would           participation and
                  use assistive technologies      change as students              confidence.
                  outside the classroom to        become more comfortable
                  become more comfortable         with usage.                  Students become more
                  with them.                                                      likely to advocate for their
                                               Students may not have             learning needs and
                                                  access to these tools           preferences.
                                                  outside of the classroom.

Media Attributions

   Figure 2  Kourtney Kerr is licensed under a CC BY (Attribution) license
   Figure 3  Kourtney Kerr is licensed under a CC BY (Attribution) license
   Figure 4  Kourtney Kerr is licensed under a CC BY (Attribution) license
   Balancing automation and autonomy. Adapted from Holstein, McLaren and Aleven (2019).  Kourtney Kerr is

      licensed under a CC BY (Attribution) license

28 | Chapter 1: Ethical Considerations When Using Artificial Intelligence-Based Assistive Technologies in Education
Chapter 2: Beware: Be Aware - The Ethical
Implications of Teachers Who Use Social
Networking Sites (SNSs) to Communicate

HEATHER VAN STREUN

Author Note
There are no conflicts of interest to disclose.
Correspondence concerning this chapter should be addressed to htumbach@gmail.com.

           Introduction

As teachers strive to build productive and positive relationships with their students, parents, and colleagues, they may
employ different techniques to do so. The main reason behind developing effective relationships with these stakeholders
is to put students at the forefront of authentic learning. It is recognized that strengthening relationships with parents,
students, and even colleagues can be one way to support student learning (Alberta Government, 2018). One of the most
critical ways to foster strong relationships is through effective communication (White, 2016).

Teachers are tasked with sharing a multitude of information from events, field trips, and student learning progress
to professional learning opportunities and resources. Known as command communication (White, 2016), teachers
communicate "in clearly prescribed ways" (p. 70) using tools such as email, websites, and newsletters. As White
(2016) points out, "[w]ritten communication is probably the most efficient and effective way teachers provide clear
information" (p. 70). Teacher communication is not limited to the command function, but also to a relational function,
which is the "basis of effective learning relationships and enables the development of communities of practice,
dialogues, and fusions of horizons" (White, 2016, p. 71). Teachers can communicate with both functions to "maximize
sharing of information and understanding" (White, 2016, p. 70). This can be challenging to accomplish, but with
the integration of technology, teachers build relationships and communities, encourage dialogue, share information
and overcome the barriers of time, distance, and even languages. Social Network Sites (SNSs), such as Facebook,
Instagram, and Twitter, lend themselves as a platform to achieve strong teacher communication to build and strengthen
relationships.

Facebook   Table 2.1 Common social networking sites and their uses (SNSs).
Twitter                                                 Users connect and share various media, such as text and
Instagram                                               pictures, with followers, who are known as `friends' online.
                                                        Friends can comment on user posts.
                                                        Users post 140-character messages (tweets) to followers.
                                                        Tweets can be commented on and shared. Private messages are
                                                        also available.
                                                        Users share with followers photos and videos that can be
                                                        commented on and shared. Altering or filtering is a common
                                                        practice by users.

           Chapter 2: Beware: Be Aware - The Ethical Implications of
                  Teachers Who Use Social Networking Sites (SNSs) to
Ethical Considerations of SNSs Use in K-12 Classrooms

This innovative use of SNSs creates ethical dilemmas for educators. From the lens of a consequentialist approach,
"teachers are in a difficult position of trying to innovate in their classroom using SNSs while at the same time being
conscious of the risks" (Henderson, et al., 2014, p. 2). This chapter will navigate the ethical implications teachers face
when using SNSs to communicate the learning that happens in their classrooms.
The framework for teachers using SNSs for communication, adapted from Farrow's (2016) OER Research Hub project,
identifies the three normative ethical theories and highlights considerations for teachers who do engage with SNSs for
communication purposes (Table 2.2). These ethical perspectives attempt to guide how teachers and students can and
should behave, which rules and procedures they should adhere to, and which beliefs and values teachers should have
(Farrow, 2016). SNSs used in the classroom context can be powerful, but what are the implications of balancing the
pressure and desires to use social media for communication from our colleagues and parent community with the ethical
expectations of the teaching profession?

30 | Chapter 2: Beware: Be Aware - The Ethical Implications of Teachers Who Use Social Networking Sites (SNSs) to Communicate
Table 2.2 Completed framework for teachers using social media networking sites for communication, in relation to normative
                                           ethical theories based on Farrow's (2016) Uncompleted Framework

Principle                Duties & Responsibilities             Outcome                     Personal Development
                                (deontological)          (consequentialist)                           (virtue)

Full disclosure           Teachers have a                Parents may opt out of           Teachers are accountable
                             responsibility to follow        their child being displayed       to be aware of current
                             ATA Code of Conduct,            on social media.                  policies and legalities.
                             FOIP, and their district's
                             policies when sharing        Teachers should consider         Teachers are responsible
                             classroom and student           a student's and parent's          for providing a culture of
                             information.                    perspective and allow             care.
                                                             them to have a voice when
                          Teachers could share with         the teacher uses social        Develops a professional
                             parents and students the        media for classroom               learning network for
                             purpose, methods, and           purposes.                         teachers, students and
                             intended use of the social                                        parents.
                             media platform.

Privacy & data security   There are legal                When interacting with            Teachers' digital presence
                             implications for                SNSs, a digital footprint is      is in line with the virtue of
                             protecting student data.        created.                          being a teacher.

                          Read and understand            Whether SNS are used             Two options:
                             Privacy Policy and Terms        personally or                       One profile for
                             of Service of chosen SNS.       professionally, users                   personal and private
                                                             should consider all posts               life.
                          When required, obtain             public.                             Two profiles - one
                             consent.                                                                private and one
                                                                                                     public.

Informed consent          Teachers have to ensure        Students & parents have          When seeking consent,
                             consent from students           the ability to request            there is an opportunity to
                             and parents before              posts to be removed and           have more forethought
                             posting content that may        request be honoured.              before posting.
                             be identifiable.
                                                          Due to the changing              Students have the
                                                             nature of SNS policies and        opportunity to create
                                                             cultural practices,               their own PLN.
                                                             teachers should consider
                                                             asking for consent on a
                                                             regular basis.

Integrity                 All students have the          Teachers can model               Respect and allow for
                             opportunity to develop          communication, digital            diverse experiences.
                             their online                    citizenship and literacy
                             communication skills and        skills.                        Teachers have in loco
                             not just for the students                                         parentis.
                             who can afford to access     Teachers should
                             from home.                      recognize that not all may
                                                             be able to participate due
                          Consider context when             to financial limitations of
                             communicating online,           affording technology.
                             teachers, students and
                             parents

Chapter 2: Beware: Be Aware - The Ethical Implications of Teachers Who Use Social Networking Sites (SNSs) to Communicate | 31
Avoid harm/minimize risk   Due to "in loco parentis"       As teachers aim to               Consider that any activity
                              teachers have the same           maximize the benefits of          on social media is public,
                              rights and responsibilities      using SNSs as a form of           so associate with groups/
                              as the parent and should         communication, they               individuals that are
                              act accordingly.                 should also take measures         suitable.
                                                               to minimize the potential
                           Consider that any activity         risk of harm to themselves     Professional 24-7.
                              on social media is public.       and those they interact        Create and maintain
                                                               with.
                                                                                                 expectations.
                                                            Set and share
                                                               expectations with parents
                                                               and students.

Respect for participant    Teachers may be directed        Teachers ensure that they        By using SNSs, users can
autonomy                      to use SNSs, but may have        minimize the impact on            connect, create and share
                              the choice of which              student's digital footprint.      knowledge with a larger
                              platform.                                                          community.
                                                            Teachers ensure that
                           Teachers ensure that               students and parents have
                              parents and students can         opportunities to
                              access communication via         participate in posting
                              technology or not.               content on SNSs.

Independence               Teachers can control what       Parents who don't want to        Students are exposed to
                              they post and how often.         communicate via social            digital literacy and
                                                               media may want the                citizenship skills that can
                           Students can contribute            information in another            be transferred out of the
                              to class SNSs content.           modality.                         classroom experience.

                                                            Teachers should consider         Teachers influence online
                                                               Equity of Access and how          identities.
                                                               it creates and removes
                                                               barriers.

                                     Full Disclosure

As teachers join the growing movement of using SNSs for their classroom communication (Auld & Henderson, 2014),
there are expectations placed on them by their principal, districts, and professional bodies. Even though not explicitly
defined, these expectations contain Nias' (1999) six components of a culture of care, which include: being affective,
responsibility for learners, responsibility for relationships in the school, self-sacrifice and obedience, over-
conscientiousness, and identity (Figure 7.1). Teachers who use SNSs should employ a due culture of care to ensure that
they meet the professional expectations placed upon them. This culture of care should include an evaluation of the
consequences of using SNSs, followed by the disclosure of the consequences and pertinent information to the parties
involved, including parents, students, and colleagues.

32 | Chapter 2: Beware: Be Aware - The Ethical Implications of Teachers Who Use Social Networking Sites (SNSs) to Communicate
                                                                                                                                                          Figure 2.1 Six
                                                                                                                                                          components of culture of
                                                                                                                                                          care, as described in Nias
                                                                                                                                                          (1999).

Luckin et al. (2009), as cited in Howard (2013), suggest that "[t]o facilitate effective use of Web 2.0 technology in the
classrooms, teachers are encouraged to be willing to embrace risk and to consider small ways of navigating existing
cultures and reframing old contexts to incorporate new ones" (p. 44). As teachers transform the purpose of SNSs to
fit their classroom contexts, they should consider the notion of full disclosure, which is when the teacher makes all
information and facts known (Oxford University Press, 2019). The following section will examine two components to this
disclosure: teacher communication expectations and the use of personal learning networks to share and co-construct
knowledge.

Teacher Policies and Procedures

Regardless of whether or not a teacher participates in SNSs, there are policies and procedures to which they must
adhere to as a member of a professional association, not only for their own professional protection but also for the
protection of colleagues, students, and parents. By following the specified policies and procedures for communication,
teachers meet the aspects of a culture of care.
Teachers in Alberta, for example, are required to follow the ATA Code of Conduct, the Teaching Quality Standards,
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act, and their own district's Administrative Procedures. These guiding
documents define what data and information teachers have access to, who can provide permission to use the platform,
and how they can use it to support the learning that happens in their classrooms.
Due to the openness and highly connected nature of SNSs, teachers should communicate to parents, students, and
colleagues (including administration) which SNSs they are using and their purpose for using those platforms. As well,
teachers should notify stakeholders what they will be posting, before they post it. This will give parents and students

     Chapter 2: Beware: Be Aware - The Ethical Implications of Teachers Who Use Social Networking Sites (SNSs) to Communicate | 33
opportunities to have input and the ability to give or refuse consent. As Henderson et al. (2014) point out, "teachers
should be aware that this consent might need to be renegotiated at regular intervals" (p. 3). Auld and Henderson (2014)
also argue that teachers have the responsibility to ensure that students (and parents) want their own virtual identities
to be made public when using SNSs as a tool for communication. As students or parents comment on a post, they are at
risk of exposing their online identity which they may not have considered.

Sharing and Co-Construction of Knowledge Through Personal Learning Networks (PLNs)

Many professionals have been adapting and adopting various emerging practices, such as using SNSs, to network, share,
and co-create knowledge (Veletsianos, 2016). Teachers may find themselves using SNSs in the classroom for the same
purposes, while guiding students in developing the skills to participate effectively in Personal Learning Networks (PLNs).
"Research that suggests that such platforms can facilitate the shared construction of knowledge and peer interactions
that support learning adds to the perception that SNSs, such as Facebook, could be a catalyst for classroom engagement
and collaboration" (Howard, 2013, p. 43). Whether it is a teacher's own PLN with other professionals or a student-
based PLN, teachers should disclose what they, themselves, are gaining from integrating SNSs as a modality. As Auld
and Henderson (2014) identify, "[t]eachers need to consider what the implications are for co-inhabiting spaces that are
designed to connect people and share information" (p. 199); however, disclosure of benefits should not be limited to the
teacher viewpoint. Emphasis should also be placed on the student viewpoint. What does the student have to gain or lose
by participating in a PLN via SNSs? What opportunities and guidance will students (and parents for that matter) have
to participate in PLNs? What opportunities exist to be part of a PLN if parents do not want to use SNSs? These are all
aspects of full disclosure that teachers should consider and communicate.

As teachers disclose the purpose for using SNSs in their classroom practice, they should consider the six aspects of the
culture of care. By keeping these practices student-centred, the argument could be made that the choices the teacher
is making to build relationships and enhance communication are inherently good. By having an environment that is
built on full disclosure, teachers will continue to build "a sense of community, people-making, and dialogue" which is
foundational to school-family partnerships (White, 2016, p. 69).

It should be recognized that full disclosure should not be limited to the intent and should also include other
considerations such as privacy and security. The next section will explore these elements and the ethical dilemmas they
create.

             Section 2: Privacy, Data Security, and Informed Consent

When it comes to the role of the teacher, and protection of privacy, evolving technology has created a need for privacy
and security awareness. As mentioned in the previous section, teachers must follow various policies and procedures,
such as the Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act (FOIP) [New Tab] (Alberta Teachers Association,
1999), which is a legally binding document and mandatory. In this particular act, "the privacy of students and parents is
protected by rules that school [administrative procedures] must follow in the collection, use, protection and disclosure
of personal information" (para. 4). While engaging on SNS platforms, teachers may expose themselves, students, and
parents to breaches of privacy and careless consent to the collection of data. In their paper, Regan and Jesse (2019)
explored the ethical concerns of privacy in 21st-century learning and identified six distinct ethical concerns. The
following section will explore three of the six privacy and data security concerns when teachers post and share content
on SNSs.

34 | Chapter 2: Beware: Be Aware - The Ethical Implications of Teachers Who Use Social Networking Sites (SNSs) to Communicate
Information Privacy

When posting any content online, there is exposure and formation to one's identity. Regardless of whether a teacher
creates a digital identity to connect with PLCs, share lessons, or celebrate the connections in the classroom, there is a
tension between confidentiality and transparency. Teachers may carelessly expose themselves, parents, and students to
the collection of data.
Teachers can enlist proper attitudes that help limit exposure. Summarized by Regan and Jesse (2019) as, "notice, consent,
choice and transparency" (p. 170), when posting any information online, teachers are responsibility to those parties
involved (students, parents, colleagues, etc.) to communicate the purpose and content of the post, to seek consent, and
to allow those involved to choose what is posted or to be removed from the post, and to be able to see the post after
submission.

                                                                                                                                                          Figure 2.2 Attitudes to
                                                                                                                                                          limit exposure of
                                                                                                                                                          privacy, as described in
                                                                                                                                                          Regan and Jesse (2019).

Ownership of Information

Once content is posted, who owns the post and its contents? The answer depends on the SNS platform and its privacy
policy. When looking at a privacy policy, or reading the terms of service before clicking accept, one may notice that
these are long and complex documents. Readers can become lost in jargon, and, as a result, users accept the agreements
without becoming aware of critical information, such as data collection and ownership of information. For example,
Facebook's Privacy Policy [New Tab], which also includes Instagram, explains ownership of information.
According to Facebook (2019), "you own the intellectual property rights (things such as copyright or trademarks) in
any such content that you create and share on Facebook" ("Your commitments" section); they go on to identify that if
users share, post, or upload content, Facebook is granted the permissions to use, distribute, modify, copy, and create
derivative products of the content. If a teacher posts a picture of students working in the classroom, the teacher has
given Facebook and Instagram the ability to "store, copy, and share it with others" (Facebook, 2019, "Your commitments"
section) based on the privacy settings. Even when parents grant permission to use photos of their child, they may not
understand that the child's photo may be used by third-party companies, based on the SNS platform. Students should

     Chapter 2: Beware: Be Aware - The Ethical Implications of Teachers Who Use Social Networking Sites (SNSs) to Communicate | 35
be consulted when their work will be posted on SNSs, as they own the intellectual property rights to their content, and
they may not want to give those platforms the ability to remix and reuse their work.

         Part of learning is adapting to the changing methods of communication. Engaging in digital environments
         can promote learning, teaching and collaboration for students, staff and parents. The very nature of SNSs

            introduces a potential lack of personal control of content and dissemination of content. Due care and
                         attention is required to safeguard privacy. (Elk Island Catholic Schools, 2019, para. 1)

Understanding the agreements of SNS platforms is crucial to effective communication practices. Some may consider the
practice of deleting the content after the school year is over, as those students move on to another classroom; however,
teachers should be aware of the adage `once online, always online.' Facebook identifies that if the content is deleted
by the user, it will be removed from Facebook's systems, though it may exist elsewhere (2019). As Molnar and Boninger
(2015) point out, "[e]ducators are obliged not only to learn how student data may be gathered and exploited but also to
develop privacy policies that protect their students from such exploitation" (p. 8).

Surveillance - AI

It would be naive to believe that one's online presence is not tracked in some form or another. "Tracking software
also records adult behaviour on the Internet, of course, although many adults may be unaware of it. Since educators
are, however, responsible for the children entrusted to their care, they cannot afford to be uninformed about potential
threats to student privacy" (Molnar and Boninger, 2015, p. 8). As soon as a teacher engages with SNSs, there is
surveillance of their activity and that of the users to whom they are connected. For example, as soon as the student does
connect to the content posted on the teacher's SNS, marketers can track the student's online activity and direct ads to
that student (Molnar and Boninger, 2015, p. 7).

Even as teachers consider information privacy, ownership of information, and surveillance, they may still fail to protect
all invested parties' privacy. A common phenomenon exists known as the Privacy Paradox. First discussed by Barnes
(2006), the Privacy Paradox identifies that there is a contradiction between online behaviour and privacy concerns
(Table 2.3). The research conducted by Dienline and Trepte (2014) showed that people on SNSs "engage in self-disclosing
behaviours that do not adequately reflect their concerns" (p. 285). "Despite privacy concerns, users, most of the time,
fail to protect their privacy within SNSs, thus putting themselves and other users at risk" (Sideri, et al., 2017, p. 79).

                                      Table 2.3 Barnes (2006) observed 4 phenomena related to the Privacy Paradox.
 4 Privacy Paradox Phenomena of Social Network Sites
 1. Large quantity of information disclosed online
 2. The illusion of privacy
 3. Discrepancy between context and behaviour (even when known to be public, act like SNSs are private)
 4. Users' poor understanding of data processing actions by online businesses

Knowing the phenomena, teachers can act in an ethical manner that ensures the protection of privacy to the best
of their ability. Prior to the first post, teachers should read the privacy policy and terms of service of their chosen
platform. They can then act according to what they are comfortable with and what is best for all users involved in the

36 | Chapter 2: Beware: Be Aware - The Ethical Implications of Teachers Who Use Social Networking Sites (SNSs) to Communicate
communication. Also, informing parents and students of the terms and allowing them to create their own limitations of
content to be posted, would reduce the breach in privacy and data collection from the post.

In the end, even with instilled practices to limit the accessibility of data or enable privacy features, these features may
dissolve at any point, leading to the risk that the content become public (Auld & Henderson, 2014). It is this point that
leads to the exploration of what the teacher can do to maintain educational integrity by avoiding harm and minimizing
risk.

         Educational Integrity by Avoiding Harm and Minimizing Risk

When parents send their children to school, they entrust educators to provide quality education while ensuring that
their child is cared for and protected. Known as in loco parentis, the teacher is in place of a parent and is given the same
rights and responsibilities (Law Now, 2019). In Alberta, according to the competencies in the Teaching Quality Standard
(2018), teachers are expected to "recognize that the professional practice of a teacher is bound by standards of conduct
expected of a caring, knowledgeable and reasonable adult entrusted with the custody, care or education of students"
(p. 3). When teachers engage in posting on SNSs, this care should still be practiced. As teachers aim to maximize the
benefits of using SNSs as a form of communication, they should also take measures to minimize the potential risk
of harm to themselves and those with whom they interact. This section will look at opportunities educators have to
maintain educational integrity while avoiding harm and reducing risks when engaging in online communication.

Modelling Digital Communication

Teachers are held in high regard in society, and what they do in their personal lives will usually be viewed with a lens
that relates to the profession. "The teacher acts in a manner which maintains the honour and dignity of the profession"
(ATA, 2018, standard 18). This also applies to the teacher's interaction with SNSs. Whether being used to connect with
other teachers in PLCs, with parents and students, or with friends and family, "teachers need to maintain a respectful
and professional identity" (Planbook.com, 2018, Section 1, para. 4).

In 2012, George Couros, an educator and recognized keynote speaker for professional audiences, posted a blog titled
"Personal and Professional vs. Public and Private" [New Tab]. He discussed the debate of teachers having a personal SNS
account separate from a professional account. His argument is that whether teachers have separate accounts or not,
there is the potential for anyone to see the posted content. "What I am always aware of is that no matter who sees what
I put out there, anyone can see it eventually, whether it is through me or someone else" (Couros, 2012, Section 1, para.
4). In fact, by combining the personal and professional accounts into one, teachers have a unique opportunity to model
effective digital citizenship and digital literacy skills to their followers, which may include parents, students, and other
teachers, rather than letting them figure it out on their own (Howard, 2013).

Setting Expectations

By communicating expectations for parents, students, colleagues, and themselves, teachers can reduce the risks that
come with engaging in SNSs. "Even if we deem the benefits of SNSs worth the potential risks, a plan for managing those
risks is warranted" (Howard, 2013, p. 44). It is interesting to note that due to the recent COVID-19 crisis (Spring 2020),

     Chapter 2: Beware: Be Aware - The Ethical Implications of Teachers Who Use Social Networking Sites (SNSs) to Communicate | 37
educators have found themselves needing to turn to emerging technologies such as SNSs to communicate effectively
with students and parents. If they do not set up expectations from the beginning of the school year, teachers may
struggle with boundaries and guidelines for themselves, parents, and students. Teachers should look to their guiding
policies and procedures to provide support for navigating this challenge. However, it is recognized that with the fast
pace of technological change, these policies and procedures may need constant revision to remain current.

Many school districts have developed administrative procedures that identify the expectations of all parties involved
with using SNSs. As Howard (2013) points out, "[p]olicies that prevent private one-to-one communication between
teachers and students that do not generate a permanent record are extremely important to ensure the public's trust
that the users of these networks are operating above-board" (p. 50). For example, Elk Island Catholic Schools (2019) has
Administrative Procedure 146, titled "Social Media", which identifies expectations for division staff, students, and parents
(Table 2.4).

                    Table 2.4 Excerpt from Elk Island Catholic Schools' Administrative Procedure: 146 social media (2019).

 Procedures

 1. Principals shall:
    1.1 Ensure students, parents, and staff are aware of the Division's expectations for responsible use of Social Media.
    1.2 Encourage parents to communicate to school personnel any concerns they may have about inappropriate use of Social

 Media.
    1.3 Ensure students, parents, and staff are educated in the appropriate use of Social Media and the associated benefits and

 dangers of a public online presence.

When teachers do set guidelines for how SNSs will be used, they should include expectations for:

   Timeliness of posts
   Expectations and moderation of responses
   Procedures for one-to-one communication
   What will happen to content after the school year is over
   Limitations to having followers and following back

Teachers who model effective use and positive communication skills with SNSs remain consistent with the rights and
responsibilities placed upon them as professionals. Each post should be considered an opportunity to develop digital
literacy skills for teachers, students, and parents. By setting and following expectations, all stakeholders will reduce risk
and the opportunity for harm. However, risk and harm are reduced not only by expectations, but also by understanding
how using SNSs can impact autonomy and independence.

              Respect for Participant Autonomy and Independence

Teachers may find themselves in situations where they are directed to engage with SNSs, such as when a school leader
suggests that teachers can add a Twitter post about their weekly classroom events. When this occurs, teachers may feel
obligated to use social media even if they do not feel comfortable with the digital tool. Alberta Education's Learning and
Technology Policy Framework (2013), Policy Direction 3 indicates that teachers are expected to "engage in professional
growth opportunities that are broadened and diversified through technology, social media, and communities of
practice" (Section 3, para. 1). Although some teachers may struggle to give up autonomy over their professional learning
choices, they may still have control over what technologies they use or how they use them. The student-centred goal, is
that "teachers . . . develop, maintain, and apply the knowledge, skills, and attributes that enable them to use technology

38 | Chapter 2: Beware: Be Aware - The Ethical Implications of Teachers Who Use Social Networking Sites (SNSs) to Communicate
effectively, efficiently, and innovatively in support of learning and teaching" (Alberta Education, 2013, Section 3, para 1).
Teachers need to consider the magnitude of this responsibility when they do engage with SNSs, as they are in a position
in which they can create and shape their own online persona, while also shaping and influencing the identity of their
students. In this final section, we will expand on the ethical examination of the teacher's role in shaping identity and
equity of access.

(Re)Shaping Identity

When teachers use SNSs in their classroom, their motivation may be to build relationships, provide support, reduce
the feeling of being isolated (for both student and teacher), build personal and professional learning environments,
and to create and share knowledge (Forbes, 2018). SNSs are not limited to these opportunities and may provide other
features and abilities, such as `going live' to show parents the events in the classroom; however, the fact that teachers
and students have the ability to use these features does not necessarily mean that they should.

As previously discussed, teachers and students who engage with SNSs may blur the lines between private and public
identity. What teachers should consider is that as they post content such as pictures, student work, or discussions about
what happened within the class, they create a digital footprint for themselves, as well as for their students, which may
be accessed and retrieved by others (Auld & Henderson, 2014). As teachers move to a more digital learning environment,
K-12 teachers are faced with the reality that their digital interactions influence identity, regardless of whether they take
place on a private or public SNS account. Forbes (2018) eloquently points out that "what an individual does with social
media does not occur in a vacuum and is likely to affect or influence others by virtue of the social character of the
communications" (p.178). As teachers consider this influence, they are held ethically to the principle of responsible care,
"where professionalism entails doing good and minimizing harm" (Forbes, 2018, p.178).

To build on this idea of doing good and minimizing harm, teachers should consider the power of their influence. By
modelling positive digital citizenship and literacy skills, they can inadvertently shape their own and students' identities
in a positive way. One example is practicing proper citations and copyright practices. As Auld and Henderson (2014)
point out, the use of a picture of a celebrity or cartoon picture to create a social media avatar may seem harmless, but it
is a breach of copyright and possible identity theft. This is an opportunity for a teachable moment that may have lasting
effects on students' identities and on the identity of the original subject whose image was used.

Teachers' ability to model and shape identity is not just proximal. Auld and Henderson (2014) explain that "teachers can
model how to respect the other even if they are not known to the students or the teacher" (p. 202). This removal of
barriers is powerful, but the strength is limited by the opportunity for digital equity of access.

Equity of Access

Digital access and equity involve many components and ethical considerations that teachers should consider as they use
SNSs. Rooted in social justice, there is a belief that emerging technologies, such as social media, will "level the playing
field, effectively creating equal access to learning opportunities by democratizing information and instruction" (Bulger,
2016, p. 2). This is supported by the fact that creating an account on SNSs is most often free. As well, SNSs are ubiquitous
communication platforms where, because they are digital, users can access assistive technologies such as speech to
text, text to speech, and translation to participate in the discussion. By integrating SNSs in the classroom, teachers
provide opportunities for all students to develop their online communication skills, not just the students who can afford
to access the platforms from home (Howard, 2013).

     Chapter 2: Beware: Be Aware - The Ethical Implications of Teachers Who Use Social Networking Sites (SNSs) to Communicate | 39
The argument that SNSs are free is limited to the actual cost to participate on the site. In order to access SNSs, one
needs technology and internet access in the first place. As well, parents may not want their children, or themselves,
to communicate online. In order to respect the autonomy of parents and students, teachers may want to consider
providing alternatives to online communication. By doing so, teachers follow the social justice principle of recognitive,
which, as Lambert (2018) points out, involves recognition and respect for diverse views and experiences.
As teachers use SNSs for communication, their reach of influence is not limited to just their own identity, but beyond.
In fact, the impact on identity is a community approach involving (but not limited to) teachers, parents, and students.
To maintain the educational integrity that teachers are responsible for, teachers should also consider opportunities for
autonomy when involving technology-based practices in their classrooms. By allowing for voice and choice by parents
and students, teachers can continue, with effective communication, to build the sense of community that is needed
(White, 2016), which was the goal in the first place.

                                       Conclusion

As teachers decide to integrate SNSs into their classroom practices, they should consider the ethical implications that
this type of technological opportunity creates. According to Auld and Henderson (2014), "a professional SNS profile
is a potentially valuable strategy but it still requires considerable thought and considerable maintenance" (p. 199). By
focusing on four main areas of ethical exploration, this chapter examined the topics of full disclosure, privacy and
security, educational integrity, and autonomy and independence, in order to address how teachers can tackle the
complexity and unique opportunities of using SNSs to communicate in their classroom.

                                                                                                                                                          Figure 2.4 Four areas of
                                                                                                                                                          ethical implications of
                                                                                                                                                          using SNSs for
                                                                                                                                                          communication by
                                                                                                                                                          teachers.

No matter the tool, teachers should consider the magnitude of their responsibility when they do engage with SNS for
communication. Part of the attraction of SNSs is the unique abilities to enhance communication, but one may want to
have the mantra: just because you have the ability, doesn't mean you should use it. By continually reflecting on the goal
and ethical implications, teachers will have a strong foundation for the use of SNSs for communication.

40 | Chapter 2: Beware: Be Aware - The Ethical Implications of Teachers Who Use Social Networking Sites (SNSs) to Communicate
                   Questions to Consider for Future Research

 Technology is always evolving, and with it, a teacher's practice should evolve, too. COVID-19 has required teachers
   across the globe to move their classrooms to an online environment. Teachers who had never considered SNSs as
   a way to communicate are now adapting these platforms to fit their classroom needs. What impact will this mass
   uptake of using SNSs have on pedagogy?

 In what ways are teachers and students reshaping the role SNSs have in education?
 What ethical considerations should be considered when students who are under the age of consent use

   technology to support their learning?
 Lastly, as teachers model different competencies in their classroom, there are opportunities to embed digital

   literacies and citizenship while creating opportunities to develop PLNs online. What do students have to gain or
   lose by participating in a PLN via SNSs?
 What frameworks could teachers consider to scaffold students developing their own PLNs using SNS (refer to
   Appendix A)?

References

Alberta Education. (2013). Learning and technology policy framework. https://education.alberta.ca/media/1045/ltpf-
   quick-guide-web.pdf

Alberta Education. (2018). Teaching quality standard. https://education.alberta.ca/media/3739620/standardsdoc-tqs-
   _fa-web-2018-01-17.pdf

Alberta Teachers Association. (1999, March 30). What you should know about the FOIP Act. ATA News.
   https://www.teachers.ab.ca/News%20Room/ata%20news/Volume%2033/Number%2015/In%20the%20News/
   Pages/What%20you%20should%20know%20about%20the%20FOIP%20Act.aspx

Alberta Teachers Association. (2018). ATA code of professional          conduct.  https://www.teachers.ab.ca/
   SiteCollectionDocuments/ATA/Publications/Teachers-as-Professionals/
   IM-4E%20Code%20of%20Professional%20Conduct.pdf

Auld, G., & Henderson, M. (2014) The ethical dilemmas of social networking sites in classroom contexts. In G. Mallia
   (Ed.), The Social Classroom: Integrating Social Network Use in Education (pp. 192-207). Ringgold Inc.
   http://ezproxy.lib.ucalgary.ca/login?url=https://www-proquest-com.ezproxy.lib.ucalgary.ca/docview/
   1494511269?accountid=9838

Barnes, S. B. (2006). A privacy paradox: Social networking in the United States. First Monday, 11(9). https://doi.org/
   10.5210/fm.v11i9.1394

Bulger, M. (2016). Personalized learning: The conversations we're not having. Data & Society. https://datasociety.net/
   pubs/ecl/PersonalizedLearning_primer_2016.pdf

Couros, G. (2012, November 18). Personal and professional vs. public and private. George Couros.
   https://georgecouros.ca/blog/archives/3432

Dienlin, T., & Trepte, S. (2015). Is the privacy paradox a relic of the past? An in-depth analysis of privacy attitudes and
   privacy behaviors. European Journal of Social Psychology, 45(3), 285- 297. https://doi.org/10.1002/ejsp.2049

Chapter 2: Beware: Be Aware - The Ethical Implications of Teachers Who Use Social Networking Sites (SNSs) to Communicate | 41
Elk Island Catholic Schools. (2019, September). Social media. Administrative Procedure 146. https://www.eics.ab.ca/
   download/218652

Facebook. (2019, July 31). Terms of service. https://www.facebook.com/terms.php

Farrow, R. (2016). A framework for the ethics of open education. Open Praxis, 8(2), 93-109. http://dx.doi.org/10.5944/
   openpraxis.8.2.291

Forbes, D. (2017). Professional online presence and learning networks: Educating for ethical use of social
   media. International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning, 18(7), 175-190. https://doi.org/10.19173/
   irrodl.v18i7.2826

Henderson, M., Auld, G., & Johnson, N. F. (2014, September 30-October 3). Ethics of teaching with social media [Paper
   presentation]. Australian Computers in Education Conference 2014, Adelaide, SA. http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/
   viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.719.2437&rep=rep1&type=pdf

Howard, K. E. (2013). Using Facebook and other SNSs in k-12 classrooms: Ethical considerations for safe social
   networking. Issues in Teacher Education, 22(2), 39-54. https://digitalcommons.chapman.edu/education_articles/50/

International Council on Human Rights Policy. (2011). Navigating the dataverse: Privacy, technology, human rights.
   http://www.ichrp.org/files/reports/64/132_report_en.pdf

Law Now. (2019, September 3). In loco parentis. https://www.lawnow.org/in-loco-parentis/

Molnar, A., & Boninger, F. (2015). On the block: Student data and privacy in the digital age. National Education Policy
   Center. http://nepc.colorado.edu/publication/schoolhouse-commercialism-2014.

Nias, J. (1999). Primary teaching as a culture of care. In J. Prosser (Ed.), School culture (pp. 66-81). SAGE Publications Ltd.
   http://dx.doi.org/10.4135/9781446219362.n5

Oxford University Press (OUP). (2019). Disclosure: definition of disclosure. https://www.lexico.com/en/definition/
   disclosure

Planbook. (n.d.). Digital ethics: Responsible social media practices for educators. https://blog.planbook.com/digital-
   ethics/

Regan, P., & Jesse, J. (2019). Ethical challenges of edtech, big data and personalized learning: Twenty-first century
   student sorting and tracking. Ethics and Information Technology, 21(3), 167-179. https://doi.org/10.1007/
   s10676-018-9492-2

Roberts, V. (2019). Open educational practices (OEP): Design-based research on expanded high school learning
   environments, spaces, and experiences [Unpublished doctoral thesis]. University of Calgary.

Sideri, M., Kitsiou, A., Kalloniatis, C., Tzortzaki, E., & Gritzalis, S. (2017). "I have learned that I must think twice before...".
   An educational intervention for enhancing students' privacy awareness on Facebook. Communications in Computer
   and Information Science, 792, 79-94. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-71117-1_6

Velestianos, G. (Ed.). (2016). Emergence and innovation in digital learning: Foundations and applications. AU Press,
   Athabasca University. https://doi.org/10.15215/aupress/9781771991490.01

White, K. W. (2016). Teacher communication: A guide to relational, organizational, and classroom communication.
   ProQuest Ebook Central https://ebookcentral-proquest-com.ezproxy.lib.ucalgary.ca

42 | Chapter 2: Beware: Be Aware - The Ethical Implications of Teachers Who Use Social Networking Sites (SNSs) to Communicate
                                         Appendix A

Table 2.5 Possible frameworks for scaffolding students in developing their own PLNs using SNS (adapted from Roberts, 2019).

   Teacher-Led Walled Garden of Open     Transition Between Teacher-Led Walled     Developing Personal Learning Networks
                       Learning           Garden & Independent Open Learning       Ages 14+

Up to age 11                             Ages 11-14

AND/OR.                                  AND/OR.                                   AND/OR.
Emerging open readiness learners         Low & medium open readiness learners      High open readiness learners
                                                                                   Example: Teacher co-designs for learning
Example: Teacher connects with their     Example: Teacher co-designs for learning  pathway that encourages inside/outside
PLN to share classroom learning          pathway that includes inside/outside      classroom experts, nodes of learning, &
experience using classroom social media  experts & open/closed sharing of          perspectives in order to solve problem
identity.                                learning experiences.                     with choice open/closed sharing of
                                                                                   learning.

Media Attributions

   Figure 2.1 Six components of culture of care, adapted from Nias (1999)  Heather van Struen is licensed under a CC
      BY (Attribution) license

   Figure 2.2 Attitudes to limit exposure of privacy, adapted from Regan and Jesse (2019)  Heather van Struen is
      licensed under a CC BY (Attribution) license

   fig8_struen

Chapter 2: Beware: Be Aware - The Ethical Implications of Teachers Who Use Social Networking Sites (SNSs) to Communicate | 43
Chapter 3: From Consumers to Prosumers: How 3D
Printing is Putting Us in the Driver's Seat for
Creation and the Ethical Considerations that
Accompany this Shift.

How 3D Printing is Putting Us in the Driver's Seat for Creation and the Ethical
Considerations that Accompany this Shift

NICOLE NEUTZLING

Author Note
Correspondence concerning this chapter should be addressed to nicole.neutzling1@ucalgary.ca.
There are no conflicts of interest to disclose.

    Shifting Gears: From Consumer to Creator/Prosumer with 3D Printing

The exponential advancement of technology has altered and continues to change the human experience. More
specifically, technological advancements -- such as 3D printing and other means of self-fabrication -- have directly
impacted "the way people perceive and consume most of the everyday objects" (Filippi & Troxler, 2015, p. 58). Many see
additive manufacturing as a disruptor to the current systems (Bechtold, 2016). It breaks the chain of events that would
typically be expected in the manufacturing process. Weinberg (2013) suggests, "just as computers have allowed us to
become makers of movies, writers of articles, and creators of music, 3D printers allow everyone to become creators of
things" (p. 1). 3D printing is also breaking away from the norm through its roots in the open movement. Based on the
idea that openly sharing ideas and intellectual property leads to increased innovation, 3D printing has capitalized on
open source plans and designs to push equipment and creation into the mainstream (Neely, 2016). The Open Design
and Open Hardware movements have allowed consumers to become "prosumers" with the ability to create and make
the same products they would otherwise just consume (Filippi & Troxler, 2015, p. 58). This shift towards creation and
away from consumption has also worked its way into the educational setting where, more frequently, engineering and
design thinking are incorporated into curricula. A video from the California Management Review (2017) highlights how
3D printing is revolutionizing industries, the economy, and society.

The Shift Expands into Educational Settings

The Maker Movement was born out of the constructivist approach originally derived by Piaget (1967) and later built
upon by Papert (1980) and his ideas surrounding constructionism (Kostakis et al., 2015). Both constructivism and
constructionism put a focus on the student as creator, as one who builds knowledge through problem-solving and
design (Papert, 1980). This type of education allows students to learn based on their abilities and interests through

44 | From Consumers to Prosumers
multiple thinking processes (Blikstein et al., 2017). Again, we see a shift away from simply consuming to creating, in
this case from the consumption of information towards students constructing their own understanding. 3D printing,
alongside this disruption in education through the maker movement, has provided a platform in which students are able
to problem-solve through design, build tangible models or prototypes, and test their innovations firsthand. As Blikstein
et al. (2017) point out, students who use 3D printing are problem-solvers, understand and apply the design and scientific
process, and integrate and develop specific technology knowledge. Often included as part of a design thinking cycle or
STEAM engineering challenge, 3D printing has provided a means through which students can express their thinking and
contribute their knowledge to the world.
The following video provides more information on how the maker movement connects students to engineering and
technology.

          Figure 3.1 Edutopia highlights a student's experience learning STEM skills through hands-on lessons.

        A YouTube element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
        https://openeducationalberta.ca/educationaltechnologyethics/?p=28

                   Putting on the Brakes: Ethical Considerations

No longer are students tasked just with absorbing information and regurgitating it on standardized tests. Educational
movements have led us down a path where innovating and creating have become the new buzz and focus. Alongside
this change, our understanding of 3D printing and our ability to utilize it as a tool for creation continues to grow.
As access to this tool increases, ethical issues surrounding the use of 3D printing will also continue to emerge. 3D
printing has opened up the ability for students to design, remix designs, and develop tangible objects (Connelley &

                                                                                                                                         From Consumers to Prosumers | 45
Connelley, 2019). Moving students away from just consuming content and into a realm of creating it and sharing it with
the world also brings with it layers of questions as to the most ethical way of doing so. Issues that were once concerns
for manufacturers or textbook companies, that produced a great deal of what was consumed in schools, have now also
shifted into the hands of teachers and their students (Neely, 2016).

As we move toward increased student agency, increased choice, and an increased ability to design and physically
produce to meet these needs, we also face increased challenges in how to best navigate the `prosumer' culture within
education. With Open Design Hardwares and Platforms pushing the 3D movement forward, safety concerns and
intellectual property rights (Neely, 2016) come to mind quickly as we begin to integrate these tools within educational
settings. Open access designs provide our students and teachers with the ability to print just about anything; they
now have the opportunity to build items that could improve lives or negatively impact them. The balance between
encouraging and monitoring designs and fostering collaboration to promote innovation can make embedding 3D
printing into curriculum a complex endeavour.

Appendix A is adapted from Farrow's (2016) "Uncompleted Framework" (p. 103) which provides an ethical lens through
which to view educational research. It also provides a summary of the normative ethics discussed in this chapter.

Generally speaking, the process of 3D printing can be divided into three stages -- design, materials, and printing (Neely,
2016). Each stage has a range of ethical considerations that go along with successfully integrating the overall educational
technology into the classroom. As an educator, one should begin to question each stage of the process before diving
into 3D printing as a whole.

The design stage is of particular importance as this stage involves using online computer-aided design (CAD) programs
and information clouds for students to develop and share designs (Neely, 2016). As soon as a technology tool requires the
use of an online platform, student privacy and protection should be considered. How are CAD programs using student
information and data? What policies have been put into place and how do educators know that students' creations are
being kept private? What privacy issues are involved when students become prosumers?

                     Tinted Windows: 3D Printing and Privacy

According to Regan and Jesse (2019), there are six main privacy concerns: information privacy, anonymity, surveillance,
autonomy, non-discrimination, and ownership of information. When looking more closely at 3D printing in an
educational setting, information privacy, anonymity, and ownership of information stand out when examining online
platforms or CAD sites utilized to create and share designs.

Information Privacy in 3D printing (CAD software)

When collecting information about an individual, they should be fully informed as to what specific information is being
collected (Regan & Jesse, 2019). The amount of information collected should also be limited to what is required. Data
collection would typically happen within the first stage of the creation of a 3D design and could also possibly occur when
the design is shared in an online database. The majority of online CAD creation tools require creating a login. Looking
at Tinkercad as an example, if a student is under the age of 13, then parental consent is required (through email) or the
student must enter as part of a teacher's online classroom. The company reduces the amount of sensitive information
collected from children under the age 13 and requires teacher or parent authorization in order to further reduce the
amount of personal information held within the system (Autodesk, 2020). Tinkercad does collect Personally Identifiable

46 | From Consumers to Prosumers
Information (PII) from children, such as their birthdays in order to verify age, and this is likely linked permanently to
their accounts. According to Bourgeois (2019), "the likelihood of harm caused by a breach involving PII is greatly reduced
if an organization minimizes the amount of PII it uses, collects, and stores" (Obtaining Patent Protection section [New
Tab]). Perhaps, negative impacts or harms could be minimized if educators use CAD companies that limit collection of
student PII.

Anonymity in 3D Printing (CAD Softwares)

According to Regan and Jesse (2019), "individuals should be able to remain anonymous or obscure if they so choose"
(p.171). With the use of software such as Tinkercad, it could be difficult for a student to remain completely anonymous.
The site requires a user to complete a sign up and login setup. Students could feasibly use falsified information in order
to remain anonymous but the company does have specific policies in place to prevent this. Even if a student managed
to keep the majority of their private information away from the account that they created, their creations and designs
could still be tracked, and this information could be linked to their account and online identity within the program. It is
also possible for an IP address or location tag to connect a specific computer to their login, and it is hard to determine
the amount of information that could be connected to the student in this way.

Ownership of Data in 3D Printing (CAD Softwares)

Ownership of an individual's data and creations can also be questioned when looking more closely at CAD software
used in creating 3D printing designs. Regan and Jesse (2019) explain that "one of the most problematic issues involved
is whether educational technology companies should be able to use data generated by students' use of their software
programs to improve those programs, raising questions about whether the companies are using students as test subjects
for development and marketing of future Edtech products" (p. 172). CAD companies are able to collect student-created
designs, and the data involved in these creations -- even if it is not shared publicly in the companies' open libraries --
still remains within their databases. With 3D printing, it is very easy to replicate designs, and, in many ways, replicating
and modifying is encouraged. CAD companies could have access to student designs and could potentially use these
to analyze and develop future software, use these base designs in other ways that could bring profit to the company,
neglect to inform the user, or fail to consider the intellectual property rights of the student.

             In the Fast Lane: Avoiding Harm and Minimizing Risk

Avoiding Harm and Minimizing Risk Through Access to Designs

Much of the 3D and additive manufacturing momentum revolves around open access and the sharing of designs (Neely,
2016). As much as this can fuel innovation and creativity -- two areas important to the shift towards students as creators
-- this open access also has the potential to put those students at risk. Websites such as Thingiverse [New Tab] have
hundreds of thousands of designs ready to be printed. The initial stage of the 3D printing process, and its use of CAD
software and open libraries, requires educators to be cognizant of the ethical issues that could arise in the realm
of avoiding harm and minimizing risk. Some of the designs openly available to students could be dangerous to the

                                                                                                                                         From Consumers to Prosumers | 47
individual printing them or those in contact with them. For example, there are open and accessible designs for printing
guns and other weaponry. The images in Figure 3.2 and 3.3 were found with a quick search on Thingiverse [New Tab].

                                                                                        Figure 3.2. Potentially
                                                                                        harmful designs (gun)
                                                                                        found on Thingiverse.
                                                                                        Harley Quinn's Gun by
                                                                                        Sivve, 2016,
                                                                                        https://www.thingiverse.
                                                                                        com/thing:1754962, Used
                                                                                        under the Creative
                                                                                        Commons - Attribution
                                                                                        license.

                                                                                        Figure 3.3. Potentially
                                                                                        harmful designs (knife)
                                                                                        found on Thingiverse.
                                                                                        OTF Knife/Switch Blade
                                                                                        by David6722, 2019,
                                                                                        https://www.thingiverse.
                                                                                        com/thing:3619717, Used
                                                                                        under the Creative
                                                                                        Commons - Attribution
                                                                                        license.

The dark side of the open movement has been made very visible by companies such as Defense Distributor, which have
aimed to become `the wiki for guns,' (Zhou, 2018). This company distributes downloadable plans that can be used to
create 3D printed plastic guns (Zhou, 2018). This side of open source has caused legal arguments in the United States
between those who believe strongly in the right to own a firearm and those who deem this access a threat to society
(Zhou, 2018). An issue with plastic guns is their minimal use of metal (nothing more than a steel nail), which makes them
virtually impossible to detect with metal detectors. These `ghost guns' also do not require a background check to obtain
nor do they have a serial number for tracking purposes (Zhou, 2018). This ability to maneuver around the loopholes in
traditional laws put in place to minimize harm is one aspect that could make the open movement very dangerous. As this
movement grows, and more controversial plans are released, governments are forced to reexamine old laws and quickly
pass new ones to minimize the risk to society. This becomes a wide spread issue in that these controls are not always
international. Neely (2016) explains that "since the internet is transnational, it is difficult to regulate its content. In the
absence of international treaties, we are probably limited to attempting to regulate content on sites hosted within our
48 | From Consumers to Prosumers
country's borders. Since users can simply go to other sites, this is unlikely to be effective" (p. 1289). When 3D printing
is brought into an educational setting, and these open designs become more accessible to students, close attention will
be needed to manage open design platforms in this context. Minimizing students' ability to access open designs may
not be easily controlled by educators. The initial design phase of 3D printing and the underpinnings of this prosumer
movement has, in many ways, been fuelled by open access to designs.

Even when focusing on the good and working towards disrupting the assumed failures of a traditional manufacturing
chain, 3D printing could still lead to more harm than good. During the COVID-19 pandemic, many 3D printing hobbyists
and communities joined forces in an attempt to make up for the lack of medical equipment required as more and more
patients flooded the hospitals. But many individuals are not stopping to consider the risks involved and the limitations of
basic individual-owned 3D printers. Gallagher (2020) interviewed MIT's Martin Culpepper [New Tab], who highlights the
issues with using 3D printing to reduce the shortages of personal protective equipment (PPE) needed in hospitals during
the pandemic. One major issue is the "material compatibility with the sterilization techniques hospitals currently use
and the use of certain materials in a setting where it is uncertain how they interact with other chemicals, devices, and
contact with patients and care providers" (Gallagher, 2020, para. 5). Another issue is the "false sense of hope" (Gallagher,
2020, para. 7) provided by relying on 3D printing. It is also important to note that 3D printing is a time consuming
process; if MIT -- an organization with some of the top quality equipment in the world -- is not prepared to print personal
protective equipment, then why do hobbyists feel they are in the position to do this (Gallagher, 2020)? Many schools
have jumped on board with this quest to reduce shortages and would say that inspiring students to act in a way that
positively contributes to society is an authentic and worthwhile learning activity, and may not have considered the
negative issues associated with producing PPE.

Educators are placed in a powerful position to highlight the importance of using 3D printing to connect and collaborate
in order to develop new designs and prototype them. As Culpepper mentions, "3D printing technologies are set up
to build proof-of-concept designs, not to manufacture medical products at scale," (Gallagher, 2020, para. 5). Teachers
focusing on innovation and designing new products to meet needs during this time, and then helping students to
connect with manufacturing companies equipped to make their creations happen on a large scale, may be a more
effective way for teachers and students to contribute during this crisis. A prime example of the case of Quinn Callander
[New Tab], a young boy who responded to a Canadian medical facility that needed solutions to the discomfort that
medical masks can cause when worn for prolonged periods (Uptas, 2020). Quinn designed a plastic clip that removes the
pressure of masks on ears, started 3D printing his design for the medical facility, and then provided his plans on an open
platform to allow others to access, print, and donate (Uptas, 2020). This contrasts the idea of emergency printing PPE in
that this student came up with a new design solution to a current issue and then demonstrated how sharing his design
in an open platform can benefit society. Not only medical staff are faced with wearing masks for hours on end; other
essential workers such as grocery clerks face the same challenges. When 3D printing is used as a medium for innovation,
creation, and prototyping, it can become a powerful tool for learning in today's educational environments.

Similar to many technologies, 3D printing is not neutral. Teachers need to be aware that helping students develop the
skills necessary to create CAD designs and effectively 3D print, that they are enabling them to create and build objects
that can be helpful or harmful. Creating projects in which the 3D printer is used to solve problems in a positive way
may influence students to think of the 3D printer as more of a tool of positive solutions versus one in which harmful
objects can be built. Ultimately, educators are left to decide if teaching students the skills needed to design, 3D print,
and become prosumers cause more benefit than harm.

As a school or individual educator working towards effectively implementing 3D printing, it is worth looking deeper
into the user agreements set up to allow students to actually print. At the printing stage of the process, we may gain
back some of the control to minimize harm that may be lost during the design stage. An acceptable use policy (AUP
[New Tab]) provides directions to users regarding behaviour and use of technology approved by the community as a
whole (Kostadinov, 2020). A school starting to implement 3D printing could work to create an AUP before allowing

                                                                                                                                         From Consumers to Prosumers | 49
educators and students to access the printer and CAD software. An AUP for a 3D printer may include screening
designs and administrator review or even approval before printing; this could help prevent inappropriate designs from
becoming tangible objects through the use of school equipment. AUPs may also address intellectual property concerns
by preventing the printing and distribution of any kind of illegal content (Kostadinov, 2020)

Avoiding Harm and Minimizing Health Risks

Policies surrounding the physical location of the 3D printer and access to it also need to be considered when working
towards minimizing harm and risk. Physical harm can occur during the actual printing process through student
exposure to the plastic chemicals used in filaments (Zhang et al., 2018). Studies have found that 3D printers release
ultrafine particles (UFPs) and volatile organic compounds (VOCs) during the printing process (Sharma, 2018; Zhang et al.,
2018). Exposure to these particles can lead to respiratory and cardiovascular issues. These potentially harmful chemicals
remain in the vicinity of the printer even after the process has been completed (Zhang et al., 2018). These same studies
indicate that filaments manufactured by the same companies as the 3D printers tend to produce less emissions than
the lower cost budget options (Zhang et al., 2018). This becomes an ethical issue for schools wishing to capitalize on the
benefits of 3D printing while keeping costs low. PLA filament is FDA approved [New Tab] and tends to be the preferred
material in terms of health standards. Due to budget constraints, schools also tend to opt for PLC, which according to
a study at Georgia Tech may be safer for school settings, though these types of filaments still produce UFPs and VOCs
when heated (Zhang et al., 2018). Schools and educators looking to reduce costs could unknowingly gravitate towards
filaments that may be more harmful, health-wise, to their students. The video below provides further details on the
study.
Figure 3.4 Georgia Tech researchers reinforce the importance of standardizing the measurement of non-engineered

                                                      nanoparticle emissions from 3D printers

        A Vimeo element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
        https://openeducationalberta.ca/educationaltechnologyethics/?p=28

When selecting 3D printing as a means of creation, it is important for educators to know the possible health
ramifications of plastics and how to reduce health-related issues due to fume exposure. Georgia Tech recommends that:

   3D printers only be operated in well-ventilated areas.
   Nozzle temperature be set at the lower end of the suggested temperature range of a given material.
   People stand away from machines under operation.

50 | From Consumers to Prosumers
   People use systems and materials that have been tested and verified to have low emissions (Molitch-Hou, 2018).

Educators should ensure these suggestions are followed, and design an acceptable use policy for the equipment, to help
them glean all the benefits of creation that 3D printing has to offer while minimizing potential harm and risk to their
students.

Avoiding Harm and Minimizing Risk Environmentally

As students can create real, tangible objects using a 3D printer, environmental impact should also be examined when
aiming to minimize harm and risk. The material and printing stage of the 3D process can lead to excess plastic waste due
to printing multiple prototypes. Mistakes can also occur while printing due to incorrect temperatures or setups, leading
to more waste. Excess plastic build up has become a global concern. By integrating 3D printing into our educational
settings, are we just contributing more to this global issue? Many schools have the money to invest in the basic
equipment, printer, and filament, but do not invest in what is necessary to minimize waste and recycle the excess plastic.

Others (Huang et al., 2013; Nowak, 2013) argue that 3D printing "may have a positive effect on our environmental impact,
since it allows us to cut down the supply chain effect by printing objects as they are needed," (Kietzemann et al., 2015,
p. 212). Kietzemann et al. (2015) also mention that there is a "positive impact of printing objects closer to their point of
consumption, thereby reducing road and air miles" (p. 212), subsequently reducing pollution problems. Ethical, fair trade
filament [New Tab] companies have surfaced in response to the constant need for plastic filament in the 3D printing
process, one of which is Protoprint, a company out of Pune, India (Pelley, 2014). Protoprint has been licensed to sell fair
trade 3D printer filament (Pelley, 2014). Protoprint sets up filament labs next to landfills and garbage dump sites. They
collaborate with waste picker cooperatives in training the pickers to clean, shred, and extrude the filament (Pelley, 2014).
The choice to utilize recycled plastic for 3D printing filament is then placed in the hands of the educational facilities that
provide student access to the printers. Educators have the ability to minimize environmental harm that may be caused
by 3D projects by making environmentally sound choices in the materials provided to students.

Educators need to consider whether the 3D projects are intended to create plastic objects that will be used for a
purpose, such as constructionist learning through design and making, or solving a problem, or innovating, or whether
the 3D projects will be used merely for novelty purposes.

                        Intellectual Property and 3D Printing

According to Bourgeois (2019), "intellectual property is defined as `property (as an idea, invention, or process) that
derives from the work of the mind or intellect." This could include creations such as song lyrics, a computer program,
a new type of toaster, or even a sculpture" (Intellectual Property section). As Bechtold (2016) mentions, there is an
"intricate relationship between intellectual property and innovation," (p.535); therefore, as we begin to see students as
innovators and creators, this intricate connection begins to intertwine within the educational setting. With students
innovating and designing their own products, care needs to be taken when sharing their ideas with the world. Combine
this shift in education toward constructing knowledge with a tool such as the 3D printer and the associated online
platforms that go with it, and this calls for an exploration of creation rights.

Interestingly, the fact that 3D printing is a tool now accessible to schools could stem from the expiration of a range of
key patents (Bechtold, 2016; Hornick, 2015). This -- along with an overall movement towards open source version control
systems, software repositories, and online marketplaces -- have all set the stage for the collaborative and innovative

                                                                                                                                          From Consumers to Prosumers | 51
community that has pushed 3D printing into the mainstream (Hornick, 2015). A large majority of personal 3D printers
have been made available due to the RepRap project (Bechtold, 2016). Bechtold (2016) explains that "the goal was to
create a 3D printer which could replicate itself. All of the designs of the project have been released under the GNU
General Public License (GPL)" (p. 524). This means that anyone can copy and improve the project as long as they share
alike their modifications (Lunpa, 2012). The very beginnings of 3D printing have gone against the need to individually
own ideas and innovations and instead have encouraged innovation to be shared freely to further inspire and grow ideas.
Bechtold (2016) shares that "this has also facilitated the creation of specialized 3D printing software programs, which are
either licensed under open source licenses or under proprietary copyright licenses, but are provided for free" (p. 523).
This leaves educators wishing to capitalize on the collaborative nature of 3D printing as a medium, with the need to
develop an understanding as to what protection is available for student's intellectual property. How should these ideas
behind the openness in remixing and sharing be effectively communicated? Students should be made aware of what
exactly could happen to their designs and should be provided with options regarding how much they want to share and
how they want to be acknowledged.
It is easy to get swept into the romanticism of openly sharing one's creations, but as Parks (2016) highlights, "creators
want to be credited for their designs because it feels good to be recognized, plus as a creator you want to know if
and how your work is being used" (para. 1). Many open platforms like Thingiverse and Sketchfab are establishing ways
for creators easily to upload and mark their designs with a Creative Commons license in hopes of more accurately
providing attribution (Parks, 2016). Oftentimes these libraries of designs contain markers for tracking derivative work,
families of designs can be pulled out, and the ancestor or the original design is openly acknowledged (Lunpa, 2012). But
not everything is open and not everything is protected. This grey area causes questions of concern for educators: are
students copying and printing copyrighted materials? How does one know if a design is open to anyone or closed to all?
This requires educators to look more deeply into the copyright and patent laws that could impact 3D printing.

How 3D Designs and Objects are Protected

3D printing is a new medium that continues to disrupt systems, including how educators look at intellectual property
rights -- particularly in regards to digital technology use in schools. Works that in the past have been digitally created
(e.g. music, photos, movies) are generally all creative works and therefore fall more easily into the established copyright
laws (Weinberg, 2013). Useful objects would generally be protected by a patent. 3D printing and this newfound ability
to create tangible objects that may be artistic but also useful begins to blur the lines between copyright and patent. As
Weinberg (2013) states, "most (but by no means all) physical objects are not protected by any type of intellectual property
right. That means that anyone is free to copy, improve, distribute, or incorporate those objects as they see fit" (p. 1). Page
2 of Weinberg's (2013) report What's the Deal with Copyright and 3D printing? [New Tab] includes a table outlining what
type of intellectual property is protected by copyrights versus patents.

52 | From Consumers to Prosumers
In many ways, 3D printed creations combine creativity with
functionality and thereby make the process of protection complex.
Weinberg (2013) explains, "if you have a useful article you cannot
protect it with a copyright. Conversely, you will not be issued a patent
on an artistic work. That means that if something is eligible for patent
protection -- even if it does not have patent protection -- it cannot be
protected by copyright" (p. 4). U.S. laws focus on severability when
examining copyright in regards to objects that are both creative and
useful (Weinberg, 2013). Severability is used to find the artistic element
of the object that could stand alone; this part of the object could be
limited to copyright (Weinberg, 2013). Laws continue to develop in
these areas as technologies such as 3D printing continue to evolve. In
many ways it is up to educators to seek out clarity and remain up to
date during these constantly changing times.

Currently, in the United States, the Digital Millennium Copyright Act          Figure 3.5 Digital Millennium Copyright Act
[New Tab] is used to protect creators' designs online. Figure 5 provides       Flowchart. Adapted from "What's the Deal with
a better understanding of how this is put into action. Due to the              Copyright and 3D Printing," by M. Weinberg, 2013,
financial and time constraints of policing the internet, responsibility is     https://www.publicknowledge.org/. Copyright [2013]
placed on host sites to remove potential infringements (Weinberg,              by the Institute for Emerging Innovation, adapted
2013). Technically, if a student creates a design that is copyrightable,       under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
and then later sees that it has been copied without credit and uploaded        license.
to a host site, they can contact the site to file a complaint, and item will
be removed. If the individual who uploaded the student's original design
challenges this request to remove the file, the host site will post it again.
This eventually could progress to the student (or legal guardians) taking
further legal action against the uploader. Generally speaking, this
system has worked, and not many cases have gone beyond the steps of
removing content, but no system is perfect (Weinberg, 2013). Bechtold
(2016) explains that, "in general, from a practical perspective, right
owners of 3D design files face similar problems to owners of patents on
3D printer production or processes: it is hard to identify consumer
infringers, costly to enforce intellectual property rights against them,
and it may not be the optimal business strategy to sue your own
customers" (p. 530).

Knowing which designs online are open and available to remix and what is protected by copyright is important for
students and educators to understand, particularly so they can avoid ending up in a DMCA complaint. According to
Weinberg (2013), "as 3D printing and modelling grow in popularity, it is likely that we will see more companies and
individuals assuming they have a copyright for a design or object and demanding removal of unauthorized versions," (p.
21). The chart in Figure 6 outlines generally what is copyrightable in regards to 3D files and objects, and what can legally
be copied and printed by individuals.

                                                                               From Consumers to Prosumers | 53
                                                  Should Students be Licensing Their Work ?

                                                  Given the difficulty of placing a copyright on a 3D printed object, many
                                                  would argue that licensing that object is therefore pointless. As Weinberg
                                                  (2013) states, "if there is no copyright, there is no need for permission,
                                                  and no way to enforce the terms. A license without an underlying right is
                                                  legally meaningless" (p. 21). On the other hand, despite the fact that
                                                  adding a Creative Commons License would in theory carry no legal
                                                  ramifications, it may make a cultural impact that could influence the
                                                  direction of the 3D collective community (Weinberg, 2013). Connecting a
                                                  Creative Commons license is a "signal that the creator wants to include
                                                  her work in the ever-expanding and evolving network of creativity"
                                                  (Weinberg, 2013, p. 21). This signal also provides confidence in those who
                                                  wish to remix and use the object as a base (Weinberg, 2013).

Figure 3.6 Copyright of 3D objects and files.     As the community of 3D printers expands and the open source
Adapted from "What's the Deal with Copyright and  movement continues to influence it, more consideration to intellectual
3D Printing," by M. Weinberg, 2013,               property rights will need to be taken in order to create norms that work
https://www.publicknowledge.org/. Copyright       for this specific medium. The challenges faced by the 3D printing
[2013] by the Institute for Emerging Innovation,  community are also challenges for educators and students as 3D printing
adapted under a Creative Commons                  becomes more commonplace in educational settings. As Parks (2016)
Attribution-ShareAlike license.                   asks, "how do you view the source of a copyrighted 3D printed object so
                                                  that you can give credit, print your own version, or iterate on the original
                                                  design? How do you comply with the attribution requirements of the CC
                                                  license, if in fact it is legally required?" (para. 8). Flath et al. (2017)
                                                  highlight that the freedom to create and express is dependent on the
                                                  freedom to remix. Remixing is dependent on open access to others'
                                                  designs and ideas to spur innovation, and should be viewed as a way of
                                                  connecting and collaborating, not as infringement (Flath et al., 2017).
                                                  Finding a balance between protecting intellectual property and openly
                                                  sharing to encourage innovation will be important as more and more
                                                  individuals and schools adopt 3D printing as a tool for innovation and
                                                  creation.

                                                  Respect for Participant Autonomy and Independence

                                                                 When 3D printing is chosen as a medium for creation in an educational
setting, it is typically incorporated into a design cycle, STEAM project, inquiry project, or similar process (Wisdom &
Novack, 2019). Educators that place importance on engineering design alongside scientific inquiry are likely to gravitate
to this technological affordance (Wisdom & Novack, 2019). As Wisdom and Novack (2019) state, "it creates opportunities
for inquiry learning where students solve real-world problems that cut across multiple disciplines. Students work on the
open-ended design of personally meaningful objects that they research, design, prototype, 3D print, and evaluate," (p.
6). The personalization of these projects creates room for student choice and voice. Choices to create a design from
scratch, remix what is already there, and share with others to encourage growth are all crucial components of the
further development of 3D printing in and outside of the classroom. Alongside this independence and choice comes
responsibility and the need to understand the complete process of additive manufacturing and the impact it can have

54 | From Consumers to Prosumers
on already ingrained systems. Guidance and encouragement are needed to ensure that students are making the best
choices for themselves and society as a whole, as they move down this path towards prosumerism.

                                       Conclusion

Undoubtedly, 3D printing has already started to make its mark on the world; however, the extent to which it will disrupt
and alter systems has yet to be seen. The impacts that it has already had on humanity have been significant. Flath et
al. (2017) suggest that "the growing materialization of 3D printing, and the platforms like Thingiverse that facilitate the
technology, have empowered users to be more than just consumers -- but producers as well" (p. 38). The world has
seen the medical field impacted by the use of 3D printing and the open design movement. The recent problem of lack
of medical supplies due to the rampant COVID-19 pandemic has been taken on, to a certain extent, by 3D printing
enthusiasts who have been making up for failures in the supply chain by printing everything from protective shields to
spare parts for ventilators. As Bechtold (2016) mentions, "it is hard to predict the impact of 3D printing on end-consumer
markets, as this will depend on the future ease of use, the adaptation of the technology," (p. 22).

The mark that this technological tool will have on education is equally hard to predict, but also will depend largely on
how educators and educational systems adapt it to suit the creation needs of their students. 3D printing has the ability
to assist in the disruption of education and has become part of this shift away from the consumption of knowledge
and towards contributing to it. As with all disruptors and new ways of approaching situations, ethical questions arise.
Educators wishing to make use of 3D printing will put themselves and students in a grey zone ethically, where not all of
their questions have clear answers, and not all of their actions have clear consequences. As the 3D printing movement
shifts and grows, educators will likely find themselves examining the purpose behind their projects and how they can
work to instil a mindset of creating to solve problems. As more CAD design apps are made available for student use,
privacy and data protection will need to be further examined, and educators will need to ask questions as to how much
information is being collected on students and what is being done with this data (Regan & Jesse, 2019). Aware and
informed educators will be needed to set up strong AUPs and to build standards aimed at minimizing the harm that
could come from open access to designs, dangerous materials, and the potential negative impact to the environment.
Intellectual property rights and issues will need to continually adapt to work with this tool that combines creative
and useful works (Weinberg, 2013). Educators will ask themselves: Are my students copying and printing copyrighted
materials? How can students properly protect and share their designs? What licensing has become available to address
the difficulty in protecting this type of intellectual property?

How we approach 3D printing and the ethical dilemmas that it creates will determine how impactful 3D printing can
be in the process of students becoming powerful innovators and creators. Will 3D printing push students into the
driver's seat of their learning, or will ethical considerations force them to remain safe and sound as passengers in the
educational experience?

                                        References

Autodesk, INC. (2020, January, 1). Children's privacy statement. Privacy Statement. https://www.autodesk.com/
   company/legal-notices-trademarks/privacy-statement/childrens-privacy-statement

Bechtold, S. (2016). 3D printing, intellectual property and innovation policy. IIC - International Review of Intellectual
   Property and Competition Law, 47(5), 517-536. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40319-016-0487-4

                                                                                                                                         From Consumers to Prosumers | 55
Blikstein, P., Kabayadondo, Z., Martin, A., & Fields, D. (2017). An assessment instrument of technological literacies in
   makerspaces and fabLabs. Journal of Engineering Education, 106(1), 149-175. https://doi.org/10.1002/jee.20156

Bulger, M. (2016). Personalized learning: The conversations we're not having. Data and Society Research Institute.
   https://datasociety.net/pubs/ecl/PersonalizedLearning_primer_2016.pdf

Bourgeois, D. (2019). The ethical and legal implications of information systems information systems for business and
   beyond. In D. Bourgeois (Ed), Information Systems for Business and Beyond. Pressbooks: Open Textbook Site.
   https://bus206.pressbooks.com/chapter/chapter-12-the-ethical-and-legal-implications-of-information-systems/

California Management Review. (2017, May 1). The 3D printing revolution [Video]. YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/
   watch?v=nRQCz3rOQpc

Connelly, L. (2017, October 10). STEM education: benefits of 3D printing in the classroom. Me3D. https://me3d.com.au/
   2017/stem-education-benefits-3d-printing-classroom/.

David6722. (2019). OTF knife/switchblade [Photograph]. Thingiverse. https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:3619717

De Filippi, P., & Troxler, P. (2015). From material scarcity to artificial abundance: The case of fabLabs and 3D printing
   technologies. In B. Van Den Berg, S. Van Der Hof, & E. Kosta (Eds.), 3D Printing Legal, Philosophical and Economic
   Dimensions (pp. 65-83). Springer. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2725404

The Digital Millennium Copyright Act of 1998, Pub. L. No. 105-304, 112 Stat. 2860 (1998). https://www.copyright.gov/
   legislation/dmca.pdf

Edutopia. (2014, July 22). How the maker movement connects students to engineering and technology. [Video]. YouTube.
   https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e9lvW6ZY-Gs

Farrow, R. (2016). A framework for the ethics of open education. Open Praxis, 8(2), 93-109. https://doi.org/10.5944/
   openpraxis.8.2.291

Flath, C.M., Friesike, S., Wirth, M., & Thiesse, F. (2017). Copy, transform, combine: Exploring the remix as a form of
   innovation. Journal of Information Technology, 32(4), 306-325. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41265-017-0043-9

Gallagher, M.B. (2020, March 26). 3 questions: the risk of using 3D printing to make personal protective equipment. MIT
   News. http://news.mit.edu/2020/3q-risks-using-3d-printing-make-personal-protective-equipment-0326

Hornick, J. (2015). 3D printing and IP rights: The elephant in the room. Santa Clara Law Review, 55(4), 800-819.
   https://digitalcommons.law.scu.edu/lawreview/vol55/iss4/1

Huang, S. H., Liu, P., Mokasdar, A., & Hou, L. (2013). Additive manufacturing and its societal impact: A literature
   review. The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 67, 1191-1203. https://doi-
   org.ezproxy.lib.ucalgary.ca/10.1007/s00170-012-4558-5

Kietzmann, J., Pitt, L., & Berthon, P. (2015). Disruptions, decisions, and destinations: Enter the age of 3-D printing and
   additive manufacturing. Business Horizons, 58(2), 209-215. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bushor.2014.11.005

Kostadinov, D. (2014, 23 September). The essentials of an acceptable use policy.
   InfoSec. https://resources.infosecinstitute.com/essentials-acceptable-use-policy/#gref

Kostakis, V., Niaros, V., & Giotitsas., C. (2015). Open source 3D printing as a means of learning: An educational experiment
   in two high schools in Greece. Telematics and Informatics, 32(1), 118-128. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tele.2014.05.001

56 | From Consumers to Prosumers
Lunpa. (2012, January 4). CC and the 3D printing community. Creative Commons. https://creativecommons.org/2012/
   01/04/cc-and-the-3d-printing-community/

Molitch-Hou, M. (2018, November 28). 3D printing health risks identified by UL and Georgia Tech. Enginnering.com.
   https://www.engineering.com/3DPrinting/3DPrintingArticles/ArticleID/18080/3D-Printing-Health-Risks-
   Identified-by-UL-and-Georgia-Tech.aspx

Neely, E. L. (2016). The risks of revolution: Ethical dilemmas in 3D printing from a US perspective. Science and
   Engineering Ethics, 22(5), 1285-1297. https://doi-org.ezproxy.lib.ucalgary.ca/10.1007/s11948-015-9707-4

Nowak, P. (2013, June 20). The promise and peril of 3D. Corporate Knights. https://www.corporateknights.com/
   channels/clean-technology/the-promise-and-peril-of-3d-13717359/

Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. Basic Books.

Parks, J. (2016, April 16). How should we attribute 3D printed objects? Creative Commons. https://creativecommons.org/
   2016/04/19/attribute-3d-printed-objects/

Pelley, J. (2014). Fair-trade plastic for 3D printers. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 12(9), 484-488.
   https://doi.org/10.1890/1540-9295-12.9.484

Piaget, J., & Inhelder, B. (1967). The child's conception of space. Norton.

Regan, P.M., & Jesse, J. (2019). Ethical challenges of edtech, big data and personalized learning: Twenty-first century
   student sorting and tracking. Ethics and Information Technology, 21(3), 167-179. https://doi-
   org.ezproxy.lib.ucalgary.ca/10.1007/s10676-018-9492-2

Sharma, R. (2018, February 7). Risks and rewards: 3D printing health and hazards. TechGenix. http://techgenix.com/3d-
   printing-health-hazards/

Sivve. (2016). Harley Quinn's Gun [Photograph]. Thingiverse. https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:1754962

Taylor & Francis. (2018, April 27). Video abstract -- Characterization of particle emissions from consumer fused deposition
   modeling 3D printers [Video]. Vimeo. https://vimeo.com/266868807

Uptas, A. (2020). Boy scout creates ear guard for people who feel pain from wearing face masks all day. deMilked.
   https://www.demilked.com/boy-scout-creates-ear-guards-quinn-callander/

Weinberg, M. (2013). What's the deal with copyright and 3D printing? Institute for Emerging Innovation, Public

Knowledge.                                                                   https://www.publicknowledge.org/files/

What%27s%20the%20Deal%20with%20Copyright_%20Final%20version2.pdf

Wisdom, S., & Novak, E. (2019). Using 3D printing to enhance STEM teaching and learning: Recommendations for designing
   3D printing projects. DOI: 10.1163/9789004415133_010

Zhang, Q., Sharma, G., Wong, J., Davis, A.Y., Black, M., Biswa, P., & Weber, R.J. (2018) Investigating particle emissions and
   aerosol dynamics from a consumer fused deposition modeling 3D printer with a lognormal moment aerosol model.
   Aerosol Science and Technology, 52^(10), 1099-1111. https://doi.org/10.1080/02786826.2018.1464115

Zhou, M. (2018, September 25). 3D-printed gun controversy: Everything you need to know. CNET. https://www.cnet.com/
   news/the-3d-printed-gun-controversy-everything-you-need-to-know/

                                                                                      From Consumers to Prosumers | 57
                                       Appendix A

58 | From Consumers to Prosumers
Table 3.1 Completed ethical framework for utilizing 3D printing within an educational setting based on Farrow's (2016)
                                                                   Uncompleted Framework

Principle      Duties & Responsibilities                   Outcomes                       Personal Development
                 (deontological theory)          (consequentialist theory)                     (virtue theory)

Respect for     Students should                  Students can choose whether or not      Students can build an
participant        understand that they have         to participate with this tech or         understanding of the maker
autonomy           a right to independently          others.                                  culture and choose to
                   choose how openly they                                                     contribute their own design.
                   share their creations.         Students could create objects that
                                                     demonstrate their understanding of    Students can develop their
                Students should be able to          how things work.                         ability to choose when to share
                   choose other media for                                                     work, when to remix work, and
                   their creations should 3D                                                  when to copy.
                   printing not suffice.

Avoid harm /    Student/Educator/                Student ability to produce harmful      Student's ability to make good
minimize risk      Administration understand         or beneficial objects.                   decisions in regards to printing
                   what data is collected on                                                  harmful objects.
                   students and how it is         Provides students with a way of
                   used.                             improving others designs and          Students develop the ability to
                                                     creating beneficial prototypes.          apply the decision-making
                Student/Educator                                                             process to other areas of their
                   understand health and          Negative health/environmental              life.
                   environmental risks               effects.
                   associated with materials.                                              Students develop their
                                                                                              understanding of intellectual
                                                                                              property and how to effectively
                                                                                              share their creations.

Full            Educators should inform          Meets the needs of the students, as     Provides a medium for
disclosure         students of the intention         it is personalized and adapted to        students to learn 21st century
                   behind the assignment and         their thinking and design skills.        skills.
                   how their data/work could
                   be used and shared.                                                     Allows students to express
                                                                                              their learning.
                Educators should inform
                   students on copyright and                                               Promotes continuous lifelong
                   creative commons                                                           learning for teachers.
                   licensing options for their
                   work.

Privacy &       Educators and students           Privacy and data security policies      Allows educators and students
data security      should be aware of the            may differ depending on region and       to build their understanding of
                   privacy policies of selected      may suffer breaches.                     privacy policies and data
                   CAD softwares.                                                             security of a range of CAD
                                                                                              softwares.

Integrity       Technology is integrated by      Students can become more                Students ability to contribute
                   educators as a means for          prepared for a future of innovation      to the greater good through
                   students to create, and not       and utilization of technology.           product design.
                   for personal gains.

                                                                                          From Consumers to Prosumers | 59
Independence   Students develop their          Students make independent               Students develop the ability to
                  ability to independently         decisions about sharing their            independently make good
                  make the right decisions in      designs, the materials they use to       decisions about their creations.
                  regards to their own             create, and the consequences of
                  designs and creations.           those decisions.

               Students become
                  independently responsible
                  for their designs and the
                  impact of those designs.

Informed       Students are informed of        Students understand the                 Students are informed, and
consent           the data being collected by      consequences of their creations and      develop an understanding of
                  the specific CAD software        consent to sharing them.                 the best ways to contribute to
                  being used.                                                               an open system such as that of
                                                Students are informed of the               the 3D printing community.
               Students are informed of           consequences of remixing work.
                  the ways to protect their
                  work and agree to the         Students are informed of copyright
                  terms of sharing their           and licensing.
                  creations.

Media Attributions

   Figure 3
   Figure 3
   Figure 5  Nicole Neutzling
   Figure 6  NIcole Neutzling

60 | From Consumers to Prosumers
PART II: PROMOTING EQUITY IN PERSONALIZED
LEARNING CONTEXTS: ACADEMIC RESOURCE
SHARING, ADAPTIVE LEARNING SYSTEMS,
STEM, ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGIES

                                                                                                        Part II: Promoting Equity in Personalized Learning Contexts:
                                                                                                   Academic Resource Sharing, Adaptive Learning Systems, STEM,
Chapter 4: Ethical Issues in Academic Resource

Sharing

JEFF LOWRY

Over the past decade, a new type of online educational marketplace of ideas has developed. Rather than creating small
study groups to discuss class notes and tackle difficult assignments, post-secondary students can now use online
platforms to connect with thousands of other students across the world studying similar topics. Academic resource
sharing (ARS) sites such as Quizlet (http://quizlet.com [New Tab]), Chegg (http://www.chegg.com [New Tab]), and
Course Hero (http://www.coursehero.com [New Tab]) have emerged as popular platforms. Quizlet was visited by one-
third of American college students in 2018 (Wan, 2018), while Chegg boasted 30 million users worldwide as of 2019
(McKenzie, 2019). Course Hero has 1 million paid subscribers and 400 million visits per year (Lederman, 2020). It is not
difficult to see why ARS sites are so popular. Quizlet contains over 200 million user-created study sets, along with an
AI-powered option that builds unique study plans for individual users (Wan, 2018). Chegg began as a textbook rental
company but has expanded to offer detailed homework responses, answers to problem sets, and access to experts who
can assist with solutions (McKenzie, 2019). In a similar manner, Course Hero has developed into a broad platform that
allows students access to course syllabi, essays, exams, and instructors' presentation materials (Lederman, 2020). Simply
by accessing one portal, students have access to an array of information such as class notes, study guides, sample essays,
and assessment materials -- access that would have been considered unthinkable by their counterparts a generation
ago.

Although ARS sites offer undeniable benefits in terms of allowing students to access materials and receive assistance,
these platforms have come under criticism from educators and administrators. As will be discussed, there have been
a number of high-profile cases of students improperly using material from ARS sites. Quizlet, Chegg, and Course Hero
all have policies aimed to prevent uploading of unauthorized materials, but given the size of their databases and the
amount of material added on a daily basis, enforcement has been inconsistent (Gillis, 2019). Consequently, this chapter
will examine the ethical issues that have arisen due to the proliferation of academic resource sharing sites, with the
aim of identifying best practices that students, instructors, and administrators can follow to reduce the likelihood of
academic dishonesty.

Section 1: Description of Ethical Issues in Digital Teaching and Learning (Full
                                       Disclosure)

The proliferation of academic resource sharing sites has had a significant impact on both traditional and digital learning.
On the positive side, ARS sites allow students to apply their digital literacy skills as active participants in the Web 2.0 era.
In fact, ARS sites fulfill the four main digital literacy skills sets outlined by Hockly (2012): language-based literacies (being
able to navigate and interpret multimedia-based sites), information-based literacies (understanding how to search for,
manage, and critically evaluate online materials), connection-based literacies (knowing how to generate digital content
as part of a network), and re-design based literacies (being able to take existing materials and build upon or repurpose
them for other uses, including copyright and plagiarism knowledge). As noted by Gillis (2019), active participation in
ARS sites leads to "empowering students and giving them more ownership over their learning processes" (p. 225). By
consulting experts on sites such as Chegg, students can learn to negotiate the meaning of course material, and to gain a
deeper understanding of it. ARS sites also allow users to connect with peers across the world; as stated by the director

                                                                                                       Chapter 4: Ethical Issues in Academic Resource Sharing | 63
of academic technology at Marist College, "imagine business students at Stanford, Marist, University of Beijing, and the
University of Paris connecting up outside their courses to study together and maybe even work on team projects . . .
This may become the `study group' of the 21st century" (Kolowich, 2009, para. 17).

Increasingly, however, ARS sites represent a challenge to traditional university academic honesty policies. Universities
have academic misconduct policies often outlining prohibited behaviours. At the University of Calgary, for instance,
these include cheating, fabrication, falsification, plagiarism, and unauthorized assistance (University of Calgary, 2019a).
Within the category of cheating, two examples may pertain to ARS sites: "having, using, or attempting to use
unauthorized materials or devices for assistance in completing academic activities" and "obtaining assistance from
another person in completing coursework, such that there is a real question whose work is being assessed" (University
of Calgary, 2019b, p. 4). The two other largest universities in Alberta, the University of Alberta and the University of
Lethbridge, have similar definitions of cheating. Recent years have seen instances of students finding exam answer
keys on ARS sites. At Texas Christian University in 2018, 12 students were suspended after they used answers found
on Quizlet to complete a final exam. They claimed that they did not realize the practice exam would be the same as
their final exam, but the university argued that it was the students' responsibility to report that they had already seen
the questions (McKenzie, 2018). Additionally, in 2019, administrators at Brandon University discovered that a number of
nursing students had obtained the answers to their final exam from a private test bank uploaded to an unnamed website.
In this case, however, the students were allowed to take an alternate version of the exam, though with a penalty applied
(Man, 2020).

Given the potential for cheating and violating academic integrity, ARS sites have developed strict policies about proper
use. Many of these policies stem from a deontological approach, which stresses the importance of following clearly
defined rules on right and wrong behaviour (Farrow, 2016). Chegg, Course Hero, and Quizlet all have their own versions
of honour codes which emphasize that users must not violate their institutions' academic honesty policies. Quizlet, for
instance, states, "It's simple: don't cheat. Quizlet is meant for learning, not cheating. Test banks, exam questions, or other
confidential course content should not be shared publicly on Quizlet" (Quizlet, 2020, bullet point 5).

For ARS sites, there are also consequentialist considerations (Farrow, 2016) in wanting to prevent students from
cheating. High-profile cases such as TCU or Brandon University could lead universities to take an adversarial
perspective. In 2019, professors at Purdue University spoke out against the integration of Purdue's Online Writing Lab
(OWL) with Chegg's writing tools. As one professor argued, "I don't know why we are lending our hard-earned reputation
to a company that is essentially making it easy for students to cheat" (McKenzie, 2019, para. 2). Chegg stressed that it
was working hard to prevent cheating, and the integration went ahead as planned. Failing to address cheating could also
have negative financial consequences for ARS sites. In defending the partnership, the director of OWL noted that Chegg
has a "fiduciary and shareholder responsibility to be ethical and responsible" (McKenzie, 2019, para. 11).

Section 2: Connection of Ethical Issue to Privacy, Data Security and Informed
                                         Consent

So far, this chapter has focused on ARS sites mostly from the perspective of students and institutions, but there is
one more group that is intricately involved -- post-secondary instructors. In many cases, instructors have had their
presentation notes, study materials, quizzes, and syllabi uploaded without their knowledge or consent. One professor
from Auburn University, for instance, discovered that several notes, articles, and study aids had been copied from his
website to Course Hero (Halford, 2010), while a biology professor at Georgia State University came across a set of her
final exams while searching Quizlet (Spence, 2018). A faculty member at UCLA whose study guides appeared on an ARS
site reflected that "(w)e were already in the digital age, but it still felt like cheating to me . . . I still viewed it pretty

64 | Chapter 4: Ethical Issues in Academic Resource Sharing
antagonistically" (Lederman, 2020, para. 2). Although more instructors are learning about the challenges posed by ARS
sites, this awareness is far from universal. A 2019 poll by Course Hero, for example, found that only 43% of educators had
heard of their site (Lederman, 2020). In recent years, ARS sites have tried to reach out to educators and include them
as partners in disseminating knowledge. Course Hero and Quizlet include sections for instructors to sign up and share
materials; as of 2019, 30,000 instructors had created profiles on Course Hero, though it is not clear how many of the
profiles were in active use (Lederman, 2020). Ultimately, given the number of ARS sites in existence, it is not surprising
that instructors are having difficulty keeping up with potential misuse of their material.

A personal analysis of Course Hero postings relating to the English departments at the University of Calgary and the
University of Alberta found a patchwork of adherence to copyright and intellectual property rules. From the University
of Calgary English department, for example, 295 documents have been posted as of April 2020; they comprise a mix
of lecture notes, study review notes, course outlines, essays, and assessments. While most of the uploads are either
summaries or student-generated study materials, three documents appeared to violate Course Hero's rules: a PDF
copy of Shirley Jackson's book The Haunting of Hill House, along with two scanned tests that included answers. Other
documents fell into a grey area, such as course notes including slides that appeared to be from a professor's lecture,
with no indication that the professor had given permission for them to be uploaded. The University of Alberta English
department section, with 465 documents, yielded similar results. Some assessments were clearly labelled as sample
exams for study purposes, though again with no clear permission given to share. However, an entire set of quizzes was
uploaded from one introductory level course in 2014. There were also a number of course outlines and rubrics present,
which are covered under intellectual property regulations. In addition, both university sites contained many examples
of uploaded student essays, which will be covered in more detail in Section 3, as they raise the potential for plagiarism.

The final consideration in terms of privacy, data security and informed consent pertains to the personal information
that users agree to share when signing up for ARS sites. Course Hero, Quizlet, and Chegg all have detailed privacy
policies outlining what information they gather from users and how that information can be utilized or shared. All
three sites store standard personal information given upon signing up (i.e. name, email address, school, gender, and
birthdate), but promise not to share personal information with third-party sites. They also make use of cookies and other
tracking technologies, which may lead to targeted advertisements based on usage. If users choose to upgrade to a paid
version, their credit card information is not stored on the ARS site. Overall, it would appear that ARS privacy policies
are similar to other websites that require personal accounts, and, to date, there have been no reported data breaches.
However, as with any other website, users must familiarize themselves with how their personal information is stored
and used. In fact, a recent survey revealed that 91% of users agreed to the terms and conditions of a hypothetical social
media site without actually having read them (Cakebread, 2017). Users do have control over what additional information
they choose to include. On Chegg, for instance, users can create an optional personal profile with a photograph and
information about personal and academic interests. In this case, users could rely on their digital literacy skills to decide
how much or how little they want to add.

As with using tests for cheating purposes, a deontological perspective (Farrow, 2016) can be applied to the issue of
informed consent. Simply put, posting an instructor's copyrighted material without consent is in clear violation of
institutional and website policies on acceptable use. However, the issue can also be approached from a consequentialist
perspective (Farrow, 2016). By using notes or study materials posted without analyzing their usefulness, students may
actually end up harming their learning. The Purdue professor who opposed working with Chegg further stated that
"(i)f this were a site that genuinely helped students to master the materials, it wouldn't be a problem. But it's not set
up like that -- it dangles the solution in front of students" (McKenzie, 2019, para. 2). Additionally, as noted in Young
(2010), students who take shortcuts in learning class material tend to perform poorly on assessments. On a positive
note, instructors can stress that developing one's own notes and materials can lead to more positive outcomes. As
they progress, students can also be encouraged to learn about the ownership they possess over their own work, thus
considering informed consent from a virtue ethics standpoint (Farrow, 2016). Chegg has also attempted to address
academic honesty from this perspective, explaining to students why it is important to adhere to academic honesty

                                                                                                       Chapter 4: Ethical Issues in Academic Resource Sharing | 65
policies. Their Chegg Intellectual Property Rights Owner (CHIPRO) program includes an FAQ section about why posted
notes need to be paraphrased and how individual professors may have differing perspectives on posting material from
their classes (Chegg, 2020). It must be noted that the CHIPRO program link is located along with dozens of others in
their terms of use, which students are unlikely to seek out. However, it is a good alternative to simply state not to do
this.

 Section 3: Connection of Ethical Issue to Educational Integrity by Avoiding
                              Harm and Minimizing Risk

In addition to cheating on tests and violating copyright infringement rules, ARS sites raise the risk of students engaging
in plagiarism. Plagiarism represents a significant and continuing challenge to post-secondary institutions. A 2014 survey
of Canadian universities discovered that plagiarism made up over 50% of reported cases of academic misconduct, more
than double the next most common category of unauthorized assistance (Moore, 2014). For students looking for an easy
source from which to plagiarize, Course Hero in particular represents an open marketplace. The University of Alberta
and the University of Calgary English department sections on Course Hero each contain over 100 essays, projects, or
writing assignments. It must be noted that users are not in violation of Course Hero's terms of use by sharing their
own written materials; however, copying others' materials is a clear infraction. In addition to simple copy-and-paste
plagiarism, there is also the potential for getting assistance with finding solutions on ARS sites. Chegg Study, which is
available for $15 a month, contains a section called "Ask an Expert Anytime" in which students can post a picture of their
homework problem and receive a solution in 30-45 minutes (Chegg, 2020). The site also contains a database of more
than 20 million homework solutions (Chegg, 2020). Unless it is forbidden by the professor, getting outside help with
difficult problems is a valid approach that could be compared to asking a friend for help. However, the existence of so
many prepared answers surely raises the odds of students submitting copied answers.

The development of the Web 2.0 era may be impacting how university students view plagiarism. Collaboration through
platforms such as Wikis has become commonplace, and the rise of blogging and social media has led to what Haitch
(2016) refers to as "patch writing: a new kind of writing style . . . (in which) younger people, especially, create blogs
and posts by piecing together large chunks from various sources" (p. 267). With ideas being shared and remixed so
easily, traditional forms of academic-style attribution are not feasible, as it can be difficult to ascertain exactly who has
contributed what (Haitch, 2016). The use and sharing of images is another area in which the Internet has challenged
longstanding views of plagiarism. Haitch (2016) compared images found online to "toys left indefinitely in the sandbox
of a public park" (p. 272), making proper attribution nearly impossible. Interestingly, some research has shown that
students view plagiarism from internet sources as less serious. Heckler and Forde (2014) found that 35% of students
believed using ideas from the internet was a justified form of plagiarism since the internet was developed as an open way
to share information. Some students also believed that copyright laws did not apply to work published on the internet
(Heckler & Forde, 2014).

The preceding paragraph should not be taken as an argument that instructors should accept assignments that contain
plagiarized work. Rather, it suggests that a strict deontological approach (Farrow, 2016), expecting students not to
plagiarize simply because there are rules forbidding it, is not sufficient on its own. From a consequentialist perspective
(Farrow, 2016), instructors can stress the importance of adhering to plagiarism regulations in order to avoid punishment;
the existence of plagiarism checkers like Turnitin.com makes it easier for instructors to spot transgressions. A more
positive consequentialist approach could focus on the importance of proper referencing style in achieving a higher
grade, as most university rubrics contain a category assessing citations and referencing. Another approach, which takes
virtue ethics (Farrow, 2016) into account, is to encourage students to reflect on their understanding of plagiarism. For
instance, students could consider the differences between remixing existing material online and copying sentences

66 | Chapter 4: Ethical Issues in Academic Resource Sharing
from various sources as part of an essay. As creators of digital work, students could also gain an understanding of why
giving proper credit is important. This would help to develop critical thinking skills in a digital context, which Gillis (2019)
claimed is "a valued skill as part of an increasingly digitally enabled society and labour market in which information is a
core resource" (p. 215).

      Section 4: Connection of Ethical Issues with Respect to Participant
                            Autonomy and Independence

ARS sites have become a fact of life for post-secondary institutions over the past decade; banning students from using
them would be impossible. Therefore, all stakeholders should focus on best practices to ensure that students can learn
from ARS sites in an autonomous manner, while ensuring that academic honesty codes and intellectual property rights
are followed. One major push needs to come from the institutional level. Post-secondary institutions must develop
specific policies related to ARS sites that students learn as part of their onboarding. The good news is that some
Canadian universities have already done so. The University of Toronto, Queen's University, and McGill University all
have specific wording in their academic integrity policies specifying proper use of ARS sites. The University of Toronto
presents students with potential scenarios and outcomes related to posting notes online -- a consequentialist approach
-- as well as strategies that students can use to become more effective learners -- a virtue ethics approach (Academic
Integrity at U of T, n.d.). However, other university policies could be more explicit. The University of Calgary makes
reference to file-sharing websites when giving examples of unauthorized assistance, but does not specifically mention
ARS sites as part of their overall policy. Creating a separate subsection relating to ARS sites appears a possible starting
point for providing clarity to students.

Naturally, it is essential to find ways to properly communicate that information, which is where instructors can
contribute. Including an overview of academic integrity policies as part of class orientation would prove beneficial. In
addition, instructors could have students discuss scenarios related to academic integrity. This would help students to
understand their positions as creators and contributors of content, which is an important part of developing expertise
in information literacy (Gillis, 2019). Addressing academic integrity in a proactive manner would also be more productive
than assigning punishment after students violate rules (Gillis, 2019). Instructors could also place notices on their
materials reiterating that they are not to be shared. On the other hand, instructors could also decide that they will
allow students to share certain materials online. Giving permission in the form of a Creative Commons license would
clearly delineate how others could use uploaded material while helping to build students' knowledge of proper methods
of online resource sharing (Gillis, 2019). Finally, instructors could expand their range of assessments in order to avoid
the possibility of tests or answer keys being leaked. Students could complete an in-class problem-solving activity, for
example, rather than doing a multiple-choice quiz from a standardized test bank. Although modifying and updating
assessments involves extra work, it is a recommended practice for educators and is likely more effective than searching
multiple sites for copies of assessments (Lienick & Esparza, 2018).

Finally, students can take a more nuanced approach to ARS sites. The ad hoc rules that exist on other digital platforms
are different from the stricter rules that apply when university policies on academic honesty are involved. As previously
mentioned, one crucial part of information-based literacy is critically appraising online materials. Students should keep
in mind that ARS sites are businesses first and foremost. They all provide limited free access but charge monthly fees
for full access to materials and experts. This may prove a barrier for students of limited financial means, so they need
to weigh the benefits of signing up for a paid membership. Students also need to be vigilant in assessing the source and
validity of uploaded materials. In one healthcare finance class, for instance, over half the class gave similar but incorrect
answers to an exam question; the instructor later discovered that the students had been using an ARS study guide that
contained numerous errors (Lienick & Esparza, 2018). Instructors could assist by providing students with examples of

                                                                                                       Chapter 4: Ethical Issues in Academic Resource Sharing | 67
learning being harmed by improper use of ARS sites. Ultimately though, students will have to apply their knowledge
about academic honesty. ARS sites do not actively police themselves, and requests to remove material can only come
from the rights holders. It is inevitable that students will encounter copyrighted material, assessments, or essays, but if
they can apply their digital literacy skills and analyze the use of material from a proper ethical standpoint, they will be
more successful in using ARS sites in a positive manner.

                                       Conclusion

The challenge of ensuring that students follow rules of academic integrity is not new, but it has become more difficult
in the age of ARS sites. If students are unfamiliar with the pitfalls of using these sites, they are likely to run afoul of
institutional policies, whether intentionally or unintentionally. They also run the risk of becoming overly reliant on
information uploaded by others, which could have a detrimental effect on the development of critical thinking skills.
This became all the more likely in the age of emergency distance learning that North American institutions dealt with
beginning in the spring of 2020. Instructors rapidly converted to modes of online instruction, uploading documents,
and recording lessons for student use. Adherence to academic honesty rules become more important than ever as
students work from home and become increasingly reliant on online resources. However, if used properly, ARS sites
have the potential to deliver benefits to students who are isolated and do not have access to university libraries or in-
person study groups. Instructors could also use this opportunity to explore the range of services offered by ARS sites
and to figure out ways to incorporate them into their instruction. It is not yet clear what the results of emergency
distance learning will be, but there is an excellent opportunity for students, instructors, and institutions to learn from
one another and gain a greater understanding of how to use ARS sites in a constructive and ethical manner.

Note: A summary of the principles of ethics as described by Farrow (2016) and how they apply to ARS sites can be found in
Appendix A.

                                        References

Cakebread, C. (2017, November 15). You're not alone, no one reads terms and service agreements. Business Insider.
   https://www.businessinsider.com/deloitte-study-91-percent-agree-terms-of-service-without-reading-2017-11

Farrow, R. (2016). A framework for the ethics of open education. Open Praxis, 8(2), 93-109. https://openpraxis.org/
   index.php/OpenPraxis/article/view/291

Gillis, R. (2019). "Caring about sharing": Copyright and student academic integrity in the university learning management
   system. In S. Benson (Ed.), Copyright conversations: Rights literacy: Rights literacy in a digital world (pp. 211-232).
   Association of College and Research Libraries. http://dx.doi.org/10.17613/dk2w-9v87

Haitch, R. (2016). Stealing or sharing? Cross-cultural issues of plagiarism in an open-source era. Teaching Theology &
   Religion, 19(3), 264-275. https://doi.org/10.1111/teth.12337

Halford, B. (2010, February 22). Professors cry foul over website. Chemical & Engineering News. https://cen.acs.org/
   articles/88/i8/Professors-Cry-Foul-Over-Website.html

Heckler, N., & Forde, D. (2014). The role of cultural values in plagiarism in higher education. Journal of Academic Ethics,
   13(1), 61-75. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10805-014-9221-3

68 | Chapter 4: Ethical Issues in Academic Resource Sharing
Hockly, H. (2012). Digital literacies. ELT Journal, 66(1), 108-112. https://doi-org.ezproxy.lib.ucalgary.ca/10.1093/elt/
   ccr077

Kolowich, S. (2009, October 6). Course hero or course villain? Inside Higher Ed. https://www.insidehighered.com/
   news/2009/10/06/course-hero-or-course-villain

Lederman, D. (2020, February 19). Course Hero woos professors. Inside Higher Ed. http://www.insidehighered.com/
   digital-learning/article/2020/02/19/course-hero-once-vilified-faculty-courts-professors-its

Lienick, C., & Esparza, S. (2018). Collaboration or collusion? The new era of commercial online resources for students
   in the digital age: an opinion piece. Internet Journal of Allied Health Sciences and Practices, 16(3), 1-8.
   https://nsuworks.nova.edu/ijahsp/vol16/iss3/7/

Man, B. (2020, February 2). Brandon University says `pirated' test bank led to compromised nursing exam. The Globe
   and Mail. https://www.theglobeandmail.com/canada/article-brandon-university-says-pirated-test-bank-led-to-
   compromised-nursing-2/

McKenzie, L. (2018, May 14). Learning tool or cheating aid? Inside Higher Ed. https://www.insidehighered.com/news/
   2018/05/14/professors-warned-about-popular-learning-tool-used-students-cheat

McKenzie, L. (2019, March 12). The wrong partnership? Inside Higher Ed. https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2019/
   03/12/purdue-professors-criticize-writing-partnership-chegg

Moore, H. (2014, February 25). Cheating students punished by the 1000s, but many more go undetected. CBC News.
   https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/manitoba/cheating-students-punished-by-the-1000s-but-many-more-go-
   undetected-1.2549621

McGill University. (n.d.). Protecting your intellectual property as instructors. Student Rights and Responsibilities.
   https://www.mcgill.ca/students/srr/honest/staff/protecting-your-intellectual-property-instructors

Queen's University. (n.d.). Intellectual property. https://www.queensu.ca/academicintegrity/general-information/
   intellectual-property

Quizlet. (n.d.). Community guidelines. https://quizlet.com/guidelines

Spence, N. (2018, September 4). GroupMe cheating: What professors have to say. The Signal.
   https://georgiastatesignal.com/groupme-cheating-what-professors-have-to-say/

University of Alberta. (n.d.). Student conduct and accountability. Office of the provost and vice president.
   https://www.ualberta.ca/provost/dean-of-students/student-conduct-and-accountability/index.html

University of Calgary. (2019a). Student academic misconduct policy. http://www.ucalgary.ca/policies/files/policies/
   student-academic-misconduct-policy.pdf

University of Calgary. (2019b). Student academic misconduct procedure. http://www.ucalgary.ca/policies/files/policies/
   student-academic-misconduct-procedure.pdf

University of Lethbridge. (2019). Institutional policies and procedures. https://www.uleth.ca/policy/resources/student-
   discipline-policy-academic-offences-undergraduate-students

University of Toronto (n.d.). Academic integrity. https://www.academicintegrity.utoronto.ca/

Wan, T. (2018, February 6). Quizlet raises $20 million to bring more artificial intelligence to its study tools. EdSurge.

                                                                                                       Chapter 4: Ethical Issues in Academic Resource Sharing | 69
   https://www.edsurge.com/news/2018-02-06-quizlet-raises-20-million-to-bring-more-artificial-intelligence-to-
   its-study-tools
University of Calgary Student Success Centre. (n.d.). What is academic integrity? https://www.ucalgary.ca/live-uc-
   ucalgary-site/sites/default/files/teams/1/academic-integrity.pdf
Young, J. (2010, March 28). High-tech cheating abounds, and professors bear some blame. The Chronicle of Higher
   Education. https://www.chronicle.com/article/High-Tech-Cheating-on-Homework/64857

70 | Chapter 4: Ethical Issues in Academic Resource Sharing
Appendix A

                        Chapter 4: Ethical Issues in Academic Resource Sharing | 71
           Table 4.1 Completed ethics in digital teaching and learning based on Farrow's (2016) Uncompleted Framework

Principle        Duties and Responsibilities                 Outcomes (consequentialist)    Personal Development (virtue)
                          (deontological)

Respect for       ARS sites must clearly            Students may encounter incorrect       Students can develop their
participant          describe what is available in      information if they do not apply        digital literacy skills by
autonomy             their free and paid versions.      digital learning skills.                assessing material found on
                                                                                                ARS sites.
                                                     Instructors can explore the
                                                        possibility of sharing materials,
                                                        potentially with a CC License.

                  Users must adhere to ARS          There is the potential for failure,    If students cheat, they will
                     and institutional guidelines       suspension, or expulsion if             not build knowledge or
                     on academic integrity.             academic integrity guidelines are       develop critical thinking skills.
                                                        violated.
Avoid harm/
minimize risk                                        Students can achieve stronger
                                                        grades if they follow referencing
                                                        guidelines.

Full disclosure   Institutions and instructors      Students can gain empowerment          Students can develop their
                     must provide students with         and build knowledge through the         collaboration skills in a digital
                     clear policies on ARS sites        proper use of ARS sites.                environment.
                     during orientation.
                                                     If ARS sites enforce their own
                  ARS sites need to include            rules, they can achieve improved
                     honour codes for users.            collaboration with institutions.

Privacy & data    Sharing without consent           If students do not read the terms      Students can learn about the
security             violates the privacy of            and conditions, they will not           importance of data security
                     instructors' tests & other         become informed about how their         and decide what personal info
                     materials.                         information will be used.               they want to share.

                  ARS sites must protect
                     users' personal data.

Integrity         Institutions must protect         Institutions must enforce their        Students can evaluate the
                     their reputations from             academic integrity policies to the      differences between remix
                     cheating scandals.                 degree necessary to maintain their      literacy and plagiarism.
                                                        integrity.

Independence      ARS sites must represent an       Students can use their knowledge       Students can discover and
                     option for learning, not a         of academic integrity to use ARS        reflect on the positive uses of
                     requirement.                       sites in a positive manner.             technology in learning.

                                                                                             Students will become more
                                                                                                well-rounded and
                                                                                                independent learners.

72 | Chapter 4: Ethical Issues in Academic Resource Sharing
Principle   Duties and Responsibilities     Outcomes (consequentialist)             Personal Development (virtue)
                     (deontological)
Informed                                     Without informed consent,              Students can learn how to
consent     Many instructors don't             instructors' copyrighted materials      offer informed consent when
               know their materials are         may be remixed and used in any          sharing and remixing
               being shared; thus, they         number of other contexts.               material.
               can't give consent.

            Stealing others' ideas
               violates attribution norms,

                                            Chapter 4: Ethical Issues in Academic Resource Sharing | 73
Chapter 5: Adaptive Learning Systems in Modern
Classrooms

SIMO ZARKOVIC

                                      Introduction

In today's modern educational systems, it is very common to have two to three dozen students in a classroom but only
one teacher. In post-secondary institutions, this can easily turn into 200 to 300 students for every one professor. Class
size is compounded in today's classrooms, which are filled with diverse learners with a multitude of needs along with
unique strengths and weaknesses. The complexity and range of student needs can result in an overworked teacher
who gives teaching their best effort and still finds that some students fail to meet an acceptable level of concept
mastery. Simply put, there are not enough teachers to meet the multitude of students' needs so that every single
student can succeed in every single classroom. In recent years, artificial intelligence (AI) has begun to take ever-stronger
roots in education, giving rise to Adaptive Learning Systems (ALS). ALSs, created through the fusion of AI software
with handheld, network-connected computers, aim to deliver personalized learning. These systems can "help teachers
reallocate 20 to 30 percent of their time so they can focus more on student-centric activities such as building deeper
one-on-one relationships, refining individual lesson plans, or providing real-time personalized feedback to students"
(Microsoft [New Tab], 2018, p.5). These ALS educational technologies are synonymous with intelligent tutoring systems,
student-centred learning, intelligent instructional design, and personalized learning applications. Marr's [New Tab]
(2018) article defines such systems as "digital platforms that use AI to provide learning, testing and feedback to students
from pre-K to college level that gives them the challenges they are ready for, identifies gaps in knowledge and redirects
to new topics when appropriate" (para. 3). In the current era of heightened calls for greater personalization and better
results in education, "personalized learning applications are currently among the most heavily marketed, exciting and
controversial applications of edtech" (Regan & Jesse [New Tab], 2018, p. 168).

                               Educational Ethical Issue

This chapter will discuss the ethical considerations of Adaptive Learning Systems (ALS) and their impact on students,
teachers, and the merchants that provide them. The following question will be examined though consequentialist,
deontological, and virtue ethics perspectives (Farrow, 2016), as well as my own perspective: should Adaptive Learning
Systems (ALS) be implemented in modern classrooms?

                      Elevated Calls for Personalized Learning

Personalized learning -- where students control pace, content, and assessment -- was one of the two emerging findings
in Microsoft's (2018) report The Class of 2030 and Life-Ready Learning: The Technology Imperative [New Tab]. The
report found that "nearly 70 percent of [2,000 surveyed] teachers cited time constraints as their biggest hurdle to
providing more personalized content to their students" (Holzapfel [New Tab], 2018b, para. 14). Automated grading

74 | Adaptive Learning Systems in Modern Classrooms
and personalized feedback are common features of ALS, so this two-pronged approach promises to provide more
instructional time to teachers to aid students in places where their exceptionally smart digital tutors cannot. The calls
for personalization do not stop there; tech companies or `philanthrocapitalists' such as the Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation, Chan Zuckerberg Initiative, Dell, Hewlett, and Google.org emphasize the differences in ways students learn
and the importance of flexible learning opportunities. These five companies use captivating statements such as "a truly
transformative, personalized learning experience (Chan Zuckerberg), and real-time assessments for gauging student
learning (Gates)" (Regan & Steeves [New Tab], 2019, para. 33), to describe ALSs.

               Table 5.1 Examples of real-world applications of artificial intelligence (AI) in educational settings

Adaptive Learning System        Brief Marketed Description of ALS
(Parent Company)

iReady                          Delivers online lessons that provide tailored instruction and practice for each student to
(Curriculum Associates)         accelerate growth, while supporting teachers with in-the-moment resources for remediation
                                and re-teaching (Curriculum Associates [New Tab], n.d., para. 4).

MATHia                          Using sophisticated AI technology to adapt at a very detailed, skill-by-skill level, MATHia
(Carnegie Learning)             personalizes the learning and keeps students engaged with customized just-in-time feedback
                                and contextual hints, while providing you with all the real-time feedback and assessments you
                                need to understand where your students are at and where they're headed (Carnegie Learning
                                [New Tab], n.d.a, para. 3).

Exact Path                      Combines adaptive diagnostic assessments with individualized learning pathways to promote
(Edmentum)                      growth for K-12 grade students in math, reading, and language arts, as students receive a
                                unique testing experience that precisely pinpoints their instructional level, strengths, and
"Jill" Watson                   needs (Edmentum [New Tab], 2020, para. 2).
(IBM)                           A graduate-level teaching assistant who can hold office hours 24/7/365, where "she" spends
                                her days helping students in the online M.S. in Computer Science program's
                                Knowledge-Based Artificial Intelligence course (Georgia Institute of Technology College of
                                Computing [New Tab], n.d., para. 1).

Cognitive Immersive Room (IBM)  An immersive classroom environment, where students feel as though they are in a restaurant
                                in China, a garden, or a Tai Chi class, where they can practice speaking Mandarin with an AI
                                chat agent through immersive technologies (IBM [New Tab], 2019, para. 1).

                                AI Policy in Education

No educational district wants to be left behind; leaders are on a constant pursuit to bring in new literature and reports,
which likely shape their board's learning directive for the next few years. Alberta Education's (2018) Leadership Quality
Standard expects K-12 leaders to embody visionary leadership and to lead a learning community. Similarly, boards
of governors at both the University of Calgary and the University of Alberta support forward-thinking programs and
collaborations to meet AI learning needs in society (Pascoe [New Tab], 2019). Additionally, in 2017, Canada's federal
government created a Pan-Canadian Artificial Intelligence Strategy [New Tab] -- the world's first national AI strategy.
This led to conferences where, thus far, more than 150 researchers, thought leaders, and policy makers examined the
social, economic, ethical, and legal implications of AI (Barron et al. [New Tab], 2019). One crucial observation from these
gatherings is that many policymakers lack awareness of current AI capabilities and applications, and their associated
policy implications. Despite the policy shortcomings with respect to AI, the participants proposed a general framework
to guide policy development for public education and responsible innovation, including to:

   Promote awareness of data protection rights and regulations among the general public;
   increase the digital literacy of the public, particularly among traditionally marginalized and vulnerable populations;
   provide government funding to incentivize companies to incorporate transparency into the design of their

      applications; and

                                                                                                               Adaptive Learning Systems in Modern Classrooms | 75
   encourage open source algorithms to mitigate inequality (Villeneuve et al. [New Tab], 2019, pg. 7).

Consequentialist Perspective

Easily interpreted, visual data is a part of every ALS, and these data sets are designed to help teachers recognize learning
gaps. This newfound awareness is supposed to lead to greater efficiency when it comes to the time spent during an
interaction between a teacher and their student. ALS can also be connected to personal mobile devices that students
carry; AI can augment the physical world, overlaying the real environment with virtual information (Luckin et al. [New
Tab], 2016). This augmented reality is designed to engage students as it moves lessons from hypothetical scenarios to
real-life, and diverges from one-size-fits-all content delivery to a tailored and dynamic learning experience.

Deontological Perspective

Experienced teachers can quickly identify the skills and curricular knowledge that their students both possess and lack.
From an equity perspective, teachers want to narrow the gaps as much as possible before moving to the next sequential
outcome, and ALS can certainly help with that. Furthermore, "teachers will be able to record their observations of
students -- and benefit from the observations of other teachers" (CoSN [New Tab], 2018, p. 34) in their work to ensure
the most efficient use of resources, both human and artificial.

Virtue Ethics Perspective

The shared narrative between people, schooling institutions, and government agencies seems to be that people "who
are unfamiliar with the use of AI-driven technology, will not receive the same benefits as those who have adopted these
tools" (Villeneuve et al. [New Tab], 2019, p. 9). It makes sense to employ ALS, which can automate grading and thus free
teachers to forge deeper socio-emotional bonds with their students. Instructional flexibility offered by ALS can provide
access for students to progress at their own pace; not only to catch up, but also to accelerate learning. An industry-
sponsored white paper called The Equity Equation [New Tab] by McGraw-Hill showcases "institutions like Columbus
State, Arizona State University and Triton Community College in Illinois, among others, which are improving educational
equity by applying new learning methods and tools that adapt to individual student needs" (Neelakantan [New Tab], 2019,
para. 4).

My Own Perspective

As teachers, students, and parents become aware of ALS, the pressure to purchase will likely increase, and the delay of
implementation may result in frustration. I am surprised that the marketing teams of various ALS have not advertised
as heavily in Canada, where they could leave the impressionable public feeling disadvantaged if their school boards do
not acquire `the latest and greatest' for their pupils. This will be reminiscent of computer purchases that occurred just
before the turn of the millennium, with schools hurriedly purchasing both PCs and Macs to accommodate their student
populations. The leadership of modern school districts must demonstrate that they are aware of powerful and influential
corporations' potential hidden intentions, and honour the expectation to disclose and justify their choice of one ALS

76 | Adaptive Learning Systems in Modern Classrooms
vendor over others. Over the last two decades that I have spent in classrooms as a student and as a teacher, I have
noticed significant amounts of technology brought in, with limited rationale provided about the purchasing decisions.
I have encountered bulky desktops, then slim laptops, and, most recently, Smart Boards in classrooms, with little
time allocated to learning about the rationale for the purchase, insufficient resources invested in preparing users, and
inadequate discussion of concerns behind the proposed enhancements. As ALS arrive in classrooms, many teachers will
need to be trained how to effectively incorporate them in teaching routines in order to gain "new ways of understanding
and interacting with their students" (Microsoft [New Tab], 2018, p. 5). Otherwise, these costly systems will remain in
boxes at the back of classrooms, as untrained teachers continue to teach, undisrupted, and without using the latest
technology gadgets.

    Benefits and Challenges of Implementation of Privacy Protection, Data
         Security, and Informed Consent in Adaptive Learning Systems

Predicting the future is challenging work, and this applies especially to the personalized predictive lessons generated in
ALS immediately after students input their unique responses. The concept of accurate error diagnosis is fundamental to
all successful tutoring, and ALS will only be as good as the size of a database that it is connected to (Ferster [New Tab],
2017). This "entails collection of more, and more granular, information about students, teachers, and families, as well
as administrative details regarding the functioning of educational institutions" (Regan & Jesse [New Tab], 2018, p. 168).
As ALS collect and analyze multiple streams of data in real time, "there is a real possibility of continuous improvement
via multiple feedback loops that operate at different time scales -- immediate to the student for the next problem,
[and] to the teacher for the next day's teaching" (Bienkowski et al. [New Tab], 2012, p. viii). Recent big data aggregator
systems such as InBloom had "some 400 `optional fields' that schools could choose to fill in and that included sensitive
information such as disability status, social security numbers, family relationships, reasons for enrolment changes, and
disciplinary actions" (Regan & Jesse [New Tab], 2018, p. 169). ALS databases need to strike a balance between not asking
for too much data and going defunct -- as in the case of InBloom -- while also requesting as much data as possible in
order to better personalize the next ALS-generated learning task.

Fuelled by renewable student populations, the market for student data is only projected to increase; "analysts forecast
the Artificial Intelligence Market in the US Education Sector to grow at a CAGR (Compound Annual Growth Rate) of
47.77% during the period 2018-2022 (Research and Markets [New Tab], 2018, para. 2). This equates to an incremental
[four-year] growth of 253.79 million USD, with one of the key market drivers being "an increased adoption of ITS
[Intelligent Tutoring Systems] . . . in the education sector" (TechNavio [New Tab], 2018, para. 2). As private student data
transfers from schools to remote servers, "we need to be particularly careful about educational technologies which
store and/or access information outside of Canada; these educational technologies are not always bound by Canadian
law" (University of Victoria [New Tab], 2019, para. 2). This could lead to foreign corporations selling the data to other
merchants or even to foreign governments nefariously targeting people by deeply digging into their personal data.

 Research Data of Various Adaptive Learning Systems and How They Impact
                               Instruction and Learning

Getting ALS raw data is a challenge. No peer-reviewed data exists, only industry-sponsored data. Additionally, "there
are no established standards for describing or evaluating the extent to which a learning experience is personalized, and

                                                                                                               Adaptive Learning Systems in Modern Classrooms | 77
often the difference between responsiveness and adaptiveness is not accounted for in product descriptions" (Bulger
[New Tab], 2016, p. 4). ALS companies such as iReady state that rigorous and scientific analysis is their priority, but this
has been slow going, because the process requires "extensive data sharing, privacy safeguards, significant funding, and
longstanding relationships with districts and schools" (McKinnon [New Tab], 2018, para. 16).

Table 5.2 Self-reported results of adaptive learning systems listed in Table 5.1

Adaptive Learning System  Excerpts from Self-Reported Data
(Parent Company)
                          Students using iReady Personalized Instruction for an average of 45 minutes or more per subject
iReady                    per week for at least 18 weeks showed statistically significantly greater growth than the average
(Curriculum Associates)   student who did not receive iReady Personalized Instruction during the 2017-2018 school year
                          (Curriculum Associates [New Tab], 2020, p. 2).
MATHia                    An independent study by the RAND Corporation and the U.S. Department of Education found that
(Carnegie Learning)       MATHia's blended approach nearly doubled growth in performance on standardized tests in the
                          second year of implementation (Carnegie Learning [New Tab], n.d.b, para. 1 )
Exact Path                Results indicated that use of Edmentum Exact Path is positively associated with student
(Edmentum)                achievement outcomes in math, reading, and language arts. Statistically significant effects were
                          found linking the amount of time spent on Exact Path and end-of-year diagnostic scores
"Jill" Watson             (Edmentum [New Tab], 2017, p. 2).
(IBM)                     Jill was a highly effective teaching assistant for students, answering questions with a 97% success
                          rate. Out of 10,000 queries that require little thinking, Jill's aim was to answer 40% of all these
Cognitive Immersive Room  questions (Maderer [New Tab], 2016).
(IBM)                     Acquiring a new language naturally, through cultural immersion, may be more effective than
                          non-immersive practices. One of the biggest obstacles in learning a foreign language through
                          immersion is students' fears of being judged by native speakers (IBM [New Tab], 2019, para. 2).

Consequentialist Perspective

According to Neelakantan [New Tab] (2019), "powered by advanced algorithms, adaptive learning technologies boost
completion rates and give students confidence" (para. 1). Furthermore, mining and analyzing data gathered by an ALS
"can analyze underlying patterns in order to predict student outcomes such as dropping out, needing extra help, or
being capable of more demanding assignments" (West [New Tab], 2012, p. 2). Despite a teacher's best efforts to provide
formative feedback in lectures, and summative feedback on an occasional assignment or quiz, use of the ALS enables
more frequent, real-time feedback to students on tasks and interactions in the system. While it would be unrealistic to
expect a teacher of two to three dozen students to adjust a lesson based on each student's needs, ALS makes this type
of responsiveness possible using the data that is collected from students.

Deontological Perspective

Data, upon which the ALS relies, can be insufficient, meaning that unseen threats are pending to everyone who is
overlooked. Students can also become overlooked and underserved by teachers who rely heavily on thinking that
AI knows best, without using their own intelligence to think, probe, and teach. Lerman [New Tab] (2013) suggests
that the "big data revolution may create new forms of inequality and subordination, and thus raise broad democracy
concerns" (p. 60). Furthermore, continued differences in decisions about how best to hold ALS vendors accountable
remain uncertain, especially when it comes to critical issues of data security and privacy protection. As Regan & Jesse
[New Tab] (2018) point out, "one of the most problematic issues involves whether edtech companies should be able
to use data generated by students' use of their software programs to improve those programs" (p. 173). This supposed

78 | Adaptive Learning Systems in Modern Classrooms
mutually beneficial practice blurs the lines on whether student learning profiles are used for a student's own good or
for corporate profit.

Virtue Ethics Perspective

Big data's use of mathematical algorithms and artificial intelligence to make predictions about individuals based on their
information and that of others raises questions about treating individuals as individuals fairly, accurately, and in ways
they can understand (Citron & Pasquale [New Tab], 2014). More so, big data critics worry that "the world's increasing
`datafication' ignores or even smothers the unquantifiable, immeasurable, ineffable parts of human experience." (Lerman
[New Tab], 2013, p. 56). Any teacher can attest that it takes attentive emotional intellect and relationships with students
to read the cues that students put out, and that students' learning is affected when they are in an escalated state of
mind. Consequently, there has been a recent interest in supporting teachers to become better acquainted with Trauma
Informed Practice (TIP) and student mental wellness.

My Own Perspective

Regan & Jesse [New Tab] (2018) explain that "a critical ethical concern raised with personalized learning is whether such
programs constitute tracking and sorting of students that might be considered discriminatory" (p. 168), as in the 1950s,
when children were divided by race, ethnicity, gender, and class. Some of these divisive factors might come back or can
even be encouraged, especially in less socially progressive countries. Though such divisions are opposed in Western
societies, the wealth gap seems to be widening (Litwin [New Tab], 2019). Data gathered by an ALS could serve as a
foundation for parents or guardians of very affluent students to advocate for redirection of the school's limited budget
to fund elite, exclusionary classes for their children. ALS are often marketed as having the potential to accelerate brains,
so influential parents within any particular school could demand a special settings class where "as the pace of change
accelerates, learners will demand more ways to convert learning to earning" (Consortium for School Networking [New
Tab], 2018, p. 8).

    Benefits and Challenges of Implementation of Respect for Participant
   Autonomy and Independence Concerns When Using Adaptive Learning

                                         Systems

Through the use of big data and smart algorithms, ALS can be used to help teachers find their own blind spots and even
reveal unorthodox thinking and teaching strategies for students. Students can link ALS profiles to their own cellular
devices, which can then remind them of deadlines and offer opportunities to continue tutoring and learning at home.
Students, teachers, smart machines, and software increasingly interact in new and deeper ways, and may be reshaping
our brains in intended and unintended ways. KnowledgeWorks [New Tab] (2018) explains that "repeated use of Google
Search has been shown to stimulate the use of short- over long-term memory in ways that may undermine critical
thinking" (p. 12). Additionally, a continuous connection to smart devices can lead to mental exhaustion due to lack of
downtime -- we are wired and tired all the time (Brody, 2017). Both parents and school administration need to ensure
that students and teachers have allocated time for themselves by respecting their right to disconnect from the non-
stop digital realm. Furthermore, all parties need to find a balance when it comes to the wealth of data available to track

                                                                                                               Adaptive Learning Systems in Modern Classrooms | 79
various stages of student development; it is easy to lose sight of the big picture in daily performance metrics supplied by
ALS. It is also important to note that the youngest, pre-kindergarten learners tend to learn better watching real, face-
to-face events, since they have trouble transferring information from a screen to the real world (Troseth & Strouse [New
Tab], 2017).

 Avoiding Harm and Minimizing Risk to Educational Integrity When Using
                              Adaptive Learning Systems

With so much attention being paid to improving the standard metrics of success in school, less attention may be paid
to students' psychological well-being and social health. However, educators should indeed keep student well-being
in sharp focus, since "the strongest signal from [Microsoft's] study was the need for teachers, schools, and school
leaders to help students develop stronger social-emotional skills" (Microsoft [New Tab], 2018, p. 10). These skills help
establish successful team collaborations and enable discourse plus discussion --not just online but in person. We need
our students to be resilient to life's many curveballs, to have the capacity to receive constructive criticism, and to
come back stronger after a failure. Furthermore, the same report estimated that 30-40% of future jobs will require
explicit social skills and emotional literacy (Microsoft [New Tab], 2018). According to Holzapfel (2018), "social-emotional
skills provide students with the perspective and flexibility necessary to function at a high level even when faced with
uncertainty, change, pressure, stress, and other work and life challenges" (p. 11). Enhanced socio-emotional capacity will
come in handy within the tumultuous gig economy, since people will shift from having a single job to having short-term
contracts with multiple employers. Social-emotional and other relational and well-being skills will not be evaluated by
ALS, but they still need to be practiced and built, so that students can have happy, healthy, and well-rounded lives.

Consequentialist Perspective

Education is moving toward outcome-based and competency-based learning, meaning that students do not need to
sit for hours listening to content being presented, but can instead optimize their time by focusing on mastering the
cognitive skills and the socio-emotional and content knowledge they lack. When a student gets ill, connecting to their
ALS account from home can enable them to engage with the curricular outcomes missed at school. More mature,
part-time students can use their time to learn other skills, which are constantly fluctuating as workplace demands and
employability skills change. In their report on the future of work and learning, D2L (2018) writes that the "constantly
fluctuating skills market means employee skills are becoming outdated more rapidly and require ongoing training and
development" (p. 11)

Deontological Perspective

Traumatic events like war conflict, poverty, family instability, homelessness, and a lack of opportunities frequently result
in educational disruptions. ALS can help to mend the gaps in learning, so schools should budget funds to close those
gaps for the students in need. The academic part of student well-being is quickly captured and reported, resulting in
instantaneous hope and jubilation in those students. KnowledgeWorks [New Tab] (2018) explains that "as students gain
the rights to own their own data, data asset advisors help students and their families manage, present and exchange
data related to students' learning, locations and device and platform usage" (p. 20).

80 | Adaptive Learning Systems in Modern Classrooms
Virtue Ethics Perspective

Personal autonomy deals with the extent of one's freedom to make choices, and can be affected by the algorithms
and intelligence that exist within ALS. When students spend a dozen years of schooling with ALS, these computers
can become a long-lasting crutch for them to lean on. As students move on to the workforce, the validations that ALS
provided them are gone, and they may feel lost without the devices that they grew up with. At the same time, teachers
cannot rely too much on ALS, as these programs and algorithms lack empathic capacities, and therefore provoke feelings
of dehumanization that endanger personal autonomy (Royakkers et al. [New Tab], 2018).

My Own Perspective

The recent COVID-19 pandemic has essentially disrupted every single school in the world for months. The first few days
and weeks were spent in uncertainty, with many educational leaders drafting corrective directives to enable education
from April until the end of the 2019-2020 school year. Through communication with colleagues from different countries,
the discrepancies in educational delivery were incredible. Some school boards scrambled to get an exponential number
of online learning platforms just as a starting point, while others had ALS programs like iReady and MATHia loaded on
their students' tablets, minimizing the educational disruption. On one end, some parents and students were stressed
and anxious as many aspects of their world suddenly stopped operating, including schools. On the other end, students
continued to log into their ALS accounts daily, ready for timely and targeted curation of learning content for the day.
Depending on grade level, the Government of Alberta [New Tab] (2020) mandated that students spend between five to
12 hours per week learning online. With some parents already concerned about too much screen time, school boards
needed to ensure that the hours students spent online were engaged through responsive, adaptive, and learner-centric
pedagogy.

                                       Conclusion

The cost-effective, scalable, yet personable and impactful learning experience that ALS can provide means the spread
of these technologies in K-12 may be unstoppable. "These systems continually assess skill and confidence levels and
provide precise direction to fill knowledge gaps, accelerate mastery, and adapt to each student's individual learning
styles and unique circumstances" (McGraw-Hill, 2019, p. 11). School boards generally set goals to increase achievement,
while students face multidirectional pressures to bolster their own test scores. It is important not to get caught up in the
perceived novelty of any new technology, such that "we're so hopeful about upgrades that we rarely look at the practices
that technology does not change, [and] those that it changes for the worse." (Watters [New Tab], 2015, para. 9). Before
district leaders and other agents of change bring ALS to schools, they need to ask questions about big data, learner
profiles, and algorithmic analytics, and to evaluate the marketed information though multiple ethical considerations.

Neither teachers nor parents should agonize about teachers getting replaced by machines, as "most experts believe that
teachers will remain irreplaceable, but there will be many changes to a teacher's job and to educational best practices"
(Marr [New Tab], 2019). In fact, "actual study findings indicate that personalized learning systems are best deployed
as supplements to teachers, rather than their replacements" (Bulger [New Tab], 2016, p. 12). The role of teachers will
continue to change, and it is likely they will be expected to incorporate computer tablets containing ALS and associated
data into their daily routines sooner or later. The shift to ALS can enable teachers to respond directly to questions not
answered by ALS, freeing time for greater emphasis on socio-emotional human connections that empower teachers

                                                                                                               Adaptive Learning Systems in Modern Classrooms | 81
to nurture other human intelligences in their students. Due to many complex societal problems, schools have become
crucial communal hubs that offer supports for essential services and human connections. With an ever-increasing
population and widening wealth gap, the need for such services in school will likely increase in the future. Though
schools will continue to have standardized tests, there is no such thing as a standardized student, and this is where
the hyper-personalization offered by ALS can be a helpful addition to teaching and learning supports. We cannot let
fear hold back innovation in the educational technology field. We need to embrace new pedagogical models for the 21st
century -- to do otherwise would be unethical.

                               Questions to Consider

 Which other major societal shifts -- comparable to the COVID-19 pandemic -- will impact the future of learning?
 What might be the ethical and long-term health and educational implications of using neural enhancement

   technologies?
 What policies, processes, and protocols will prevent recorded student learning profiles from being sold to

   prospective employers, financial institutions, and health insurance providers of those students?
 In what ways will classrooms change for present learners, and to better prepare graduates for their futures?

                                                     References

Alberta Education. (2018). Leadership quality standard. Alberta Government. https://education.alberta.ca/media/
   3739621/standardsdoc-lqs-_fa-web-2018-01-17.pdf

Barron, B., Chowdhury, N., Davidson, K., & Kleiner, K. (2019). Annual report of the CIFAR pan-canadian AI strategy. CIFAR.
   https://www.amii.ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/ai_annualreport2019_web.pdf

Bienkowski, M., Feng, M., & Means, B. (2012). Enhancing teaching and learning through educational analytics and data
   mining. U.S. Department of Education. https://tech.ed.gov/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/edm-la-brief.pdf

Brody, J. E. (2017, January 9). Hooked on our smartphones. The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/09/
   well/live/hooked-on-our-smartphones.html

Bulger, M. (2016). Personalized learning: The conversations we're not having. Data and Society Research Institute.
   https://datasociety.net/pubs/ecl/PersonalizedLearning_primer_2016.pdf

Carnegie Learning. (n.d.a) MATHia. Retrieved February 27, 2020, from https://www.carnegielearning.com/products/
   software-platform/mathia-learning-software/

Carnegie Learning. (n.d.b). Welcome to the new Carnegie Learning Sample Center! Retrieved March 28, 2020, from
   https://www.carnegielearning.com/sample-center/?redirected=/sample-center/why-cl/the-cl-story#our-
   research

Citron, D. K., & Pasquale, F. (2014). The scored society: Due process for automated predictions. Washington Law Review,
   89(1), 101-133. https://digitalcommons.law.uw.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=4796&context=wlr

Consortium for School Networking (2018, March). The future of work and                learning:  2030.
   https://imgsvr.eventrebels.com/ERImg/02/08/06/WorkandLearning2030ToolkitFINAL.pdf

82 | Adaptive Learning Systems in Modern Classrooms
Curriculum Associates. (2020). iReady Diagnostic: Linking study with the Massachusetts comprehensive assessment system
   (MCAS). https://www.curriculumassociates.com/-/media/mainsite/files/i-ready/iready-diagnostic-assessments-
   linking-study-overview-massachusetts-2020.pdf?la=en&hash=CAE0B4E43A145D8513CE3198005D8990

Curriculum Associates. (n.d.). iReady: Personalized instruction and teacher resources. Retrieved February 26, 2020, from
   https://www.curriculumassociates.com/products/i-ready/i-ready-learning

Desire2Learn. (2018, November 6). The future of work and learning in the age of the 4th industrial revolution.
   https://www.d2l.com/future-of-work/

Edmentum. (n.d.). Exact Path. Retrieved February 29, 2020, from https://www.edmentum.com/products/exact-path

Ferster, B. (2017, January 29). Intelligent Tutoring Systems: What happened? Bill Ferster. http://www.stagetools.com/
   bill/intelligent-tutoring-systems-what-happened/

Georgia Institute of Technology College of Computing. (n.d.). Jill Watson. Retrieved February 22, 2020, from
   https://www.cc.gatech.edu/holiday/jill-watson

Government of Alberta. (2020). Student learning during COVID-19. Retrieved April 8, 2020, from
   https://www.alberta.ca/student-learning-during-covid-19.aspx

Holzapfel, B. (2018, May 24). How can technology empower the class of 2030? Microsoft Education Blog.
   https://educationblog.microsoft.com/en-us/2018/05/technology-empower-class-of-2030/

IBM. (2018, August 23). Mandarin language learners get a boost from AI. IBM Research Blog. https://www.ibm.com/
   blogs/research/2018/08/mandarin-language-ai/

KnowledgeWorks. (2018, November 27). Navigating the future of learning: KnowledgeWorks Future Forecast 5.0.
   https://knowledgeworks.org/resources/forecast-5/

Lerman, J. (2013, September). Big data and its exclusions. Stanford Law Review Online, 66, 55-63.
   https://www.stanfordlawreview.org/online/privacy-and-big-data-big-data-and-its-exclusions/

Litwin, K. (2019, January 21). Obscene gap between rich and poor, says Oxfam. National Observer.
   https://www.nationalobserver.com/2019/01/21/news/obscene-gap-between-rich-and-poor-says-oxfam

Luckin, R., Holmes, W., Griffiths, M., & Forcier, L.B. (2016). Intelligence unleashed: An argument for AI in education.

Pearson.  https://www.pearson.com/content/dam/one-dot-com/one-dot-com/global/Files/about-pearson/

innovation/open-ideas/Intelligence-Unleashed-v15-Web.pdf

Maderer, J. (2016, May 9). Artificial intelligence course creates AI teaching assistant. Georgia Tech News Center.
   https://www.news.gatech.edu/2016/05/09/artificial-intelligence-course-creates-ai-teaching-assistant

Marr, B. (2018, July 25). How is AI used in education -- Real world examples of today and a peek into the future. Forbes.
   https://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2018/07/25/how-is-ai-used-in-education-real-world-examples-of-
   today-and-a-peek-into-the-future/#d1d407d586e8

Marr, B. (2019). How is AI used in education -- Real world examples of today and a peek into the future. Bernard Marr &
   Co. https://bernardmarr.com/default.asp?contentID=1541

McGraw-Hill. (2019). The equity equation. https://s3.amazonaws.com/ecommerce-prod.mheducation.com/unitas/
   highered/explore/equity/equity-equation-digital.pdf

McKinnon, R. (2018, September 25). More teachers, less tech, say parents wary of i-Ready. Gainesville Sun.

                                                          Adaptive Learning Systems in Modern Classrooms | 83
   https://www.gainesville.com/news/20180921/more-teachers-less-tech-say-parents-wary-of-i-
   ready?template=ampart

McLeod, J. (2017). Exact path research brief: Effectiveness study. Edmentum. https://www.edmentum.com/sites/
   edmentum.com/files/resource/media/Exact Path Effectiveness Paper FINAL_0.pdf

Microsoft. (2018). The class of 2030 and life-ready learning: The technology imperative. https://education.minecraft.net/
   wp-content/uploads/13679_EDU_Thought_Leadership_Summary_revisions_5.10.18.pdf

Neelakantan, S. (2019, November 25). Colleges see equity success with adaptive learning systems. EdTech Magazine.
   https://edtechmagazine.com/higher/article/2019/11/colleges-see-equity-success-adaptive-learning-systems

Pascoe, J. (2019, July 25). Meeting society's AI learning needs. University of Alberta. https://www.ualberta.ca/science/
   news/2019/july/reinforcement-learning-online-course

Regan, P.M., & Jesse, J. (2018). Ethical challenges of edtech, big data and personalized learning: Twenty-first century
   student sorting and tracking. Ethics and Information Technology, 21(3), 167-179. https://doi.org/10.1007/
   s10676-018-9492-2

Regan, P., & Steeves, V. (2019). Education, privacy, and big data algorithms: Taking the persons out of personalized
   learning. First Monday, 24(11). https://doi.org/10.5210/fm.v24i11.10094

Research and Markets. (2018, August). Artificial intelligence market in the US education sector
   2018-2022. https://www.researchandmarkets.com/reports/4613290/artificial-intelligence-market-in-
   the-us?utm_code=5lshzz&amp;utm_medium=BW

Royakkers, L., Timmer, J., Kool, L., & van Est, R. (2018). Societal and ethical issues of digitization. Ethics and Information
   Technology, 20(2), 127-142. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10676-018-9452-x

TechNavio. (2018a, August). Artificial intelligence market in the US education sector 2018-2022.
   https://www.technavio.com/report/global-artificial-intelligence-market-in-education-sector-analysis-share-2018

TechNavio. (2018b, August). Global artificial intelligence market in education sector 2018-2022.
   https://www.technavio.com/report/global-artificial-intelligence-market-in-education-sector-analysis-share-2018

Troseth, G. L., & Strouse, G. A. (2017). Designing and using digital books for learning: The informative case of young
   children and video. International Journal of Child-Computer Interaction, 12, 3-7. https://doi.org/10.1016/
   j.ijcci.2016.12.002

University of Victoria. (n.d.). Student privacy. Retrieved March 22, 2020, from https://www.uvic.ca/library/featured/
   copyright/faculty/studentprivacy/index.php

Villeneuve, S., Barron, B., & Boskovic, G. (2019, May). Rebooting regulation: Exploring the future of AI Policy in Canada.
   CIFAR & Brookfield Institute. https://www.cifar.ca/docs/default-source/ai-futures-policy-labs/rebooting-
   regulation-exploring-the-future-of-ai-policy-in-canada.pdf?sfvrsn=1b627b74_14

Watters, A. (2015, August 10). Teaching machines and Turing machines: The history of the future of labor and learning.
   Hack Education. http://hackeducation.com/2015/08/10/digpedlab

West, D. M. (2012, September). Big data for education: Data mining, data analytics, and web dashboards. Governance
   Studies at Brookings. https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/04-education-technology-
   west.pdf

84 | Adaptive Learning Systems in Modern Classrooms
Appendix A

                               Adaptive Learning Systems in Modern Classrooms | 85
Table 5.3 Completed ethical framework for use of adaptive learning systems in modern classrooms, based on Farrow's (2016)
                                                                    Uncompleted Framework

Principle                    Consequentialist Theory          Deontological Theory             Virtue Ethics Theory

Full disclosure               ALS deliver all sorts of        Practicing equity, teachers     Students who attend
                                 new data, which provide          use real-time data to            schools that do not have
                                 teachers with new                narrow the gaps in               funds to purchase ALS
                                 insights.                        student comprehension            become disadvantaged by
                                                                  before moving to the next        not having the
                              Teachers are able to use           curricula outcome.               opportunity to use AI in
                                 their time with students                                          ALS.
                                 in more efficient way, to     Teachers utilize the
                                 fulfil the gaps that ALS         recorded ALS                  Teacher is freed from
                                 identifies.                      observations to better           spending time marking so
                                                                  address student needs.           more of it can be spent on
                              Student engagement                                                  other pedagogical tasks.
                                 increases as ALS              Ongoing information flow
                                 incorporates student's           about student's learning      Flexibility offered by ALS
                                 own data into otherwise          profile mean no need to          can inspire students to go
                                 static questions and             reinvent the wheel and           at faster or slower pace,
                                 makes the visualization          waste time asking what           depending on each
                                 appears on screen.               was already captured.            curricular outcome
                                                                                                   studied.

Privacy, data security and    Data can be analyzed to         Gaps in data can lead to        There are many aspects of
informed consent                 forewarn about risks of          students becoming                a human being that go
                                 students dropping out.           overlooked, erroneously          beyond the ALS
                                                                  resulting in no                  perimeters, and those
                              Thanks to instantaneous            interventions.                   unincorporated bits of
                                 feedback offered by ALS,                                          information can lead to
                                 students do not wait for      Regulations are vague or           dehumanization of its
                                 days to get their quizzes        lacking when it comes to         users.
                                 or assignments evaluated         ethic expectations and
                                 and recorded.                    lawful compliance with        Automated ALS cannot
                                                                  respect to student data.         read emotional cues
                              AI within ALS uses                                                  presented by students,
                                 student input to generate     ALS merchants could use            leading to futile attempts
                                 personalized lessons for         student data to improve          to engage actively.
                                 every student in class.          their own AI systems and
                                                                  sell more units, creating a   Teachers need to utilize
                                                                  positive feedback loop to        their training to address
                                                                  generate more money.             ALS shortcomings.

Respect for autonomy and      Following the                   The spectrum of                 Constant use of ALS can
independence while avoiding      competency-based model           educational disruption is        lead students to become
harm and minimizing risk         of instruction, students         wide, but customized             dependent on the system
                                 use their time in school to      learning content,                for validation.
                                 progress in their own            generated by ALS can
                                 unique pathways.                 close gaps in a timely        Heavy reliance on ALS for
                                                                  manner.                          confirmation can hinder
                              For times when students                                             development of student's
                                 cannot be at school, they     Parents get learning               own internal sense of
                                 can remotely connect to          reports frequently,              checks and balances.
                                 their ALS devices to and         enabling them to focus
                                 carry on with learning.          further at home on topics     Teachers need to use their
                                                                  that students find               professional judgement
                              Time spent learning is             challenging.                     and not depend solely on
                                 optimized, leaving                                                ALS to drive the direction
                                 students with time to         ALS distributes data to            of student's learning.
                                 learn other skills that can      students, teachers, and
                                 assist them in the future.       parents, ensuring that all
                                                                  involved parties are on the
                                                                  same page.

86 | Adaptive Learning Systems in Modern Classrooms
Chapter 6: STEM Beyond the Acronym: Ethical

Considerations in Standardizing STEM Education in

K-12

JENNIFER ANSORGER

The American education system has undergone numerous iterations over the years. From the No Child Left Behind
Act of 2002 to the Back to Basics movement (and it's emphasis on the 3 R's -- reading, `riting, `rithmatic), educational
trends have influenced decision-makers to design and build programs in the hopes of improving student outcomes on
standardized tests. Over the past few decades, STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math) has been a widely
discussed program in education (Blackley & Howell, 2015; Breiner et al., 2012; Bybee, 2013). However, STEM has yet to be
truly defined, since government officials, teachers, parents, and other stakeholders have varying perspectives of what
STEM is and how it should look in the classroom (Breiner et al., 2012). STEM is viewed in a variety of ways that are
dependent on stakeholders and on ethical considerations -- which causes tension when trying to create a unilateral
definition in order to better direct teaching practice.

Some argue that standardizing STEM would result in teaching silos (Blackley & Howell, 2015; Bybee, 2013) with little
diversity of thinking, leading to STEM subjects being taught as four separate subjects with assessments conducted
through standardized testing. Blackely and Howell (2015) argue that "teachers have defaulted to the notion of S.T.E.M.
rather than STEM," where the full stops "signif[y] . . . the silo-ing of the four distinct discipline areas, rather than
their integration" (p. 104). By teaching science, technology, engineering, and math as separate subjects (or silos), the
learning experience shifts from being interdisciplinary, transdisciplinary, and integrated, to one that is focused on
an individualized curriculum (Bybee, 2013) that "reflects decisions made centuries ago, especially around science and
mathematics" (Davis et al., 2019, p. 3). Others argue that to truly meet the needs of learners, a foundational approach or
mindset that weaves STEM throughout all subject areas is crucial. This orientation creates a comprehensive curriculum
that utilizes a transdisciplinary approach with an objective that "resolve[s] real world or complex problems . . . provide[s]
different perspectives on problems" (Choi & Pak, 2006, p. 351), and requires insights and perspectives from more than
one discipline (Davis et al., 2019).

This chapter will consider the ethical implications of STEM education (silo versus mindset approach) in the US and its
impact on learners, with special consideration for gender, ethnicity, and socioeconomic standing. When determining
how to define STEM education, who should be responsible for determining best practices and the future direction
that education should take? Decisions need to be made to meet the needs of the learners themselves, not based on
funding nor global positioning. There are multiple ethical implications when creating a standardized curriculum for
STEM without considering all of the stakeholders (i.e. students, parents, and educators). This standardization could
create a larger achievement gap among minority groups, girls, and those in lower socioeconomic districts. The push for
a standardized definition of STEM as a silo, with standardized testing being the gauge of effectiveness, has illustrated
the disparity between gender, socioeconomic, and ethnic groups. In the US, various programs have been designed to
promote STEM education for girls [New Tab] and minority groups [New Tab]; however, males and the privileged classes
still continue to dominate in STEM careers and industries (Building America's Future, n.d.; Chang, 2019; Maclean, 2017).

                                                                                                 Chapter 6: STEM Beyond the Acronym: Ethical Considerations in
                                                                                                                               Standardizing STEM Education in K-12 | 87
                                     Full Disclosure

STEM is an umbrella concept that incorporates Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math. How STEM education is
actually incorporated into different schools and districts varies. The original implementation of SMET in the US was led
by the National Science Foundation (NSF); the acronym was later changed to STEM (Bybee, 2013; Sanders, 2009) in the
1990s in response to a need to strengthen science and math education. Until the early 2000s, few people understood
the term STEM and many linked it to stem cell research and plants (Bybee, 2013; Sanders, 2009). STEM, when taken
verbatim, refers only to the four subject areas. For the purpose of this chapter, the focus will be on STEM education,
which is an important distinction.

One impetus for the growing STEM education trend came in reaction to the results of the early PISA [New Tab] test
results. The scores on these tests, in addition to a belief in a shortage of people to work in STEM-related fields,
prompted the implementation of STEM education in K-12 schools around the world (Williams, 2011). In the US, STEM
education became a focused trend to shift "American students from the middle to the top of the pack [internationally] in
science and math over the next decade" (The White House, 2009, para. 1) by raising test scores. Another priority was to
meet the perceived STEM crisis -- a lack of skilled workforce to fill the growing specialized job market (Jadav, 2013; The
STEM Crisis & Our Solution, 2020; Xu, 2015). The Partnership for 21st Century Skills (2008) claimed that STEM education
was the key to success in the 21st Century, and that without a "charge to action," the US would be left behind in the
global market. This charge to action has led many schools in the US to focus primarily on teaching each subject as a
silo, with small pockets of schools and districts forging their own mindset path (Cherry Creek School District [CCSD],
n.d.). This push for STEM education raises many ethical concerns regarding privacy, autonomy, and best practices for
our students.

STEM as a foundational way of thinking focuses on students iterating; collaborating; and using science, technology,
engineering, math, and humanities in an interdisciplinary way to solve real-world problems (Davis, 2019). STEM as an
inquiry-based integrated method of teaching these subjects is not necessarily a new concept. In the 1990s, the American
Association for the Advancement of Science (2009) published a series of benchmarks for science literacy. They believed
that:

The common core or learning in science, math, and technology

should focus on science literacy, not on an understanding of each

of the separate disciplines. Moreover, the core studies should include

connections among science, math, and technology and between

those areas and the arts and humanities and the vocational subjects. (p. xii)

Sanders (2009) argues that STEM should be taught with the mindset of "purposeful design and inquiry" (p.21), which
incorporates all areas within the STEM umbrella. The integration of the disciplines can provide students with the
opportunity to explore and develop potential solutions to global issues, such as renewable energy sources and climate
change (Davis, 2019). In districts such as Cherry Creek Schools in Centennial, Colorado, this remains the focus of their
STEM program. They see STEM as a focused way of teaching that "instills a deep and extensive understanding of STEM
content applied in real-world contexts" (Cherry Creek Schools District, n.d., para. 2).

The term STEM has been used and reused so many times that its meaning has become ambiguous (Bybee, 2013; Sanders,
2009). One school's STEM program can look very different from another. One school can have access to robotics, 3D
printers, and one-to-one student laptops. Their program can focus on the T of STEM but have little to no incorporation
of design thinking or science and math (indicating a silo approach). Another school can have very little technology

88 | Chapter 6: STEM Beyond the Acronym: Ethical Considerations in Standardizing STEM Education in K-12
but has students ideating, building, and conversing about real-world problems (foundational thinking). As there is no
universal definition of STEM, there is a wide variety of ways in which it is being incorporated into schools. From this
ambiguity emerge several ethical issues that need to be considered.

 Connection of STEM Education in Teaching and Learning to Privacy, Data
                           Security, and Informed Consent

When determining a standardized definition for STEM, the agenda of stakeholders can greatly influence the direction
this standardization takes. One way of influencing how STEM is defined is through funding. Funding from sources such
as Google, Code.org, and other companies in Silicon Valley has been influential in pushing STEM education in the US
(Caperton, 2012), as illustrated by the most recent $300 million of funding in 2017. The motives behind a companies'
investment in STEM education can be considered from an ethical perspective. Some argue that Silicon Valley and
subsequent tech giants are pushing their own agendas and have ulterior motives for this funding. One such agenda
focuses on the money that can be made by pushing the T in STEM education, which in many iterations refers only to
computing. When schools focus on the T in STEM, they essentially buy into the programs and products on the market.
This push for technology can lessen the time spent in the collective work needed to unify STEM as a foundational way
of thinking, and can create a market in which money must be spent in order to ensure that schools have the latest and
greatest technology -- technology that continually changes and requires constant upgrading.

Through its ease of use, more affordable devices, and an easily manageable platform, Google for Education [New Tab],
which includes Google Classroom and G Suite, has been adopted by many school districts around the US, as well as
other countries around the world. It has been marketed as a platform that "focuses on creating the best educational
experience for over 70 million students and teachers in more than 180 countries" (Google for Education, n.d.). However,
some critics consider whether this accessibility is really free. Tech giants, such as Google, have digital dominance and
can effect the economy, society, and politics (Moore & Tambini, 2018), and education (Villapaz, 2014). For example,
teachers can use Google to manage classes, share homework, and create shareable, collaborative projects for students
without any cost to the school or parents. Ethically, it is important to consider the possible benefits Google might
receive with the "free" access provided to students and teachers. Google has faced many lawsuits over the years due to
its data mining without parental consent. In September 2019, Google paid out $170 million to the state of New York [New
Tab] in response to allegations that Google and YouTube "earned millions by illegally collecting personal information
from children without their parents' consent" (Elias & Feiner, 2019, para. 1). More recently, new lawsuits have been filed
by New Mexico's state attorney general [New Tab] alleging that "the tech company is illegally collecting personal data
generated by children in violation of federal and state laws" (Bryan, 2020).

   Ethical Considerations of Privacy, Data, and Security When Schools and
                  Districts Focus on the T (Computing) in STEM

When considering the emphasis of the T in STEM education from a deontological ethical perspective (Farrow, 2016)
or in term of moral obligation, the T could be considered a money-making strategy employed by big business, most
notably big business out of Silicon Valley. Through the use of its devices and free apps, Google has been collecting
information from and about students under the age of 13. Their data mining includes [New Tab] "search history and
which results students click on, videos they search for and watch on YouTube, usage data and preferences, Gmail

                                   Chapter 6: STEM Beyond the Acronym: Ethical Considerations in Standardizing STEM Education in K-12 | 89
messages, G+ profiles and photos, docs, and other Google-hosted content, and content that flows through Google's
systems" (Electronic Frontier Foundation, n.d., para. 7). The means through which Google is learning about future
consumers are justifiable, as they are a money-making enterprise. They are using this information to build profiles and
to focus advertisements on non-education suite websites such as YouTube. Through these profiles, Google can expand
its database and focus advertisements to target consumerism; this, in turn, brings in revenue for the company. This
mining of children's data could be considered a justifiable means to an end. The revenue that companies like Google
earn far outweighs the ethical implications of collecting this data.

From a consequentialist ethical perspective (Farrow, 2016), the consequences -- the invasion of student privacy with and
without parental consent by these companies -- far outweigh the financial gain. There are state and federal acts, such as
the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974 (FERPA) and the Children's Online Privacy Protection Act of 1998
(COPPA), in place that work to protect minors from the collection and use of their private information. However, these
policies are limited in their scope and can at times be ineffective at protecting students (Regan & Jesse, 2019). The lack
of transparency from big data companies regarding their collection and use of the data makes it extremely difficult for
lawmakers to prove probable cause (Regan & Jesse, 2019). The nature of technology and the tightly guarded algorithms
that companies use have created a new world, where laws and acts to protect children are ultimately ineffective. The
continually changing nature of technology and the sophistication of big data algorithms make it difficult for parents
and minors to truly know what they are agreeing to when they click "agree" below the terms of use. The legalese and
sophisticated language mask the underlying agreement. When students and parents agree, do they truly understand
what they are agreeing to? Not only are minors being tracked and profiled within Google's education suite, they are also
losing their autonomy. With access to photos, emails, Google maps, etc. -- student anonymity is being lost.

Is it ethical for companies to use information garnered from minors to earn profit and nudge them towards particular
brands or advertisements? From a virtues perspective (Farrow, 2016), it is an individual's right to full disclosure, privacy,
and autonomy, especially when considering those under the age of majority. Parents, schools, and government bodies
are morally obligated to protect those who cannot protect themselves, and to act ethically. Children essentially lose this
protection when the door is opened for big data companies to access a their data, parents, schools, and government
bodies. Educational use of software and hardware, such as ChromeBooks and Google for Education, invites these
companies into our schools under the guise of supporting learners. However, there are potential conflicts of interest as
edtech companies work with the schools and teachers while at the same time working with districts, researchers, and
shareholders. Is this conflict of interest working to protect our students?

Implications

When STEM is defined with the T as its focus, students become vulnerable to considerable issues around privacy,
consent, and autonomy. Through the use of programs such as Google Education, students and teachers receive easy
access to a wealth of free online apps advertised to make online learning simpler and more collaborative. These apps
grant students and teachers the ability to access a plethora of online programs for free. However, through signing up
and clicking "I accept" to the terms of use for each of these programs, students unwittingly give access to companies to
data-mine and track every click. When we focus on the T, money is continually funnelled back to companies in Silicon
Valley and to other tech giants through the purchasing of licenses, laptops, iPads, and robots. In addition to school
spending, these companies profit from advertisements are driven by clickbait and tracked student searches. If STEM is
defined as a mindset, however, the use of and reliance on technology becomes lessened, as students look at real-world
problems from an interdisciplinary lens, not filtered through technology.

90 | Chapter 6: STEM Beyond the Acronym: Ethical Considerations in Standardizing STEM Education in K-12
   Connection of STEM Education in Teaching to Educational Integrity by
                        Avoiding Harm and Minimizing Risk

Since the early 2000s, government funding programs aimed at improving test scores and deepening the teaching of
STEM in K-12 and postsecondary institutions (President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology, 2010). To
meet these needs, the federal government has viewed STEM not as a mindset, but rather as the strengthening of each
individual subject under its own umbrella (as a silo). Defining STEM as separate subjects allows for a greater focus on
the core subjects and creates a standardization of practice. This standardization can lead to a standardized assessment
tool (tests) that have been used historically to track student progress and could lead to gradually increasing sanctions
and/or school closures (Duignan & Nolen, 2019; Famularo et al., 2013).

This standardization of practice does not always consider gender, ethnicity, or socioeconomic status. When responding
to multiple-choice test questions, students are unable to bring their social narratives or real-life experiences to bear.
Rather, only one answer is correct, thus limiting diversity of thinking and providing no option for students to think
outside of the box to solve the problem. Examining these initiatives reveals that they have not changed teaching of STEM
subjects much at the classroom level, nor have they greatly increased student interest in the subjects (Breiner et al.,
2012). When considering these initiatives and the limited improvement of test scores on a global scale, there appears
to be a disconnect between these policies and the reality of teaching 21st-century students. This raises the question of
who should be making these policy decisions.

   Ethical Considerations When Determining a Standardized Definition of
                                     STEM as a Silo

From a deontological ethical perspective (Farrow, 2016), this standardization of practice and assessment will allow the
US to track students and educators which will then help determine who is underperforming and what sanctions are
needed to improve individual schools and districts. The intention of these sanctions (Duignan & Nolen, 2019) is to push
educators to better prepare their students in the core subjects (science, math, and reading). This view argues that the
means to which test scores are improved outweighs the moral implications.

On the other hand, if we look at the standardization of STEM into its component subjects from a consequentialist ethical
viewpoint (Farrow, 2016), data from the 2018 Programme for International Student Assessment (OECD) shows that there
has been no major improvement in science and math test scores in the US even with massive federal funding over the
past twenty years for STEM education. From this perspective, pushing STEM education as separate core subjects has
not resulted in improved of test scores, and the US continues to rest solidly in the middle of the pack.

According to ethical virtue theory (Farrow, 2016) the standardization of STEM education is detrimental to our students'
learning. By narrowing the definition of STEM to its component subjects, students are not encouraged to tackle real-
world problems from an interdisciplinary standpoint. Students are relegated to a number on a paper that does not take
into consideration diversity, culture, nor gender. Should one test written each year determine the future educational
trajectory of a student? From this perspective, students should be assessed using a variety of tools and instruments that
can effectively account for multiculturalism, ability, and diversity of thinking. A standardization of STEM and subsequent
assessment has limited ability to bring in multiculturalism and divergent thinking. This brings to light a need for more
culturally responsive education (CRE). CRE is defined as, "a student-centred approach to teaching in which the students'
unique cultural strengths are identified and nurtured to promote student achievement and a sense of well-being about

                                    Chapter 6: STEM Beyond the Acronym: Ethical Considerations in Standardizing STEM Education in K-12 | 91
the student's cultural place in the world" (Lynch, 2016, para. 2). Culturally responsive education provides students with
the opportunity to use their own experiences and backgrounds to guide their learning.

          Figure 6.1 TEDx talk by Isael Torres focused on cultural pedagogy and educational access and equality

        A YouTube element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
        https://openeducationalberta.ca/educationaltechnologyethics/?p=43

Implications

The use of standardized tests to assess capabilities has worked against creating a cohesive, accessible curriculum.
Instead of unifying STEM into a foundational way of thinking and creating a curriculum that honours it, STEM continues
to be rather ambiguous in its definition, resulting in a heavy reliance on teaching the individual subjects. The tracking
of students through a standardized test format has not resulted in an improvement for the US in global standings,
nor has it unified the diverse groups of students that make up US schools. Rather, it has disaggregated students
based on ethnicity, English language proficiency, socioeconomic status, and gender (Ansell, 2011; Miller, 2013). Failing
to consider the diversity of thought and experience negates of the human side of the student population. Test scores
are being used as the benchmark for policy decisions (Duignan & Nolen, 2019), which does not necessarily align with
what is best for students. The use of standardized testing "has become entrenched in our society, and the collection
of such data has exploded in its frequency, in its undue influence on the curriculum, and in its use for making life-
impacting decisions about children, teachers, administrators, and schools" (Miller, 2013, para. 5). Foundational thinking
and innovative teaching pedagogy provide the opportunity for CRE to be integrated into teaching practice. Teaching in
a silo limits the capacity for divergent thinking and students' cultural strengths to be utilized.
92 | Chapter 6: STEM Beyond the Acronym: Ethical Considerations in Standardizing STEM Education in K-12
    Connection of STEM Education in Teaching to Respect for Participant
                            Autonomy and Independence

Though STEM education at the K-16 level has continued to expand, and numerous programs have been created to
promote STEM with girls and women, there continues to be a gender gap in STEM fields and careers (Archer et
al., 2012; Chang, 2019; UNESCO, 2017). Research has noted numerous reasons for this gap, not limited to gender
stereotypes (Shapiro & Williams, 2011; UNESCO, 2017), earning discrepancies (Xu, 2015), teacher bias, and a lack of female
voice in STEM programming. Figure 6.2 highlights the "ecological framework of factors influencing girls' and women's
participation, achievement and progression in STEM studies" (p. 40).

Figure 6.2 Framework of the factors influencing the participation, achievement, and progression of girls in STEM, adapted from
"Cracking the code girls and women's education in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (Stem)" (United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, 2017)

Children are exposed to gender stereotypes in the STEM fields from a early age. These stereotypes inadvertently lead
to a tendency to associate science and math skills as male-dominated skill sets, which in turn lead to stereotype threat
(Gunderson et al., 2011; Shapiro & Williams, 2011). Stereotype threat is defined as "a concern or anxiety that one's
performance or actions can be seen through the lens of a negative stereotype -- a concern that disrupts and
undermines performance in negatively stereotyped domains" (Shapiro & Williams, 2011, p. 175). Even though
neuroscience research shows that there are few differences between the structures and functions of the brain
between girls and boys (UNESCO, 2017) these stereotype threatspersist in US schools (Gunderson et al., 2011). Gender
stereotypes are so entrenched in society that this research does little to dispel the negative impacts of bias on girls'

                                   Chapter 6: STEM Beyond the Acronym: Ethical Considerations in Standardizing STEM Education in K-12 | 93
interest in and pursuit of STEM-based fields (Archer et al., 2012; Ertl et al., 2017; Shapiro & Williams, 2011; UNESCO,
2017). As Shapiro and Williams (2011) state, "stereotypes can undermine women's and girls' performance and interest in
STEM domains even when women and girls have positive math attitudes" (p.175). Developing a STEM identity, a form of
social identity where one develops a sense of belonging and social acceptance as part of that community begins in
adolescence (Kim et al., 2018; Martin-Hansen, 2018; Seyranian et al., 2018). Family, peers, and teachers can greatly
impact a girl's sense of STEM identity (Eccles et al., 1990; Gunderson et al., 2011).

94 | Chapter 6: STEM Beyond the Acronym: Ethical Considerations in Standardizing STEM Education in K-12
Chapter 6: STEM Beyond the Acronym: Ethical Considerations in Standardizing STEM Education in K-12 | 95
                     Figure 6.3 STEM Programs Designed for Girls

When determining best practices for STEM education, one could consider a female perspective when designing a
curriculum. From a social justice perspective, one could look at the recognitive justice of female representation in STEM
education and instruction (Lambert, 2018). Is there an equal representation of females in textbooks, curriculum, etc., to
ensure that girls feel a sense of community in their learning?

Currently, STEM education as a silo approach is predominantly taught from a male perspective, which limits many girls'
capacity to develop a STEM identity (Archer et al., 2012; Calabrese Barton & Brickhouse, 2006; Haussler & Hoffmann,
2002). Education requires a shift in how STEM classes are taught at a K-12 level. A foundational approach could
be beneficial to aiding girls in developing their STEM identity (Baker, 2012; Haussler & Hoffmann, 2002; UNESCO,
2017). Research has shown that girls have responded favourably to a curriculum that incorporates ". . . a strong
conceptual framework, [and is] contextualized and relevant to real-world situations" (UNESCO, 2017, p.67). Additionally,
a foundational approach to STEM creates an environment that could build girls' interests, as the curricula can provide
a "varied experience, which integrates social and scientific issues, provides opportunities for genuine inquiry, involves
real-world experience, as well as opportunities for experimentation, practice, reflection and conceptualization"
(UNESCO, 2017, p. 67).

    Ethical Considerations of a STEM Identity for Girls in a Silo Approach

From a consequentialist ethical perspective (Farrow, 2016), STEM education thus far has been known to limit autonomy
and independence of women. By focusing on a silo approach, teachers and policymakers propagate pre-existing
gender stereotypes. These stereotypes may contribute to expanding the gender gap in STEM-based fields and careers.
When pedagogy focuses on a foundational way of thinking, thus prioritizing inquiry and real-world problems, girls
demonstrate greater interest in pursuing STEM fields. Gender bias and stereotyping have limited women's self-identity
and their pursuit of STEM-based fields. These biases, through teachers, parents, and society as a whole, inadvertently,
and at times intentionally, impact girls from a young age.

From a virtues perspective (Farrow, 2016) a shift in educational standards is required in order to meet the needs of all
learners. The bias towards males as scientists and mathematicians is antiquated, and research has shown that gender
plays little role in the learning of individual subjects. These biases cause harm to girls developing a sense of identity in
the STEM subjects. Every student has a right to learn and to gain education free from stereotypes and bias.

Viewing women's roles in STEM from a deontological ethical perspective (Farrow, 2016), women and men are equal
neurologically. Research has demonstrated that gender bias and stereotypes are not founded in science and fact, as
the human brain is designed in much the same way regardless of male or female genetics (UNESCO, 2017). Eradicating
these stereotypes can lead to an equality of learning and provide more freedom for women to focus on STEM subjects.
Providing equity and promoting women's pursuit of STEM-focused programs could expand the depth and breadth of
innovation.

Implications

Gender bias and stereotypes have greatly affected female STEM identities. These biases have limited their pursuit of

96 | Chapter 6: STEM Beyond the Acronym: Ethical Considerations in Standardizing STEM Education in K-12
STEM fields/careers. Research has shown that these stereotypes are not grounded in fact, but rather on assumptions
made of male and female capabilities and skillsets (UNESCO, 2017).

STEM education requires shifting teaching pedagogy from a curriculum focused on the individual subjects or disciplines
to one that incorporates inquiry, real-world problems, and a contextualized approach. Shifting the teaching of STEM
can open up more opportunities for females to develop a stronger STEM identity. There is a need for recognitive justice
in the STEM world. Women are woefully underrepresented in textbooks and learning materials. Through mentoring
opportunities and more visibility of women in STEM, girls can begin to develop a better sense of their role and identity
in the STEM subjects.

                                       Conclusion

When considering a standardized approach for STEM education, it is vitally important to consider all of the stakeholders
and their voices. When we teach STEM subjects as silos, many ethical issues arise that limit the efficacy of the learning,
most notably for girls and minority groups.

When focusing on the T in STEM, students become trackable and reliant on technology for their learning. This tracking
leads to an invasion of privacy and issues around consent. The reliance on technology for learning leads to more money
being funnelled to tech giants, and further issues emerge regarding dependence on technology for achieving curricular
outcomes.

The standardization of STEM into silos limits assessment and culturally responsive teaching. Any standardized
assessment tool limits the diversity of thinking and culturally relevant curricula.

As there is a pronounced gap between women and men pursuing STEM careers, there is a limitation on diversity. Gender
bias and stereotypes have negatively impacted female pursuit of STEM careers. It has led to a stereotype threat that
propagates girls' belief that they are just not as strong as boys in the STEM subjects.

STEM education is an important component of teaching practice. The focus of STEM as a curricular component should
not be up for debate, only how it is to be defined. How it is taught should be of the biggest concern to all stakeholders.
Those who are impacted the most by this ambiguity should be the ones whose voices are considered in this definition.
Ensuring a program that is rich in diversity and that focuses on a foundational way of thinking could pave the way for
equity and a voice for all.

Note: Using Farrow's (2016) framework, Appendix A summarizes key ethical considerations when determining best
practices for the integration of STEM education in K-12 schools. The impact of a misguided definition for STEM has
numerous repercussions as noted in the framework.

                                        References

American Association for the Advancement of Science. (2009). Benchmarks on-line. http://www.project2061.org/
   publications/bsl/online/index.php

Anft, M. (2013, November 11). The STEM crisis: Reality or myth? The Chronicle of Higher Education. http://chronicle.com/
   article/The-STEM-Crisis-Reality-or/142879/

                                    Chapter 6: STEM Beyond the Acronym: Ethical Considerations in Standardizing STEM Education in K-12 | 97
Ansell, S. (2011, July 7). Achievement gap. Education Week. https://www.edweek.org/ew/issues/achievement-gap/
   index.html

Archer, L., DeWitt, J., Osborne, J., Dillon, J., Willis, B., & Wong, B. (2012). "Balancing acts"`: Elementary school girls'
   negotiations of femininity, achievement, and science. Science Education, 96(6), 967-989. https://doi-
   org.ezproxy.lib.ucalgary.ca/10.1002/sce.21031

Baker, D. (2013). What works: Using curriculum and pedagogy to increase girls' interest and participation in science.
   Theory into Practice, 52(1), 14-20. https://doi.org/10.1080/07351690.2013.743760

Berghel, H. (2015). STEM crazy. Computer, 48(9), 75-80. https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2015.256

Blackley, S. & Howell, J. (2015). A STEM narrative: 15 years in the making. Australian Journal of Teacher Education, 40(7),
   102-112. https://doi.org/10.14221/ajte.2015v40n7.8

Breckler, S. (2010). Advising the president on STEM education. Psychological Science Agenda. https://www.apa.org/
   science/about/psa/2010/10/president-stem

Breiner, J. M., Harkness, S. S., Johnson, C. C., & Koehler, C. M. (2012). What is STEM? A discussion about conceptions
   of STEM in education and partnerships. School Science and Mathematics, 112(1), 3-11. https://doi.org/10.1111/
   j.1949-8594.2011.00109.x

Brinkmann, M. (2018, January 4). Google accused of tracking Google Apps for education students. gHacks.net.
   https://www.ghacks.net/2015/12/03/google-accused-of-tracking-google-apps-for-education-students/

Bryan, S. M. (2020, February 20). New Mexico sues Google over collection of children's data. Yahoo News.
   https://news.yahoo.com/mexico-sues-google-over-collection-195306501.html?soc_src=hl-viewer&soc_trk=ma

Bybee, R. W. (2013). The case for Stem education: Challenges and opportunities. NSTA Press.

Caperton, I. H. (2012, March 19). High-quality stem education for all: It takes a village. US News.
   https://www.usnews.com/news/blogs/stem-education/2012/03/19/high-quality-stem-education-for-all-it-
   takes-a-village

Chang, E. (2019). Brotopia: Breaking up the boys' club of Silicon Valley. Portfolio.

Charette, R. N. (2013). The STEM crisis is a myth. IEEE Spectrum, 50(9), 44-59. https://doi.org/10.1109/
   MSPEC.2013.6587189

Cherry Creek Schools. (2020). STEM and Innovation/Definition. https://www.cherrycreekschools.org/Page/11954

Choi, B. C. K. & Pak, A. W. P. (2006). Multidisciplinarity, interdisciplinarity and transdisciplinarity in health research,

services, education and policy: 1. definitions, objectives, and evidence of effectiveness. Clinical and Investigative

Medicine, 29(6),  351-64.  http://ezproxy.lib.ucalgary.ca/login?url=https://www-proquest-

com.ezproxy.lib.ucalgary.ca/docview/196425990?accountid=9838

Davis, B., Francis, K., & Friesen, S. (2019). STEM education by design: Opening horizons of possibility. Taylor Francis Group.

Duignan, B., & Nolen, J. L. (2019, September 24). No child left behind. Britannica. https://www.britannica.com/topic/No-
   Child-Left-Behind-Act

Eccles, J. S., Jacobs, J. E., & Harold, R. D. (1990). Gender role stereotypes, expectancy effects, and parents' socialization of
   gender differences. Journal of Social Issues, 46(2), 183-201. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-4560.1990.tb01929.x

98 | Chapter 6: STEM Beyond the Acronym: Ethical Considerations in Standardizing STEM Education in K-12
Electronic Frontier Foundation. (n.d.). FAQ about cloud education services and devices in schools. https://www.eff.org/
issues/student-privacy/faq

Elias, J., & Feiner, L. (2019, September 4). YouTube will pay $170 million to settle claims it violated child privacy laws. CNBC.
   https://www.cnbc.com/2019/09/04/youtube-to-pay-170-million-in-ftc-child-privacy-settlement.html

Ertl, B., Luttenberger, S., & Paechter, M. (2017). The impact of gender stereotypes on the self-concept of female students
   in STEM subjects with an under-representation of females. Frontiers in Psychology, 8(703), 1-11. https://doi.org/
   10.3389/fpsyg.2017.00703

Famularo, J., French, D., Noonan, J., Schneider, J., & Sienkiewicz, E. (2018). Beyond standardized tests: A new vision for
   assessing student learning and school quality. Centre for Collaborative Education. http://cce.org/files/MCIEA-White-
   Paper_Beyond-Standardized-Tests.pdf

Farrow, R. (2016). A framework for the ethics of open education. Open Praxis, 8(2), pp. 93-109.

Gunderson, E. A., Ramirez, G., Levine, S. C., & Beilock, S. L. (2012). The role of parents and teachers in the development
   of gender-related math attitudes. Sex Roles, 66(3-4), 153-166. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11199-011-9996-2

Honey, M. A., Pearson, G., & Schweingruber, H. (2014). STEM integration in K-12 education: Status, prospects, and an
   agenda for research. The National Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/18612

Isreal, S. (2017, November 1). Building America's future: STEM education intervention is a win-win. Public Policy Initiative.
   https://publicpolicy.wharton.upenn.edu/live/news/2188-building-americas-future-stem-education/for-students/
   blog/news.php

Jadav, D. (2018, May 3). The STEM crisis: What the growing skills gap means for the economy and where we go from here.
   The Hill. https://thehill.com/blogs/congress-blog/education/385929-the-stem-crisis-what-the-growing-skills-
   gap-means-for-the

Kim, A. Y., Sinatra, G. M., & Seyranian, V. (2018). Developing a STEM identity among young women: A social identity
   perspective. Review of Educational Research, 88(4), 589-625. https://doi.org/10.3102/0034654318779957

Lambert, S.R. (2018). Changing our (dis)course: A distinctive social justice aligned definition of open education. Journal
   of Learning for Development, 5(3). https://jl4d.org/index.php/ejl4d/ article/view/290/334

Lynch, M. (2016, May 2). What is culturally responsive pedagogy? The Edvocate. https://www.theedadvocate.org/what-
   is-culturally-responsive-pedagogy/

MacLean, L. M. (2017). Cracking the code: How to get women and minorities into stem disciplines and why we must.

Momentum  Press.             https://ebookcentral-proquest-com.ezproxy.lib.ucalgary.ca/lib/ucalgary-ebooks/

detail.action?docID=4791046

Martin-Hansen, L. (2018). Examining ways to meaningfully support students in STEM. International Journal of STEM
   Education, 5(53), 1-6. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40594-018-0150-3

Miller, H. M. (2013, September). The dilemma of standardized testing and the achievement gap: It's time to end
   reliance on tools that don't do what they are needed to do. District Administration, 49(9), 92. https://link-gale-
   com.ezproxy.lib.ucalgary.ca/apps/doc/A344279223/AONE?u=ucalgary&sid=AONE&xid=67e34a5c

Moore, M. & Tambini, D. (2018). Digital dominance: The power of Google, Amazon, Facebook, and Apple. Oxford University
   Press.

OECD. (n.d.). PISA 2018 test results. https://www.oecd.org/pisa/publications/pisa-2018-results.htm

          Chapter 6: STEM Beyond the Acronym: Ethical Considerations in Standardizing STEM Education in K-12 | 99
The Partnership for 21st Century Skills. (2008). 21st century skills, education & competitiveness: A resource and policy
   guide. https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED519337

Regan, P. & Jesse, J. (2019). Ethical challenges of edtech, big data and personalized learning: Twenty-first century student
   sorting and tracking. Ethics and Information Technology, 21(3), 167-179. https://doi-org.ezproxy.lib.ucalgary.ca/
   10.1007/s10676-018-9492-2

Seyranian, V., Madva, A., Duong, N., Abramzon, N., Tibbetts, Y., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (2018). The longitudinal effects of
   STEM identity and gender on flourishing and achievement in college physics. International Journal of STEM Education,
   5(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s40594-018-0137-0

Shapiro, J. R. & Williams, A. M. (2012). The role of stereotype threats in undermining girls' and women's performance and
   interest in STEM fields. Sex Roles, 66, 175-183. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11199-011-0051-0

Siekmann, G. & Korbel, P. (2016). Defining "STEM" skills: Review and synthesis of the literature. National Centre for
   Vocational Education Research. https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED570655.pdf

Science from Scientists (n.d.). The STEM crisis & our solution. Science from Scientists.
   https://www.sciencefromscientists.org/the-stem-crisis

UNESCO. (2017). Cracking the code: Girls' and women's education in science, technology, engineering and mathematics
   (STEM). United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
   pf0000253479

Villapaz, L. (2014, August 15). How Google took over the American classroom and is creating a Gmail generation.
   International Business Times. https://www.ibtimes.com/how-google-took-over-american-classroom-creating-
   gmail-generation-1657852

The White House. (2009, November 23). President Obama launches "Educate to Innovate" campaign for excellence in
   science, technology, engineering & math (stem) education [Press release]. https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/
   the-press-office/president-obama-launches-educate-innovate-campaign-excellence-science-technology-en

Williams, P. J. (2011). STEM education: Proceed with caution. Design and Technology Education, 16(1), 26-35.
https://eric.ed.gov/?id=EJ916494
Xu, Y. (2015). Focusing on women in STEM: A longitudinal examination of gender-based learning gap of college

   graduates. Journal of Higher Education, 86(4), 489-523. https://doi.org/10.1353/jhe.2015.0020
Zakaria, F. (2015, March 26). Why America's obsession with STEM education is dangerous. The Washington Post.

   https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/why-stem-wont-make-us-successful/2015/03/26/
   5f4604f2-d2a5-11e4-ab77-9646eea6a4c7_story.html
Zeide, E. (2017). The limits of education purpose limitations. University of Miami Law Review, 71(2), 494-527.
   https://repository.law.miami.edu/umlr/vol71/iss2/8/

100 | Chapter 6: STEM Beyond the Acronym: Ethical Considerations in Standardizing STEM Education in K-12
                     Appendix A

Chapter 6: STEM Beyond the Acronym: Ethical Considerations in Standardizing STEM Education in K-12 | 101
Table 6.1 Completed ethical framework for standardizing STEM education in K-12 based on Farrow's (2016) Uncompleted
                                                                              Framework

Principle                  Duties & Responsibilities        Outcome (consequentialist)       Personal Development
                                  (deontological)                                                      (Virtue)

Full disclosure             Those who choose                If teachers are not making      Is STEM education truly
                               educational practice and         decisions on trends, is the      the best direction for our
                               policy are not always from       push for STEM biased             students, or does it just
                               the educational sector.          from the start?                  make the majority of US
                                                                                                 students look better from
                            Teachers have little voice      Is STEM education                  a world perspective?
                               in determining policy and        hurting our students and
                               funding.                         the economy in the long       What are the teacher
                                                                run?                             perspectives on STEM
                            Big business and global                                             education?
                               positioning are large         Pros and Cons of STEM
                               decision-makers in policy.       education.

                            How would education be
                               impacted if teachers had a
                               decision-making voice?

                            Decision-makers are
                               being swayed by big
                               business and by
                               educational ranking on
                               the world stage

                            STEM is touted as the
                               needed skill set for future
                               jobs; without extensive
                               STEM education are we
                               letting our students
                               down?

                            What pieces of STEM and
                               the 3 R's are needed to
                               fulfill students' needs?
                               Can we meet their needs
                               with one and not the
                               other?

Privacy, data security, &   Money-making strategy           The mining of student           It is an individual's right to
informed consent               employed by giant tech           data invades their privacy       have privacy and
                               firms.                           and opens them up to             autonomy, especially for
                                                                risk.                            those under the age of
                            Providing free access to                                            majority
                               students and teachers         The invasion of student
                               gives tech companies an          privacy with and without      Parents, schools, and
                               ability to track and mine        parental consent by these        government bodies are
                               information with and             companies far outweighs          morally obligated to
                               without the consent of           the financial gain.              protect those who cannot
                               minors.                                                           protect themselves.
                                                             The continually changing
                                                                nature of technology and      Potential conflicts of
                                                                the sophistication of big        interest arise, as edtech
                                                                data algorithms makes it         companies are work with
                                                                difficult for parents and        the schools/teachers, but
                                                                minors to truly know what        at the same time work
                                                                they are agreeing to when        with districts, researchers
                                                                they click "agree" below         and shareholders.
                                                                the terms of use.

                                                             With access to photos,
                                                                emails, Google maps, etc.
                                                                student anonymity is
                                                                being lost.

102 | Chapter 6: STEM Beyond the Acronym: Ethical Considerations in Standardizing STEM Education in K-12
Principle                   Duties & Responsibilities        Outcome (consequentialist)        Personal Development
                                   (deontological)                                                       (Virtue)
Avoiding harm & minimizing
risk                         Standardization of              There has been no major          Standardization of STEM
                                practice and assessment          improvement in science            education is detrimental
                                will allow the US to track       and math test scores in           to the learning of our
                                students and educators,          the US, even with massive         students.
                                which will then help             federal funding over the
                                determine who is                 past twenty years for          When we narrow the
                                underperforming and              STEM education.                   definition of STEM to its
                                what sanctions are                                                 component subjects, we
                                needed to improve             Pushing STEM education              do not allow students to
                                individual schools/              as separate core subjects         tackle real-world
                                districts.                       has not resulted in the           problems from an
                                                                 improvement of test               interdisciplinary
                             These sanctions are                scores, and the US                standpoint.
                                intended to push                 continues to rest solidly in
                                educators to better              the "middle of the pack."      Students are relegated to
                                prepare their students in                                          a number on a paper, that
                                the core subjects (science,                                        does not take into
                                math, and reading).                                                consideration diversity,
                                                                                                   culture, nor gender.

                                                                                                Standardization of STEM
                                                                                                   and subsequent
                                                                                                   assessment has limited
                                                                                                   ability to bring in
                                                                                                   multiculturalism and
                                                                                                   divergent thinking.

Autonomy & independence      Minority groups and girls       Even with a push for             Societal norms should not
                                are being left behind            STEM towards girls, there         sway a person from
                                when it comes to STEM            remain fewer woman and            following their interests
                                education.                       people of minorities              or heart.
                                                                 entering STEM
                             Shouldn't the definition of        professions.                   Why do gender and
                                STEM be inclusive?                                                 ethnicity bias play such a
                                                              Is the push for STEM                large role in education?
                             It is our duty to ensure           education still targeting
                                that we do not                   white males?                   We owe it to our students
                                standardize STEM;                                                  to provide them with
                                otherwise, yet again, we      Do cultural norms and               access to a variety of
                                take the diversity out of        gender bias deter girls           activities without fear of
                                the programming.                 from going into STEM              recrimination, teasing,
                                                                 classes/activities?               and/or avoidance of
                                                                                                   diversity.
                                                              There persist a stereotype
                                                                 for girls and minority
                                                                 groups when it comes to
                                                                 the higher-level
                                                                 academics; societal norms
                                                                 do get in the way of
                                                                 choosing certain subjects.

Media Attributions

   Figure 1 Factors Impacting girls  Jennifer Ansorger is licensed under a CC BY (Attribution) license
   Figure 6.2: STEM Programs Designed for Girls  Jennifer Ansorger is licensed under a CC BY (Attribution) license

Chapter 6: STEM Beyond the Acronym: Ethical Considerations in Standardizing STEM Education in K-12 | 103
Chapter 7: Considerations of Equitable Standards in
the Implementation of Assistive Technology

TERRI MARLES

                                      Introduction

The creation of Alberta Education's (2010) Inspiring Education Policy has helped to promote a shift in the focus of
teaching towards student-centred learning, the expansion of traditional methods of instruction, and more license for
creativity in instruction and programming. Within the guiding principles of Inspiring Education exist specific initiatives
conducive to this shift. One of these initiatives, the Learning and Technology Framework Policy, provides a guide for
educators in understanding how technology in the classroom increases opportunities and support for students (Alberta
Education, 2010). This initiative has helped increase understanding among educators of the importance of technology in
providing students with opportunities in the classroom that might not otherwise exist. With the increase of educational
and instructional technology in classrooms, the need for technologies that assist and support students with special
needs has become more obvious.

The interest among educators in using technologies to support students with disabilities has promoted the
implementation of assistive technology in classrooms. Assistive technology is defined as "any item or piece of equipment
or product system either acquired commercially, off the shelf, modified, or customized and used to increase, maintain,
or improve functional capabilities for individuals with disabilities" (Johnston et al., 2007, p. 4). Many educators have a
simplified understanding of assistive technology as technology and tools that support student learning by removing
barriers and obstacles, increasing engagement, and promoting a feeling of success. The Alberta Government's (2020)
Inclusive Education Framework outlines the principles of inclusive education, including assistive technology as a key
factor in supporting students with exceptional needs. The Alberta Government's (2010) Inspiring Education Policy
was created to provide pedagogical and ethical standards that outline inclusive education practices. These practices
promote a sense of belonging through positive learning experiences for students, and address the need for educators
to understand the importance of using assistive technology. These policies provide guidelines for supporting students
with disabilities; however, no set educational government mandate ensures that the needs of students are met (Inclusive
Education, 2020). Within these principles, guiding questions are asked around the implementation of assistive
technologies in school. These questions consider issues such as how data is being used to inform the selection,
implementation and evaluation of assistive technology for learning at the classroom, school and authority level, and
what expertise and resources are available to support implementation of assistive technology for learning (A Guide to
Support Implementation: Essential Conditions [New Tab], Edmonton Regional Learning Consortium, 2016).

Vignette

Decisions around implementation of assistive technology in K-12 settings are made at the school level. The implications
of this can be both negative and positive, as administration at schools may not view assistive technology as a necessary
tool for students and may decide to allocate funding to the resources instead. For example, in my current role as an
assistive technology consultant, I help make decisions about allocation of devices and equipment for students with
104 | Considerations of Equitable Standards in the
Implementation of Assistive Technology
special needs in the school district. Other schools may not have a specialist or consultant, or may not include them in
decision-making.

During my time in this position, I have developed a process to determine which students receive assistive technology.
When I started the position, there were no specific guidelines for this process. My experience as a special education
teacher and special education consultant, using a multitude of assistive technologies to support students in their
learning, guided my decisions on student access to assistive technology. To create a pedagogically sound policy, it was
necessary to work with a multidisciplinary team to ensure that the needs of students were met. I collaborated with
school psychologists, teachers in the field, learning consultants, and the educational technology team to develop a series
of questions that outline a student's learning needs, the professionals involved with the student, and how a device and
applications would support their learning. Using a Google form, responses are collected in such a way that priority
students can be identified. This process provides the information that I need to determine the device and programs that
will best support a given student.

The struggle is that this process is sustainable only if the funding and the budget allow for it. With recent cutbacks
and the possibility of the assistive technology budget diminishing, I have had to reimagine a different process that will
still provide the necessary assistive technology to students with special needs. I have spoken with other school districts
around the topic and about how they support students with assistive technology. Every school district seems to have
a different process, and, in some cases, there is nothing in place. The question then arises, how should school districts
implement a model of assistive technology for students with diverse needs that supports equitable standards?

Full Disclosure

Using Farrow's (2016) framework for ethical perspectives, this paper will address the question above and consider
why ethical perspectives need to be part of the implementation of assistive technology in classrooms, taking into
consideration deontological, consequentialist, and virtue ethics.

There is a vast amount of research on the benefits of access to assistive technology for student learning. Assistive
technology educator and researcher Joy Zabala is known for her work in this area, advocating for the successful
implementation and evaluation of assistive technology in classrooms. Zabala et al. (2005) created the Student,
Environments, Tasks, and Tools (SETT) framework as a guide for educators in using assistive technology. The SETT
framework can guide educators in carefully assessing the needs of students in these areas and in making informed
decisions in implementing and evaluating assistive technology tools (Zabala et al., 2005). The framework helps educators
answer questions about individual student learning needs, such as who is involved supporting these students, what prior
experience they have with students using the same or similar devices, and what comfort level they have with students
using devices (Zabala et al., 2005).

The answers to these questions provide important insight into programming for a student's unique learning needs.
However, who within the school holds responsibility for using the SETT framework and assessing the assistive
technology needs of a student? How is funding determined and allocated for students receiving support, and who
ensures that the process is based on equitable standards? Equitable standards that should be considered are:

   sustainable process that provides equal access for all students,
   learning technologies that provide additional supports (not substitution of professional expertise for student's

      assessment and achievement), and
   informed decision-making policies that are grounded in best practice and that consider student voice.

                                                            Considerations of Equitable Standards in the Implementation of Assistive Technology | 105
     Privacy and Data Considerations with Using Supportive Technologies

Among the concerns raised about equitable standards in implementation and student use of assistive technology are
the ethical issues related to privacy and informed consent with users. In the last decade, educational and assistive
technologies have exploded, and teachers are using a myriad of educational programs to support student learning
across the curriculum (Regan & Jesse, 2018). Assistive technologies have become popular among teachers as a way of
increasing access to curriculum materials, and of adapting and differentiating instruction for students with exceptional
needs. Many of these programs employ a personalized learning system, which is geared at providing students with
lessons and activities based on their current academic levels. For example, programs such as Mathletics have built-in
assessment, whereby students respond to a series of math questions, and their responses are used to identify their
current math ability and grade level. A-Z Learning is a reading program that works in the same way, assessing students
through standardized questions in order to determine a grade level for them to begin at and work through.

Deontological Theory

There are several ethical considerations related to the use of educational and assistive technology applications,
specifically with personalized learning systems. These programs are intuitive, and the end result of initial and then
ongoing interactions is a snapshot of a student's ability, which informs how questions and activities are generated to
focus on increasing the student's skills. However, there is little information available on how a student's information is
used to determine their ability, and even less information on student demographics. In the case of students with special
needs, their learning style may be quite different from the average student, and their achievement in certain areas may
be lower than their capabilities if the program does not consider the accommodations that need to be in place for
learner success.

Regan and Jesse (2018) state that "a critical ethical concern raised with personalized learning is whether such programs
constitute tracking and sorting of students that might be considered discriminatory" (p. 168). They caution that in the
United States, the tracking and sorting of students has led to divided classrooms of race, gender, and class. Today,
tracking is happening behind a screen, hidden from students and parents (Regan & Jesse, 2018). When examined from a
deontological perspective, which focuses on "responsibility, intention and duty" (Farrow, 2016, p. 102), attention should
paid to understanding the intended use of these programs and to ensuring that teachers recognize that personalized
learning systems collect student information without any consideration of their exceptional needs. These systems
should be considered an additional or supplemental learning resource and not an authentic assessment of a student's
learning ability or needs. Furthermore, students and parents should be made aware of how these systems collect
information and whether and how this information is used by teachers in planning and programming.

Consequentialist Theory

Most teachers use educational and assistive technology programs as an alternative means to support student learning.
Personalized learning systems provide opportunities to provide students with engaging one-to-one learning. Bulger
(2016) describes personalized learning systems as having the "potential to revolutionize learning" (p. 3) despite vague
research findings on whether and how these systems do improve learning outcomes for students. This raises the
question of how teachers are using these programs to improve students' academic skills and whether they are an
appropriate measure of achievement.

106 | Considerations of Equitable Standards in the Implementation of Assistive Technology
A second ethical consideration for the use of educational and assistive technologies for personalized learning is whether
the use of these systems is replacing expertise available through school districts. Even the most intuitive and customized
personalized learning system cannot replace the expertise of school professionals, whose responsibility and role is to
assess, adapt, and help identify the best way to support students in their learning.

Virtue Theory

The use of personalized learning systems in K-12 classrooms is increasing at a rapid rate. School districts have an
increased responsibility in deciding what educational applications can be used without the breach of student privacy.
However, teachers have access to a vast range of free educational programs that can be downloaded and used without
exploring the consequences. Very similar to the focus of virtue ethics on individual character and a strength on "making
good choices," teachers may unknowingly expose their students to programs that collect student's data without consent
and increase the risk of privacy concerns. The use of these programs in education has become mainstream, and
the potential for personalized learning has been noted by Facebook developer Mark Zuckerberg. Zuckerberg and his
wife, Priscilla Chan, invested US$45 billion into advancing personalized learning and establishing the Chan Zuckerberg
Education initiative (Bulger, 2016). It is not surprising that educators are turning to technology to enhance and engage
students when it is so widely supported by influential people in the digital world. Teachers want to make a difference
for their students and to provide opportunities for personalized and individualized learning; however, they may not
recognize the risks involved.

Summary

The use of personalized learning systems as digital tools to support diverse students' learning needs requires close
examination. Educators cannot rely on the results or scores that are often embedded in personalized learning systems
as authentic assessment for student learning. All students -- not only those with diverse learning needs -- have unique
learning abilities, approaches, and needs. Educators are responsible for understanding the abilities and needs of their
students and for providing classroom experiences that tap into students' strengths and help address needs.

    Avoiding Harm and Risk in Implementation of Assistive Technologies

Vignette

The current COVID-19 crisis caused a major uprooting and shift for educators across the globe. When Premier Jason
Kenney announced school closures on March 7, 2020 for most school districts across Alberta, superintendents and
educators across the province responded to the situation with a plan for K-12 education to take place at home.
For many school districts, this meant a shift from in-class teaching to delivering curriculum content and connecting
with students online. It also meant a complete reimagining of assessment and feedback for students. For some
educators, this has proved a daunting shift -- one for which they were not at all -- while other teachers are adjusting to
this change, having had some experience in the digital world of teaching and learning.

                                                            Considerations of Equitable Standards in the Implementation of Assistive Technology | 107
One of the major concerns for districts has been to ensure that students have access to technology at home in order to
access the delivery of online content and to connect with their teachers. In my role working with assistive technology,
the shift to remote teaching brought about many questions concerning how best to support students with diverse
learning needs. I had to ensure that students had access to their assigned devices and also had support in using these
devices at home. Some of questions that emerged as a result of the shift to online learning were as follows:

   How will students who are supported by assistive technology in schools gain access to their one-to-one device at
      home?

   Who is responsible for ensuring students' continued support from assistive technologies?
   How will the one-to-one devices be distributed for home use and how will I manage their return?
   How much will it cost to ensure that students have access to technology?
   What about students who are not coded, and who use assistive technology at school, but do not have access to

      these technologies at home? (Reasons vary and include financial constraints, parent's level of understanding of
      assistive technology resources, and so on.)

One of the many challenges that educators face in today's classroom is ensuring that the unique needs of every student
are met. Some students have mental health needs, and also social, behavioural, and emotional needs. For others,
struggles in specific areas of learning pose cognitive support needs. The dynamics of a classroom can be overwhelming
for many teachers, with pressure to meet provincial standards, combined with the need to support the emotional,
physical, and learning needs of all students, and also to remain attuned to parent involvement and demands. Research
findings from the Alberta Education's Severe Disabilities Profile Review revealed that only "56 percent of the files
related to students with severe disabilities met the ministry's policy requirements" (Alberta Teacher's Association, 2011,
p. 1), which means that just over half of the needs of students with disabilities were being funded. As a result, the
mandate Setting the Direction for Special Education in Alberta was launched in 2008, along with a framework for special
education from Grades 1 through 12.

In 2009, a committee brought their concerns and suggestions to the Alberta Minister of Education. Informed by these
concerns, a new framework was established based on the principle to create "one inclusive education system where
each student is successful" (Alberta Teachers' Association, 2011, p.1). The Inclusive Education committee's vision was
to ensure that the educational needs of students would be recognized as changing, and therefore so would their
opportunities for success. The framework identifies three areas of priority -- "curriculum, capacity and collaboration
-- and recommends a vision of an inclusive education that repositions education within the broader education system"
(Alberta Teachers' Association, 2011, p.1).

The inclusive education system is guided by fairness and equitable standards; however, issues can arise when resources
and technology support come with a high price tag to districts, combined with varying levels of government funding.
Although most educators are vigilant in reaching for the goal of fairness and equality for every student in their
classroom, they are often met with the harsh fiscal reality that the educational and assistive technology that can better
support students is simply not available.

Fast forward to the current situation in which educators are dealing with instruction and assessment for all of their
students using some means of online delivery, and the issue becomes even more complex. How can educators ensure
an equitable standard for all students now that they are teaching online, and students are learning from home?

Deontological Theory

The deontological theory "emphasizes moral obligation and the rule-based nature of morality" (Farrow, 2016, p. 101),

108 | Considerations of Equitable Standards in the Implementation of Assistive Technology
which is the foundation for inclusive education practices both in the classroom and in the current `at home' learning
state. For some students, ensuring their needs are met requires adjustment to instructional methods and flexibility in
the way they produce and show their work. Accommodations through technology can assist and support these students
in a multitude of ways by removing barriers and obstacles to learning so that they can reach outcomes and goals.
For some students with diverse learning needs, the shift to online learning has been positive, as lessons are delivered
digitally, and assistive technology are in place to support students with areas of weakness, such as reading and writing.
Some students have reported that they like learning at home and using Google Classroom, because they do not feel
the same time constraints to complete their work that they sometimes experience in the classroom. However, the
negative impact is also present, as some students struggle with attending to tasks and require more one-to-one support
with learning strategies. Such students may become frustrated and anxious with the daunting task of independently
managing their work. Furthermore, teachers are now faced with their own challenge of ensuring the success of students
with assistive technologies. Rather than working with students and assessing their assistive technology needs at school,
they are supporting students' use of these technologies through online instruction.

Consequential Theory

In order to achieve a process for implementing assistive technology that ensures equity among students with diverse
learning needs, all stakeholders must be involved. Both budget roadblocks and the need to train teachers in
implementing technology in the classroom must be addressed and discussed with key individuals, such as
administrators, parents, and district support service personel.

Bugaj and Norton-Darr's (2010) Guide to Assistive Technology in Public Schools notes that "the `Education for All'
concept spreads from the top down as an administrative philosophy as well as from the bottom up with teachers
working together within classrooms to ensure that every student is successful" (p. 124). The message surrounding
the implementation of assistive technology in the classroom must come from school districts leaders and must
communicate a universal commitment to supporting students online using a range of learning technologies.

Virtue Theory

Alberta Education's Action on Inclusion framework (Alberta Teachers' Association, 2011) promotes a universal
understanding of inclusive classrooms. Therefore, it is imperative that teachers take on the responsibility for all their
students in a value-based approach. Such an approach requires a shift in mindset, as teachers are ultimately responsible
for ensuring the success of each student. A virtuous approach recognizes the importance of inclusive practices for
students, while high expectations are put on teachers to provide differentiated instruction and accommodations that
may include technologies they have no experience using.

Summary

When implementing assistive technologies in support of students with diverse learning needs, a collaborative approach
between school administration, instructional leaders, learning coaches, and teachers must be taken. The approach must
consider teachers as key in implementation, while also recognizing their different levels of comfort and experience
when it comes to using technology. Now more than ever, as learning shifts completely online, teachers are experiencing
increasing demands on their role. Building capacity by providing training to teachers has also shifted to online

                                                            Considerations of Equitable Standards in the Implementation of Assistive Technology | 109
instruction; this approach to professional development works well for many teachers, but has proved challenging
for some who are more comfortable with in-person training. Online professional development for teachers requires
interactive instruction and participation in order to personalize learning and make it more meaningful (Francis &
Jacobson, 2013). Interestingly, Francis & Jacobson (2013) found that teacher experiences with an online learning platform
were consistent with the "inquiry approaches to learning" (p. 335) that exists in Alberta's current curriculum. Francis
& Jacobson (2013) found that participant engagement increased through collaboration and inquiry (using interactive
whiteboard activities) which in turn sparked conversations amongst teacher participants around the important of
discovery in learning with their students.

Although classrooms are now digital, educators and leaders are still required to carefully research digital resources and
provide support and assistance to teachers in using them so they can ultimately do the same for their students. Learning
communities, demonstrations, and hands-on activities need to be provided for teachers using effective approaches to
online professional learning (citations needed here, see notes).

 Implementing and Connecting Assistive Technology to Personal Autonomy,
                     Multiple Perspectives, and Finding a Voice

Vignette

With the recent turn of events due to COVID-19 and learning at home, the question for many school districts was how to
ensure that students with diverse learning needs had access to technology. In my role, I had to make plans for students
to gain access to their assigned assistive technology devices to use at home. However, there were many students who
did not have access to technology at home to engage in online learning. A process for administrators was determined
for the families that required technology and did not have assigned assistive technology devices. These students may
not be coded and therefore are ineligible to receive one-to-one assistive technology devices; however, these are very
much in need given diverse financial dynamics and constraints at home. Leaders had to come together to explore the
possibilities of using resources to support diverse student needs, including collecting older devices for students who did
not have access to suitable technology.

There are certainly concerns around participant autonomy and independence when implementing assistive technology
for students with diverse learning needs. For all matters, including education, parents and guardians are the voices and
advocates for their children. Ultimately, parents make the final decision regarding programming and supports that will
best meet the learning needs of their child and ensure their social and emotional wellbeing. Many factors can impact
programming and the use of assistive technology, and these need to be discussed between schools and parents.

Deontological Theory

Ideally, when planning for a student's education needs, teachers and parents work together to ensure a child's learning
needs are met. However, there can be obstacles and concerns that keep equitable access from being achieved. For
example, there may be cultural or linguistic perspectives or beliefs about learners with special needs that prevent
children from receiving such support. There may be resistance to specialized programming, including assistive
technology. In other cases, there may be resistance to a child receiving specialized support for fear that the child
looks different than their peers and becomes socially isolated. In situations like this, how does the school support the

110 | Considerations of Equitable Standards in the Implementation of Assistive Technology
student through adaptation, modifications, and accommodations if the parents are resistant or do not agree with the
recommendations? Is it the teacher's duty and responsibility to implement support for a child even when a parent is not
in agreement? Or, do parents make the final decision in such cases? Complex issues and situations and ethical decisions
like this are amplified for schools, teachers, and parents during a pandemic and during a shift to remote instruction.

Consequential Theory

Within the consequential theory of ethics, "responsibility, intention and duty" (Farrow, 2016, p. 102) lie at the forefront.
School districts that adhere to government mandates in this situation, such as Alberta's Education Act (2020), behave
according to the premise that educators are bound by law and respect "clear moral boundaries" (Farrow, 2016, p. 102).
Alberta's Education Act (2020) states that teachers are obligated to provide students with instruction and learning at
their level as outlined in the curriculum and consistent with the goals outlined by the act. The Education Act (2020)
also states that teachers must "encourage and foster learning in students" (p. 130) in a safe and caring environment.
In the present context, educators may feel pressured by policy and less willing to adhere to a parent's concern (voice).
It becomes a balance between keeping a relationship with parents and respecting their rights and authority with their
child, and also supporting a child's right to education.

In situations concerning parent disagreement of supportive services for their children, it is important to keep an
open and communicative relationship. Farrow (2016) describes how, according to the consequential theory, the balance
between parent and teacher relationship represents the voice of a child by "incorporat[ing] multiple perspectives" (p.
102) and using "a practical approach" (p. 102). School boards are obligated to provide a safe and nurturing environment
for children that encourages active learning, and this must include ensuring that students are supported in their
academics and experience success. This legal and pedagogical responsibility involves addressing the role that parents
play in their child's education and supporting parents in understanding this responsibility. According to Alberta's
Education Act (2020), a parent's responsibility in their child's education includes "co-operat[ing] and collaborat[ing]
with school staff to support the delivery of supports and services to the child" (p.38). For parents who may be hesitant
due to cultural differences, this means including the multicultural team in helping parents understand the benefits to
implementing supports, specifically assistive technologies. For parents concerned about their child standing out, the
conversation should focus on how technology is used universally in the classroom as a digital resource that supports all
students in their learning.

Virtue Theory

From a virtue ethics perspective, the key principle is that every student is entitled to the support they need to
experience success in school. This perspective considers teachers and parents as the voice for a child with diverse
learning needs. Furthermore, the equitable standards within the virtuous theory considers those students who may
not have the voice of a parent to advocate for them. Unfortunately, there are students who do not receive support
through assistive technology because their parents may not be involved in their schooling. The question then needs to
be addressed, who is the voice for these students? Not all students who need support are coded, and if parents are not
their voice to advocate for their child, then how can equitable standards be put in place to ensure these students receive
the supports that they need to be successful?

Educators can be the voice for students and can help to advocate for the supports that will enable a student's learning to
occur. This is difficult when a student is not coded, as funding supports and resources are often established under these
parameters. Teachers turn to their administration for support in purchasing devices and programs, but schools are also

                                                             Considerations of Equitable Standards in the Implementation of Assistive Technology | 111
limited by budget constraints. In some cases, a solution may be to ask to reuse older devices for students who need
them. While a viable option, this can snowball into other concerns, such as who maintains and supports these devices,
if anyone does, and who determines which students receive them, and how (Floyd, 2010).

Summary

The key to ensuring students with diverse learning needs have a voice in their learning is establishing an educational
support team of expertise for students, including teachers, parents, technology leaders, and therapists. The common
interest among this team should focus on providing the student with the learning conditions and digital technologies
that best support learning and also promote independence.

                                       Conclusion

Over the last decade, there has been a major shift in schools toward including and supporting students with diverse
learning needs in regular education instruction settings. This inclusion is a visual representation of society's desire for
progression in social justice. The extent to which inclusion exists from province to province is an indication of society's
willingness to embrace and promote fair and equitable social policies in education.

Implementing assistive technology into the classroom provides students with diverse learning needs with the
opportunity for positive classroom experiences by removing barriers to learning and by providing tools for success.
Ensuring equitable standards for all learners should be the foundation of any model of implementation of assistive
technology. In recognizing these standards, teachers must be aware of obstacles that may exist with using assistive
technology. Simpson et al. (2009) explain that "a `one size fits all' approach is never appropriate for assistive technology
selection. All students are different, and therefore their assistive technology needs are different" (p. 174). An effective
and equitable model of implementing assistive technology for inclusive education will address and overcome budgetary
constraints, involve meaningful and appropriate training for educators, consider and address parental concerns, and
implement assistive technologies that are inclusive and universally accessible.

References

Alberta Education. (2013). Learning technology policy framework. Alberta                          Government.
   https://inspiring.education.alberta.ca/initiative/learning-and-technology-policy-framework/

Alberta Government. (2020). Inclusive education. https://www.alberta.ca/inclusive-education.aspx

Alberta Government. (2010). Inspiring education: A dialogue with Albertans. https://open.alberta.ca/dataset/
   45370ce9-3a90-4ff2-8735-cdb760c720f0/resource/2ee2452c-81d3-414f-892f-060caf40e78e/download/
   4492270-2010-inspiring-education-dialogue-albertans-2010-04.pdf

The Alberta Teachers' Association. (2011, January). Alberta's action on inclusion: Transforming diversity into possibility.
   Leadership Update, 7(5), 1-3. https://www.teachers.ab.ca/SiteCollectionDocuments/ATA/Publications/School-
   Administrators/Leadership-Update/COMM-118-56%20v7n5.pdf

112 | Considerations of Equitable Standards in the Implementation of Assistive Technology
Bugaj, C. R., & Norton-Darr, S. (2010). Practical (and fun) guide to assistive technology in public schools: Building or
   improving your district's at team. International Society for Tech in Ed. https://ebookcentral-proquest-
   com.ezproxy.lib.ucalgary.ca/lib/ucalgary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=3317679

Bulger, M. (2016). Personalized learning: The conversations we're not having. Data and Society Research
   Institute. https://datasociety.net/pubs/ecl/PersonalizedLearning_primer_2016.pdf

Education  Act,  S.A.  2012,  c  E-0.3.                      (2020)  https://www.qp.alberta.ca/

1266.cfm?page=E00P3.cfm&leg_type=Acts&isbncln=9780779816774

Farrow, R. (2016). A framework for the ethics of open education. Open Praxis, 8(2), 93-109. https://doi.org/10.5944/
   openpraxis.8.2.291

Floyd, K. (2010). Book and software review: The practical (and fun) guide to assistive technology in public schools.
   Journal of Special Education Technology, 25(4), 65-66. https://doi.org/10.1177/016264341002500407

Francis, K., & Jacobsen, M. (2013). Synchronous online collaborative professional development for elementary
   mathematics teachers. The International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning, 14(3), 319-343.
   https://doi.org/10.19173/irrodl.v14i3.1460

Johnston, L., Beard, L. A., & Carpenter, L. B. (2007). Assistive technology: Access for all students. Columbus, OH: Pearson
   Merrill Prentice Hall.

Regan, P., & Jesse, J. (2018). Ethical challenges of edtech, big data and personalized learning: twenty-first century student
   sorting and tracking. Ethics And Information Technology, 21(3), 167-179. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10676-018-9492-2

Simpson, G.C., McBride, R., Spencer, V.G., Lowdermilk, J. & Lynch, S. (2009). Assistive technology-supporting learners in
   inclusive classrooms. Kappa Delta Pi Record, 45(4), 172-175. https://doi.org/10.1080/00228958.2009.10516540

Zabala, J., Bowser, G., & Korsten, J. (2005). Sett and Resett: Concepts for AT Implementation. Closing The Gap, 23(5), 1-4.
   https://www.rockyview.ab.ca/assets/archive/learning/teaching/assistive-technology/atl-assets/SETT.pdf

                       Considerations of Equitable Standards in the Implementation of Assistive Technology | 113
                                       Appendix A

114 | Considerations of Equitable Standards in the Implementation of Assistive Technology
Table 7.1: Completed ethical framework for use of assistive technology in education based on Farrow's (2016) Uncompleted Framework

Principle                    Duties & Responsibilities                   Outcomes               Personal Development
                               (deontological theory)          (consequentialist theory)             (virtue theory)

Full disclosure               Decisions are made from          If decisions are made by        Policies should promote a
                                 the top-down and                  individuals not directly         shift in the focus of
                                 educators are not often           involved in the classroom,       teaching away from
                                 included in these                 are these decisions based        traditional methods to
                                 decisions as key                  on an accurate                   provide more license for
                                 stakeholders.                     representation of the            teachers to be creative in
                                                                   state of today's                 their instruction and
                                                                   classrooms?                      programming.

Privacy, data security, and   Attention should be paid         Are these systems               The use of personalized
informed consent                 to use of these programs          replacing the expertise          learning systems in K-12
                                 and the understanding             available through school         classrooms is increasing
                                 that teachers recognize           districts?                       at a rapid rate. School
                                 that personalized learning                                         districts have an
                                 systems collect student's      There must be some                 increased responsibility in
                                 information without any           awareness that even the          deciding what educational
                                 consideration of student's        most intuitive and               applications can be used
                                 exceptional needs.                customized personalized          without the breach of
                                                                   learning system cannot           student privacy.
                              They should be                      replace the expertise of
                                 considered an additional          school professionals
                                 resource and not an               whose job is to assess,
                                 authentic assessment of a         adapt and help identify
                                 student's learning needs.         the best way to support
                                                                   students in their learning.

Avoiding harm and             For some students,               For assistive technology        Imperative that teachers
minimizing risk                  ensuring their needs are          to ensure equity among           take on the responsibility
                                 met requires adjustment           students with diverse            for all their students in a
                                 to instructional methods          learning needs, all              value-based approach.
                                 and flexibility in the way        stakeholders must be             This approach requires a
                                 they produce and show             involved.                        shift in mindset and
                                 their work.                                                        teachers are ultimately
                                 Accommodations through         Budget roadblocks and              responsible for ensuring
                                 technology can assist and         training for teachers in         the success of each
                                 support these learners in         implementing technology          student.
                                 a multitude of ways by            into the classroom must
                                 removing barriers and             be addressed and
                                 obstacles and supporting          discussed with key
                                 learning to reach                 individuals.
                                 outcomes and goals.

Autonomy and independence     Parents may be resistant         Focus on how technology         Focus on the principle
                                 to their child receiving          is used universally in the       that every student is
                                 specialized support for           classroom as a digital           entitled to the support
                                 fear of their child standing      resource that supports all       they need to experience
                                 out from their peers and          students in their learning.      success in school. This
                                 being socially isolated.                                           perspective considers
                                                                                                    teacher and parents as the
                              How does the school                                                  voice for a child with
                                 support the student                                                diverse learning needs.
                                 through adaptation,
                                 modifications and
                                 accommodations if a
                                 parent is not in
                                 agreement?

                             Considerations of Equitable Standards in the Implementation of Assistive Technology | 115
PART III: NURTURING ETHICAL AWARENESS IN
INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXTS: ADMISSIONS AND
COMMUNICATIONS

                                                                                                     Part III: Nurturing Ethical Awareness in Institutional Contexts:
                                                                                                                                      Admissions and Communications | 117
Chapter 8: Who Gets In? Examining Ethics and

Equity in Post-Secondary Admissions

EMMA LOCKYER

                          Introduction and Full Disclosure

Post-secondary admissions are rife with ethical issues, on both the part of the applicant and the admitting institution.
Admissions are a high stakes game, in which students are seeking entrance to increasingly competitive programs that
will define the course of the next several years of their lives (at a minimum). Meanwhile, institutions are seeking students
that they perceive as desirable to fill the limited number of seats available. These pressures can cause parents, students
and institutions to behave in unethical ways to fulfill their own needs.

Unethical behaviour by both applicants and institutions in the admissions process can create an unequal playing field
for all applicants, and especially those from disadvantaged backgrounds. This inequity in access to education can serve
to perpetuate socioeconomic inequality within our society. It is important to note that discussion around these issues
is emerging, and as such, there is limited scholarly research around this topic. However, significant investigations
and discussions have taken place in the media. For example, the extensive coverage of the 2019 Operation Varsity
Blues admissions scandal, that included celebrities Felicity Huffman and Lori Loughlin, saw a number of parents facing
fraud-related charges in a massive college admissions scandal. Admissions fraud in this case involved paying test
administrators to change grades and paying bribes to athletics coaches to admit students as recruits for sports that they
did not play (Reeves, 2019).

Along with the FBI's Operation Varsity Blues investigation, other cases have involved international students paying third
party services to have someone else complete their language tests (Reuters, 2018) or to compromise international testing
centres (Keung, 2018). While the behaviours that these individuals engage in are both unethical and illegal, there are
many other tactics that parents and applicants may use to increase the chance of admission that are legal but may still be
unethical. This can include the use of college admissions coaches and making large financial donations to the institution
their child is interested in attending.

Post-secondary institutions can also be engaged in unethical admission practices, which can include policies of legacy
admissions (Daniels, 2020), admitting the children of major donors and considering a student's socioeconomic
background (Weissbourd, 2019a) and need for financial aid (MacMillian, 2019). Institutions may also prioritize the
admission of athletes based on their athletic -- rather than their academic -- capabilities (Jump, 2019). Institutions justify
these decisions on the basis that they are looking for the best students who will be the right fit for their institution,
although these practices can sometimes equate to overrepresentation those who are white and wealthy (Reeves, 2019).

In targeting students for recruitment and admission, institutions may also engage in unethical behaviour by using
applicant data obtained from test administrators such as College Board (Selingo, 2017), internet cookies that track an
applicant's browsing history (MacMillan and Anderson, 2019), or an applicant's social media posts posted in private
Facebook groups (Homayon, 2017) to make decisions about which applicants to admit, even if the applicants have not
provided this information to the school directly.

Table 8.1 demonstrates the ethical issues associated with post-secondary admissions using Farrow's (2016) Uncompleted
Framework.

                                                                                                      Who Gets In? Examining Ethics and Equity in Post-Secondary
                                                                                                                                                                     Admissions | 119
Table 8.1 Ethical issues associated with post-secondary admissions based on Farrow's (2016) Uncompleted Framework

Principle                      Duties & Responsibilities    Outcomes (consequentialist) Personal development (virtue)
                                       (deontological)
Respect for participant                                     Institutions should use ethical  Parents have an obligation to
autonomy & independence     Institutions have a             data to make equitable           behave ethically and to not put
                            responsibility to respect       admission decisions.             their child's education at risk.
                            student privacy and not use
                            data obtained in unethical
                            ways.

Avoid harm / minimize risk  Students have an obligation to  Post-secondary institutions      Assumes that applicants will
                            provide factual and honest      have an obligation to train      act honestly and provide
                            information to post-secondary   staff on the security features   factual information.
                            institutions. Students and      of test scores and transcripts.
                            parents must follow the laws.   Institutions have an obligation
                                                            to try and prevent students
                                                            from being admitted using
                                                            fraudulent methods.

Full Disclosure             Institutions should be                                           Applicants should disclose
                            transparent about data used in                                   honest and factual
Privacy, Data Security &    admissions decisions.                                            information.
Informed Consent            Institutions have a                                              Applicants should disclose
                            responsibility to respect                                        honest and factual
Integrity                   student privacy.                                                 information.
                            Institutions and students have                                   Institutions should act to
                            a duty to act in ways that                                       admit students in a way that is
                            promote equity.                                                  equitable.

While unethical behaviours in post-secondary admissions predate many modern technologies, technology has created
additional avenues in which these behaviours can flourish (Selingo, 2017). Technology has also created opportunities to
highlight and expose these behaviours. These behaviours have the ability to create inequity within the post-secondary
system by giving undue advantage to those with financial privilege. This chapter will explore equity in North American
post-secondary education, and how unethical behaviours aided by technology threaten the equitable admission of
eligible students.

                            Equitable Access to Education

Equitable access to post-secondary education is an issue across North America. Many admissions practices used
by institutions favour students of particular backgrounds, whether that be implicit or explicit. For example, wealthy
individuals with the means to make large donations (typically $500,000 and up) to institutions may have their child
pushed to the top of the waitlist (Reeves, 2019). Daniels (2020), citing Arcidiacono, Kinsler and Ransom (2019), notes
that students admitted under legacy policies (those who are admitted because they are the child or grandchild of
an alum) are disproportionately more likely to be white and come from a wealthy family. Kingkade (2019) discusses,
policies surrounding donor and legacy admissions are much more common at US institutions than they are at Canadian
institutions. However, affluent families in both countries are able to pay for tutoring and other similar resources, which
allows those students to score higher on exams and school work than their less privileged classmates and puts them at
an advantage when it comes to grades-based admissions (Reeves, 2019).

Speaking on the Harvard EdCast podcast, high school students Nicolas Burgess and Dequan Franks noted that, coming
from economically disadvantaged backgrounds, students like them struggle to afford the costs associated with writing
standardized tests, let alone paying for test prep courses (Weissbourd, 2019b). Burgess and Franks discussed the other
barriers that prevented them from excelling in their high school courses, noting that they had to work to contribute to

120 | Who Gets In? Examining Ethics and Equity in Post-Secondary Admissions
household expenses which took them away from their studies and gave them less time for homework than their more
affluent peers.

Student-athletes are also given privilege when it comes to admission at some schools (Desai, 2018; Fox, 2019). As Desai
(2018) notes, over 65% of NCAA athletes are white. Desai (2018) discusses that many of these students come from
affluent families that are able to pay for the costs associated with playing sports in order to get these athletes to the
NCAA level. This provides an advantage to these students in the admissions process, as Fox (2019) notes that athletes
have the opportunity to be admitted with lower grades than their peers. Arcidiacono, Kinsler and Ransom (2019) use
Harvard University as an example, where seats are reserved for athletes and the applications of recruited athletes are
reviewed separately from other applicants. It should be acknowledged that, as noted by Desai (2018), there are some
student-athletes (primarily basketball and football players) who come from disadvantaged backgrounds, and for whom
admission as an athlete does give access to education that they otherwise would not have. However, the vast majority of
student-athletes have an advantage in the admissions process as a result of their socioeconomic status (Desai, 2018).

The privilege that student-athletes are given in the admissions process was demonstrated in the Varsity Blues scandal,
in which actress Lori Loughlin had her two daughters admitted to the University of Southern California under the
guise of being rowing team members by paying bribes to the coaches (Kahlenberg, 2019). Because her daughters were
recommended for admission by athletics coaches, they were offered admission despite having lower grades and test
scores than other students (Kahlenberg, 2019). While the Varsity Blues scandal is an extreme example of parents and
students engaging in unethical behaviour to gain admission, there are many methods of cheating that are used by
students and parents who are desperate to gain admission to their chosen school.

Many of the admission policies and tactics discussed in this chapter offer advantages to students of certain racial and
socioeconomic groups. In an attempt to combat this gap, some policies have been implemented. In the United States,
Affirmative Action was introduced in 1961 (Webster, 2017). As Webster (2017) notes, Affirmative Action was originally
intended to "to improve the educational opportunities for minority groups (including minority races, genders, and
sexual orientations) that are commonly and historically discriminated against" (para. 2). However, the use of Affirmative
Action at US institutions is declining, and DeSilver (2014) notes that eight states have banned the use of Affirmative
Action, in favour of other policies.

Similar equitable access programs exist in Canada, where admission has commonly been based on grades, without
consideration for race or other demographic factors (Kingkade, 2019). Many institutions have created policies regarding
Indigenous student admission in response to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission recommendations (Cote-Meek,
2017) that seek to level the playing field for those who have experienced discrimination in the education system.
Institutions walk a fine line trying to balance equity in admissions processes with serving students who may typically
struggle to access education without denying access to other students. From a deontological perspective (Farrow, 2016),
post-secondary institutions have a responsibility to offer education to students from a variety of backgrounds, which
can make the engagement in practices that favour those from certain racial or socioeconomic backgrounds unethical.
However, in cases where these practices seek to level the playing field, they may be considered ethical behaviour by the
institution if they seek to end legacies of discrimination from the education system.

                               Privacy and Data Security

Privacy and data security have become major issues in admissions with the increase in data tracking and analytics tools
available to institutions. As MacMillan and Anderson (2019) reported, many institutions are using internet cookies to
track prospective students before they have even applied for admission. Selingo (2017) notes that there are several tools
available tailored to educational institutions that track prospective student's browsing history on both the institution's

                                                                             Who Gets In? Examining Ethics and Equity in Post-Secondary Admissions | 121
website and across the internet, using this data to build a profile that predicts, among other things, a student's location,
race and if the student will require financial aid. These profiles can be traced to the student's identity and eventually
attached to a student's application, thus providing admissions officers with information about the applicant that the
applicant did not supply themselves.

Homayon (2017) discusses an example of admissions being impacted by information that prospective students did not
supply to an institution. A group of students had their offers to Harvard rescinded after screenshots of racist, sexist
and homophobic memes shared in a `private' Facebook group surfaced. As Hu (2020) explores, many people want more
private spaces on the internet where they can interact with others. However, as Hu (2020) discusses, a space on the
internet is never truly private; screenshots can be taken and shared beyond the intended audience.

Even before prospective students apply, or consider applying to, an institution, it is possible that their data is already
being evaluated to determine if they are a suitable candidate. Selingo (2017) discussed the practice of purchasing lists of
names from test administrators. Lists of names of students who have recently written a standardized admissions test,
such as the SAT, are purchased from the test administrators based on demographic criteria such as location, test score,
and parent's income level (Selingo, 2017). Once an institution purchases a student's name from a test administrator,
they are allowed to market to that student for a certain length of time (usually 1-2 years). This process can decrease
equity in the education system from the start of the recruitment process, as the names purchased are more likely
to be of students from higher socioeconomic classes (Selingo, 2017). That means that some applicants will receive
tailored communication from institutions providing them with information that may not be as readily available to other
applicants.

From a consequentialist perspective (Farrow, 2016), institutions are acting to promote the best outcomes for themselves,
by using any data they can access or purchase. For institutions, these practices often focus on the recruitment and
admission of students who meet the socioeconomic and demographic profiles the institution is seeking to bolster,
including targeting certain race and gender statistics, as well as to attract students who do not need financial aid or
scholarships to pay tuition (Selingo, 2017). However, these best outcomes for the institution are not aligned with the
best outcomes for all students, or for society. From a virtue ethics perspective (Farrow, 2016), the behaviour of the
institutions is unethical, as the institution (and thus those making decisions at the institution) are not acting in a fair and
ethical manner.

                Educational Integrity and Minimizing Risk for All

Newcomb (2017) identifies a need for admissions staff to be trained on the security features of documents and how
to spot fraudulent transcripts, test scores and suspicious documents, as part of the role of admissions staff is to be
a "gatekeeper" for admission to the institution (p. 39). Several parents indicated in the Varsity Blues scandal paid to
have their children's SAT scores fraudulently inflated, many without their children even knowing (Kircher, 2019). In 2018,
Niagara College identified that English language proficiency test scores coming from certain testing centres in India had
been compromised (Keung, 2018).

Tyre (2016) describes the online network that some international students use to obtain fraudulent scores on
standardized admissions and English language tests. Using online brokers, students are able to hire what are referred
to as "gunmen" (Tyre, 2016), or a proxy test-taker. Students specify the score range that they need on the test, as well
as provide a photo of themselves or information about their appearance. Gunmen who have a similar appearance to
the student are vital, as ID is required at most testing sites, and many testing agencies take a photo of the test-taker
and include it on the test results. Tyre (2016) notes that exceptionally high scores or having the test taken at a North
American testing centre (rather than a Chinese location) costs extra. Brokers can be in North America as well; in 2019,

122 | Who Gets In? Examining Ethics and Equity in Post-Secondary Admissions
a TOEFL fraud ring was discovered at the University of California Los Angeles (Beam, 2019). In 2018, a Chinese student
studying at Pennsylvania State University was deported from the United States following fraud charges after using a paid
test taker to write her TOEFL exam in 2016 (Reuters, 2018). These are only a few recent examples of test-taking fraud.

As technology has advanced, so have the methods of both engaging in and detecting fraudulent behaviour. As discussed
by Jenks (2019) on the podcast Gangster Capitalism, the Varsity Blues scandal was built almost entirely electronically,
with text messages, emails, photoshopped pictures, and wire transfers for funds connecting this fraudulent network.
Tyre (2016) examines how these agencies attempt to keep ahead of the security features implemented by test
administrators, such as hiring test takers who have a similar appearance to the person on whose behalf they are writing
the test. Beam (2019) notes that face and voice recognition software are being considered by some testing companies as
additional security measures.

The concern with the admission of students who have been granted admission on the basis of fraudulent application
documents and test scores is that they are taking the spot of a more deserving student. The commonality of those
who are admitted by cheating the system is the use of financial resources. From a virtue ethics perspective (Farrow,
2016), this is a challenge as it demonstrates that not all of the students are acting virtuously. From a consequentialist
perspective (Farrow, 2016), this behaviour is unethical as it does not promote the best outcomes for all parties.

                       Student Autonomy and Independence

In the post-secondary admissions process, there can be a lack of consideration for student autonomy and privacy. In
order to write the SAT exam, which is required for admission to most universities in the United States (and may be
used to admission to many Canadian institutions as well), students are required to provide the following information to
College Board (the private company that administers the exam): full name, date of birth, mailing address, phone number,
email address, gender, race, and information about their high school (College Board, 2020). The College Board then uses
this data to track students, as well as selling this data to colleges and universities through their Student Search Service
(College Board, 2020). Students may `opt-out' of having their data included in the Student Search Service (College Board,
2020), but they cannot `opt-out' of providing their information to College Board in the first place. The sale of this student
data means that students may receive communication from schools that they have never heard of, or that they are
not interested in. While the schools have the choice of which student's data they purchase, based on demographic and
academic information, students do not have a choice of which schools contact them (Selingo, 2017).

Not only are students tracked by data they knowingly provide (such as the data they give to College Board), they can
also be tracked by data they do not realize they are providing. As discussed earlier in this chapter, both MacMillan and
Anderson (2019) and Selingo (2017) note that many institutions use internet cookies to track students before they have
even applied for admission. The information gleaned from the student's web browsing history may then be factored into
that student's admission decision (MacMillan & Anderson, 2019). This means that the student does not have a choice in
regards to the information they are providing to an institution and may be evaluated based on information they did not
want to disclose. As discussed previously, targeting and evaluating students based on this type of data may decrease
equity in the admissions process, as this data can disclose information about a student's race or socioeconomic status
that may make them less likely to receive an offer of admission.

In 2019, College Board announced plans to introduce an "Adversity Score", which would accompany a student's SAT
score when reporting to post-secondary institutions (Allyn, 2019). This score was designed to provide context about a
student's background based on their zip code and school, and would index things such as crime rate, median income,
and average educational attainment into a numeric "score" (Allyn, 2019). The intent of this score was to demonstrate
to institutions the factors that may impact a student's ability to score as high on the SAT as their more affluent

                                                                             Who Gets In? Examining Ethics and Equity in Post-Secondary Admissions | 123
peers and allow them to be evaluated in the context of their situation (Rim, 2019); however, critics quickly noted that
this information could be used to discriminate against students of lower socioeconomic backgrounds who may be
regarded as less desirable by institutions (Allyn, 2019). Following this backlash, College Board redesigned this concept
as the "Environmental Context Dashboard", which is a series of metrics (rather than one single number), provided to
institutions along with a student's SAT score (Rim, 2019). However, Rim (2019) notes that this still provides institutions
with information about a student's background that they did not disclose themselves, which may be used against them
in an admission decision.

It is not only institutions and data that strip students of their autonomy; as discussed by Kircher (2019a), many of the
students who were admitted to top universities as a result of the Varsity Blues scandal did not know about the actions
their parents had taken and were not aware that their admission was fraudulent. Kircher (2019b) notes that some of
these students had their admission offers revoked (for those who had not started at the time of the arrests), and others
were expelled or had their programs put on hold while schools conducted their own investigations.

From a consequentialist perspective (Farrow, 2016), College Board was trying to promote the best outcomes for students
by providing institutions with a holistic view of a student's background. Similarly, the parents involved in the Varsity
Blues scandal were acting to promote what they felt were the best outcomes for their child, in this case, being admitted
to a prestigious university. However, from a virtue ethics perspective (Farrow, 2016), these actions do not value the well
being of the individual students.

                                       Conclusion

The challenge with determining equity in post-secondary admissions is that there is not truly one "right" answer. In
many cases, there are more interested prospective students than there are available seats in many programs, and it is up
to institutions to determine the best and most fair way to fill these seats. While it is clearly unethical when prospective
students and or their parents present fraudulent documents or engage in other illegal activities to gain admission, other
situations are not as obvious.

In the play Admissions (Dunsdon, 2020), the lead character, Sheri Rosen-Mason, grapples with this conundrum. After
spending her entire career advocating for diversity in admissions at the college prep school where she works, her
son does not get admitted to his dream ivy league school, although his minority friend with lower grades does. Sheri
recognizes the delicate balance of considering both circumstance and achievement, and the role of race, class, and
privilege in these decisions.

As institutions consider how they admit students, they must consider the criteria they use for admission and how that is
impacted by an applicant's individual life and education circumstances. At the time of writing this chapter, institutions
worldwide were considering admission criteria as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Standardized tests traditionally
used for admissions such as the SAT and provincial diploma exams were cancelled (Adams, 2020; Edwardson, 2020) and
testing centres that administer English language tests were closed. In some cases, institutions moved towards alternate
forms of assessment such as online English language tests (University of Calgary, 2020) and eliminated the requirement
for standardized tests and final grades (Hess, 2020).

As Hess (2020) notes, the COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted some of the issues with equity in education, as students
from less affluent backgrounds, or students in remote and rural communities or areas of the country, struggle to access
online resources due to lack of access to appropriate technology and or internet connections. The impacts of COVID-19
will be felt in the admissions process for several years to come, as prospective students apply with lower or non-
traditional (such as pass/fail) grades or without earlier opportunities to write standardized tests (Hess, 2020). With

124 | Who Gets In? Examining Ethics and Equity in Post-Secondary Admissions
these new challenges in admissions, institutions will need to be flexible and work with prospective students based on
their individual circumstances. What remains to be seen is if this pandemic will change the way that institutions make
decisions about admissions in the long-term, or whether institutions will revert to their previous ways of doing things
as the pandemic becomes a memory.

While a student's individual circumstances should be considered in the admissions process, institutions must carefully
consider the source and credibility of information. While there is a great deal of information provided by prospective
students to institutions in the admissions process, institutions must also consider a student's right to privacy when
considering the use of data gleaned from social media, internet cookies or third-party sources, as the student did not
make the conscious decision to disclose that data to the school (Rim, 2019).

In the end, no matter what information is used and how admission decisions are made, there are applicants who will not
be offered admission, as there are simply not enough seats for everyone who wants admission. This is the heartbreaking
challenge of admissions work. No matter if admission is based on test scores, grades, or personal circumstances, there
are applicants who will be denied admission. The ethical challenge is deciding which applicants will and will not be
offered admission, without unfairly advantaging or disadvantaging any groups of prospective students in the process.

                                        References

Adams, S. (2020, March 13). How the coronavirus pandemic is wreaking havoc with the SAT. Forbes.
   https://www.forbes.com/sites/susanadams/2020/03/13/how-the-coronavirus-pandemic-is-wreaking-havoc-
   with-the-sat/#705702c75a44

Arcidiacono, P., Kinsler, J., & Ransom, T. (2019). Legacy and athlete preferences at Harvard [Working Paper No. 26316].
   National Bureau of Economic Research. https://www.nber.org/papers/w26316

Beam, C. (2019, April 26). A Chinese cheating ring at UCLA reveals an industry devoted to helping international students
   scam grades. Los Angeles Magazine. https://www.lamag.com/citythinkblog/ucla-cheating/

College Board. (2020, April 12). Privacy statement. https://about.collegeboard.org/privacy-center/privacy-statement

Cote-Meek, S. (2017, February 16). We need to reimagine an education system that better meets Indigenous peoples'
   needs. Policy Options. https://policyoptions.irpp.org/magazines/february-2017/post-secondary-education-and-
   reconciliation/

Daniels, R. J. (2020, January 18). Why we ended legacy admissions at John Hopkins. The Atlantic.
   https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2020/01/why-we-ended-legacy-admissions-johns-hopkins/605131/

Desai, S. (2018, October 23). College sports are affirmative action for rich white students. The Atlantic.
   https://www.theatlantic.com/education/archive/2018/10/college-sports-benefits-white-students/573688/

DeSilver, D. (2014, April 22). Supreme Court says states can ban affirmative action; 8 already have. Pew Research
   Center. https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2014/04/22/supreme-court-says-states-can-ban-affirmative-
   action-8-already-have/

Dunsdon, J. (Director). (2020). Admissions. [Stage Production]. Theater Calgary.

Edwardson, L. (2020, March 20). Alberta cancels provincial and diploma exams, releases at-home-learning guidelines.

                                                                             Who Gets In? Examining Ethics and Equity in Post-Secondary Admissions | 125
CBC.   https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/calgary/alberta-cancels-provincial-and-diploma-exams-releases-at-

home-learning-guidelines-1.5504733

Farrow, R. (2016). A framework for the ethics of open education. Open Praxis, 8(2), 93-109. http://dx.doi.org/10.5944/
   openpraxis.8.2.291

Fox, J. (2019, March 22). The amazing admissions advantages for athletes at the apex of academia.
   Bloomberg. https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2019-03-22/athletes-have-huge-college-admissions-
   advantages

Hess, A. (2020, April 16). How the coronavirus pandemic has changed college admissions. CNBC.
   https://www.cnbc.com/2020/04/16/how-the-coronavirus-pandemic-has-changed-college-admissions.html

Homayon, A. (2017, June 7). The secret social media lives of teenagers. The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/
   2017/06/07/well/family/the-secret-social-media-lives-of-teenagers.html

Hu, J. C. (2020, February 25). We want a more private internet, but we want to screenshot it too. Slate. https://slate.com/
   technology/2020/02/screenshots-text-conversations-privacy-social-media.html

Jenks, A. (Host). (2019, June 11). Where you start is where you finish (5). [Audio podcast episode]. In Gangster Capitalism.
   C13Originals. https://podcasts.apple.com/ca/podcast/gangster-capitalism/id1460320573?i=1000441104403

Jump, J. (2019, May 28). Ethical college admissions: is it time to end admissions preferences for athletes? Inside
   Higher Ed. https://www.insidehighered.com/admissions/views/2019/05/28/it-time-end-admissions-preferences-
   athletes-opinion

Kahelnberg, R. D. (2019, March 13). College admissions scandal implicating Felicity Huffman and Lori Loughlin reveals
   elite culture of corruption. NBC News. https://www.nbcnews.com/think/opinion/college-admissions-scandal-
   implicating-felicity-huffman-lori-loughlin-reveals-elite-ncna982961

Keung, N. (2018, December 8). More than 400 students in India told to retake language tests after Niagara College flags
   concerns. The Star. https://www.thestar.com/news/canada/2018/12/08/400-students-in-india-told-to-retake-
   language-tests-after-niagara-college-f lags-concerns.html

Kingkade, T. (2019, April 26). This is why Canadian universities don't have college admissions scandals. The Huffington

Post.  https://www.huffingtonpost.ca/entry/college-admissions-scam-inequality-university-

canada_n_5cc16918e4b0ad77ff7fd4e8?ri18n=true

Kircher, M. M. (2019a, March 19). What every kid in the college admissions scandal knew about the scam. New York
   Magazine. https://nymag.com/intelligencer/2019/03/college-admissions-scandal-what-every-kid-knew.html

Kircher, M. M. (2019b, April 15). College admissions scam fallout: what happened to everyone in the scandal. New York
   Magazine. https://nymag.com/intelligencer/2019/04/college-admissions-scandal-fallout.html

MacMillan, D. (Host). (2019, October 15). Some colleges are tracking students before they even apply. [Audio podcast
   episode]. In Post Reports. The Washington Post. https://www.washingtonpost.com/podcasts/post-reports/some-
   colleges-are-tracking-students-before-they-even-
   apply/?tid=aud_rsslink&utm_source=podcasts&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=post-reports

MacMillan, D., & Anderson, N. (2019, October 14). Student tracking, secret scores: How college admissions offices
   rank prospects before they apply. The Washington Post. https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/2019/10/14/
   colleges-quietly-rank-prospective-students-based-their-personal-data/

126 | Who Gets In? Examining Ethics and Equity in Post-Secondary Admissions
Newcomb, J. T. (2017). Understanding the lived experiences and training of undergraduate admission officers in detecting
   fraudulent application materials of international applicants at highly selective institutions. [Unpublished doctoral
   dissertation]. College of Professional Studies Northeastern University.

Reeves, R. V. (2019, March 12). It's not just corruption. Entrance into elite US colleges is rigged in every way. The Guardian.
   https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2019/mar/12/us-college-admissions-scandal-corruption-rigged

Reuters. (2018, April 3). Chinese woman admits using imposter to take US college English test, amid crackdown on fraud
   by foreign students. South China Morning Post. https://www.scmp.com/news/world/united-states-canada/article/
   2140013/chinese-woman-admits-using-impostor-take-us-college

Rim, C. (2019, September 11). The SAT `adversity score' is still happening -- and colleges may use it against low income
   students. Forbes. https://www.forbes.com/sites/christopherrim/2019/09/11/the-sat-adversity-score-is-still-
   happening-and-colleges-may-use-it-against-low-income-students/#49e372062ff8

Selingo, J. (2017, April 11). How colleges use big data to target the students they want. The Atlantic.
   https://www.theatlantic.com/education/archive/2017/04/how-colleges-find-their-students/522516/

Tyre, P. (2016, March 21). How sophisticated test scams from China are making their way into the U.S. The Atlantic.
   https://www.theatlantic.com/education/archive/2016/03/how-sophisticated-test-scams-from-china-are-
   making-their-way-into-the-us/474474/

Webster, E. S. (2017, August 14). Affirmative action: What it is and how it works. Teen Vogue.
   https://www.teenvogue.com/story/what-is-affirmative-action-explainer

Weissbourd, R. (Host). (2019a, April 24). Putting ethics first in college admissions. [Audio podcast episode]. In The
   Harvard EdCast. Harvard Graduate School of Education. https://podcasts.apple.com/ca/podcast/the-harvard-
   edcast/id1062333296?i=1000436311290

Weissbourd, R. (Host). (2019b, April 29). EdCast extra: Teens get real about inequity in college access. [Audio podcast
   episode]. In The Harvard EdCast. Harvard Graduate School of Education. https://podcasts.apple.com/ca/podcast/
   the-harvard-edcast/id1062333296?i=1000436832007

                                                                             Who Gets In? Examining Ethics and Equity in Post-Secondary Admissions | 127
Chapter 9: To What Extent Does Fake News

Influence Our Ability to Communicate in Learning

Organizations?

DEAN PARTHENIS

The proliferation of fake news has seen rapid growth in its ability to spread quickly due to the access to, and convenience
and ease of, digital technology that provides users with the option to share and receive instantaneous communications
to and from millions of people globally. This process lends itself to many ethical challenges for all of the end users of
digital technology and various platforms. It also has impact within educational, professional, and personal contexts. Due
to limitations, my chapter will only focus on selected aspects of fake news relevant to education, such as understanding
and identifying it, the role technology and citizens can play in the distribution of mistruths, AI detection tools, and taking
steps to better navigate and protect against fake news.

The quickest way of spreading fake news is via social media channels. The most popular media include -- but are
not limited to -- Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, WeChat, Tumblr, WhatsApp, Snapchat, Reddit, and YouTube. Recent
research confirms just how quickly misinformation can spread among an information-hungry society. Aside from social
media, many people use search engines (Google, Yahoo, or Bing) or depend on various mainstream news media, left- or
right-wing websites, or community journalists to receive information. The sheer volume, immediacy, and combination
of information sources only adds fuel to the fire by blasting out false news at unprecedented speeds. According to
Rheingold (2012), "the average American consumes thirty-four gigabytes of information on an average day" (p. 99).

Defining what fake news is and identifying potential implications of the increase in fake news will help to provide
a base-level understanding of the current situation. However, we must also understand that there are tools and
techniques one can use to detect fake news, protect oneself, and avoid making the situation worse by spreading it. By
examining the impact of fake news on the COVID-19 (coronavirus) outbreak, we can gain some insights into how this
information phenomenon has become what I refer to as a "digital information virus" and what others -- such as the
World Health Organization (WHO, 2020) -- refer to as an infodemic. Conversely, to counter fake news and help to create
a factual, credible, and timely source of information, I will provide a snapshot of my overall experience in risk and crisis
communications, including the messaging process that helped to keep key audiences accurately informed at an Alberta
based post-secondary institution at the point and time of this writing.

Ultimately, fake news causes a chain reaction effect in society, and this has several ethical implications that may
result in unexpected potential outcomes. Based on my real-time and participatory emergency and pandemic-related
communications experiences, I will suggest an easy-to-use matrix tool to help people detect fake news and offer a new
strategic communications approach for organizations to establish consistent and credible sources of information that
will help to offset fake news and prevent it from spreading.

                                  What is Fake News?

It is important to gain a basic understanding of what fake news is and how it is distributed. While the definitions may
vary, fake news is essentially information that is not true and is intended to misguide, fool, provide mistruths, or deceive
people into believing the stated falsehood(s) (Charlton, 2019; Dulhanty et al., 2019; Watters, 2017). Other terms used to

128 | To What Extent Does Fake News Influence Our Ability to
Communicate in Learning Organizations?
refer to fake news that have been used in public forums include: hoax, misinformation, and disinformation. Additionally,
Collins Dictionary labelled "fake news" the word of the year in 2017. Rheingold (2012) suggests that performing more
than one search query and going beyond the initial search page results can reduce the chances of getting fooled by
fake news. While it may seem as though fake news is a more recent informational phenomenon -- most notably during
the 2016 presidential election campaign in the United States -- this is not actually the case. According to Heidi Tworek
(2019), a historian and author from the University of British Columbia, disinformation likely had its origins in the 16th
century with the establishment of the printing press and early newspapers. She explains that the earliest form of fake
news came from groups who spread anti-Semitic information about Jewish people.

Fast forward to the present day, and we find ourselves thrust into a seemingly endless stream of information flowing
through social media channels, the traditional news media and other rogue and less than credible sources. To gain a
greater sense of the severity of the problem on a global scale, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
and the United Nations Human Rights Commission issued a Joint Declaration on freedom of expression, focusing on fake
news, disinformation, and propaganda (OSCE, 2017). But it is the public's insatiable appetite for information and the ease
in which it can be shared, viewed, and liked via the use of various forms of technology that makes it even more difficult
to discern fake news from credible and reliable information and news.

                                Is Technology to Blame?

While there has been a rapid evolution in the type of communication-related technology that can be used by consumers,
we have to remember that someone is responsible for preparing the message. According to Cybenko and Cybenko
(2018), the current state of technology and social media helps fake news thrive in a so-called `petri dish'. Another
expert suggests a direct linkage between fake news and Artificial Intelligence (AI). Samuel Woolley (as cited in Powers &
Kounalakis, 2017) states that "security experts argue that more than 10 percent of content across social media websites
and 62 percent of all web traffic is generated by bots -- pieces of computer code that automate human tasks online" (p.
19).

Conversely, a study from MIT shows that humans are the key culprits when it comes to releasing fake or misleading
information. Using the process on Twitter as an example, Vosoushi et al. (2018) surmise that a cascading effect occurs
when information is posted (tweeted). "A rumour cascade begins on Twitter when a user makes an assertion about a
topic in a tweet, which could include written text, photos, or links to articles online" (p.1). Furthermore, the authors' key
findings reveal that false news stories are more likely to be retweeted seven out of 10 times compared to true stories. To
make matters worse, it has become extremely easy to send messages and spread mistruths via the use of smartphones,
among other digital devices (such as tablets).

                                Coronavirus `Infodemic'

The COVID-19 (coronavirus) worldwide pandemic is a great example of how difficult it has been for health organizations
not only to help prevent the spread of the virus to humans, but also to manage the rapid explosion of disinformation,
which can exacerbate the situation. The World Health Organization (2020) declared COVID-19 a global pandemic. The
spread of misinformation can cause unnecessary panic. Here is a brief summary of examples that were uncovered by
the BBC News Reality Check team (2020) in relation to misinformation in Africa:

   Dettol can be used to protect against coronavirus. An image of a bottle of the disinfectant (Dettol) was shared on

                                         To What Extent Does Fake News Influence Our Ability to Communicate in Learning Organizations? | 129
      social media, and it was implied that it could prevent the spread of COVID-19. This statement was FALSE.
   Shaving a beard can protect against coronavirus. An old graphic from US health authorities about facial hair was

      incorrectly used to suggest shaving beards would help men avoid contracting the virus. It was even attributed to
      the CDC. This statement was FALSE.
   A preacher posted a video claiming that pepper soup could cure coronavirus. This information quickly spread
      after being shared on WhatsApp. This statement was FALSE.

These fake news items, along with numerous others, caused the World Health Organization to state that the outbreak
has caused not only an epidemic but an infodemic of false and misleading information. The goal is to ensure everyone
has accurate information to help prevent the spread of the disease (Zaracosta, 2020). Tech giants, such as Facebook,
Google, and Twitter are leading the fight to mitigate mistruths on the Internet. But as Holmes (2020) suggests, "the
bigger threat is speculation and false rumours about coronavirus that spread organically on online forums" (para. 4). The
nature of this threat is primarily due to the speed at which news can travel. To make matters worse, the spread of false
information during COVID-19 has been exacerbated by a few world leaders, including Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro
(Garcia & Benitacanova, 2020) and most notably US President Donald Trump when he falsely touted chloroquine as a
drug that could treat COVID-19 (Liptak & Klein, 2020).

                    Detecting and Protecting Against Tall Tales

The first step towards protecting oneself against disinformation is to know what to look for in order to sort fact from
fiction. This can be a daunting task; however, there are some basic questions one can ask and tools one can use to
help make the detection process easier. Rheingold (2012) suggests learning key skills like "learning attention and crap-
detection skills" (p. 114). There are also several fact-checking organizations that people can utilize including Snopes,
Politifact, and the Media/Bias Fact Check website, which is made up of a team of fact-checkers who review and assess
the accuracy and biases of dozens of news sites.

University of Waterloo researchers recently developed a new artificial intelligence (AI) tool to help social media
networks and news organizations flag fake stories (2019). Based on what the researchers call "deep-learning AI
algorithms, they can scan thousands of social media posts and news stories and make relevant links to other sources of
information" (Dulhanty et al., 2019). Similarly, researchers at MIT developed a new system that uses technology (machine
learning) to determine if a source is accurate or politically biased (Baly et al., 2018).

Some news organizations are providing their viewers and listeners with key fact-checking advice. CBC News has
developed a chatbot tool for Facebook messenger. This tool is accessible online and provides users with several weeks of
"learning about misinformation and disinformation, from deep fakes to suspicious articles" (CBCb, 2019, Image caption
section).

Rheingold (2012) suggests asking a key question when viewing or watching information updates: "once you've searched,
you need to determine how much you should trust the info your search has yielded" (p. 89). CBC (2019a) suggests asking
key questions such as:

   Are the details of the story thin or unavailable?
   Does the story seem too bad or too good to be true?
   Have I heard of this organization before?
   Can I find another source that confirms and counters this information? (How do I know if it's disinformation?

      section)

130 | To What Extent Does Fake News Influence Our Ability to Communicate in Learning Organizations?
Within educational circles, there is a growing effort to provide relevant learning resources to students to fight the
spread of fake news within Canada, such as mediasmarts.ca. In the US, the Digital Literacy Resource Centre (DRC)
has provided key learning opportunities for students and staff online (Jackobson, 2017). According to Manzini (2015),
digital platforms provide enabling solutions for organizations (p. 168), and students can certainly broaden their learning
opportunities under the right set of circumstances and safety considerations. There is certainly an opportunity to
develop more consistent educational resources for students and teachers in Canada for K-12 and post-secondary
institutions.

                          Risk and Crisis Communications

With over 20 years of experience in risk and crisis communications, including as a sessional instructor in continuing
education at a post-secondary institution, I realize the importance of audiences receiving timely and factual information
from credible sources. The act of disinformation could have reputational health and safety ramifications for end-users
and receivers of information. Regan and Jesse (2018) advise that there are a range of ethical issues that should be
considered in regards to the use of edtech and data. To help add some further context to this area of communications
within the realm of fake news, it is important to delineate the differences between risk communications and crisis
communications.

The process of risk communications deals with things that might go wrong (Telg, 2019). According to Fearn-Banks
(2017), it is an ongoing program of informing and educating various publics (usually external publics) about issues that
can negatively or positively affect an organization's success. Based on my work experience, relationships between an
organization and its key publics need to be established before a situation escalates into a crisis.

The process of crisis communications deals with things that do go wrong (Telg, 2019). Crisis communications is the
dialogue between the organization and its public(s) prior to, during, and after the negative occurrence (Fearn-Banks,
2017). Effective communications consist of preparing a crisis communications plan with supporting tactics, of involving
the team in training scenarios to help mitigate any reputational harm against the organization, and of being strategic in
enacting the crisis communications plan.

                 Experience and Strategic Audience Engagement

As a former media relations manager, trainer, and spokesperson for an Alberta-based police service (1999-2011), I
was involved in disseminating daily, accurate information to internal audiences and the public through various digital
platform technologies including news, social media, and organizational communication channels (email, website,
Intranet, conference calls, news conferences, so on), which helped to contribute to the overall well-being, education,
and safety of citizens, and employees. Any mistruths would have a negative effect on how seriously people would take
any information they received from police. This could also impact the effectiveness of educational school programs such
as the D.A.R.E. program.

It is not unusual for fake news to escalate during a time of crisis. During the flood of 2013 in a southern Alberta city,
I was employed as a Public Affairs Manager, and I noted that disinformation would flare up and hinder efforts to have
the public follow safety instructions. Our approach was to correct and address any mistruths as soon as possible to
prevent their further spread. Some disinformation was centred on the actual importance of having a 72-hour emergency
preparedness kit. Some fake information resulted in people doubting its importance, leaving them vulnerable to not

                                         To What Extent Does Fake News Influence Our Ability to Communicate in Learning Organizations? | 131
being properly prepared to survive the situation. Any type of mistruth only serves to work against emergency services
personnel, who only have the health and safety of the public in mind.
A more recent example is based on my participatory role and perspective regarding the communications process at
a post-secondary institution during the COVID-19 outbreak from the period of January-March 31, 2020. As the senior
manager of media and issues management, I led an effort to establish the trusted communications channels to share
relevant and timely informational updates with the campus community and to help prevent the spread of disinformation.
I prepared a communications plan with tactics and specific communications drafted in conjunction with executives
and teammates in various departments during the early risk communications phase and in advance of COVID-19 being
declared a pandemic by the WHO. The plan was fluid and adaptable to audience needs as the outbreak became a
crisis; this included the creation of a central hub of factual information and relevant links by colleagues (a COVID-19
themed website). To help mitigate fake news, an institution needs to provide strong and consistent internal and external
communications, including the news media.
In this digital age, the use of social media has also amplified the amount of information being shared in general during
the worldwide pandemic. Dr. Peter Chow-White aptly described its impact in the Saanich News: "social contagion
operates very similarly to viral contagion; there is a network effect, and social media amplifies this" (Mclachlan, 2020).
Additionally, Powers & Kounalakis (2017) support research findings that indicate people are actually relying on digital
platforms like Twitter and Facebook for their news. This increases the "level of exposure they have to a multitude of
sources and stories" (p. 4). More importantly, Rheingold (2012) suggests that people need to learn how to participate
effectively online to help reduce the spread of disinformation.

                               Tips to Detect Fake News

My own experience and research suggest a solution to help safeguard and protect against fake news. I have developed a
simple process to verify the information one encounters via social media and news media circles (Figure 9.1).

Figure 9.1 Five-step source assessment process for fake news

132 | To What Extent Does Fake News Influence Our Ability to Communicate in Learning Organizations?
Individuals can also create an easy-to-follow chart based on the above themes in a word document, PDF or Excel format.
This information is meant to help guide people as they identify, track and assess fake news.

Figure 9.2 Source assessment matrix tool

              Effective Communications Process During a Pandemic

Equally important for organizations and professional communicators is to have a strategy in place prior to and during a
time of crisis to provide a source of credible information and to also protect against disinformation. This new eight-step
model is informed by action research, my personal industry experience, digital technology, creativity, design principles,
and best practices. This process can help to offer guidance during the planning process (risk and crisis situations).

                                         To What Extent Does Fake News Influence Our Ability to Communicate in Learning Organizations? | 133
                                                                                                                                                          Figure 9.3 Eight-step
                                                                                                                                                          communications process
                                                                                                                                                          for risk and crisis
                                                                                                                                                          situations

                                Ethical Considerations

From a broader perspective, the onus of responsibility in mitigating the proliferation of fake news requires a
complementary effort by a variety of end-users of technology. A study conducted by Gabielkov et al. (2016) reveals that
many people share links on Twitter without reading the information first: "out of 10 articles mentioned on Twitter, 6
typically on niche topics are never clicked" (p. 8). This influences what information gets circulated. Moreover, in 2017,
the news site The Science Post published a block of "lorem ipsum" text. According to Dewey (2017), "nearly 46,000
people shared the post without reading past the headline." This is a concerning trend, as the speed at which people can
now create and distribute information globally is unprecedented. The chain reaction cause and effect of fake news as
depicted in Figure 9.4 is far-reaching.

134 | To What Extent Does Fake News Influence Our Ability to Communicate in Learning Organizations?
                                                                                                                                                          Figure 9.4 Chain
                                                                                                                                                          reaction cause and effect
                                                                                                                                                          of fake news
A closer analysis of the `typical' key players involved in creating and sharing information highlights the ethical challenges
for these groups. In table 9.1 , ethical highways for consideration, are based on Farrow's normative theory (2016).

                                         To What Extent Does Fake News Influence Our Ability to Communicate in Learning Organizations? | 135
Table 9.1 Ethical highways for consideration (creating, distributing, and receiving fake news) based on Farrow's (2016)
                                                                  Uncompleted Framework

Group                                   Influencer or Impacted     Normative Theory

 Creators of fake news                  Influencer (knowingly)    Ego consequentialist/
                                                                       Machiavellianism.

                                                                    This self-centred approach starts the
                                                                       chain reaction and cascading effect
                                                                       that fake news has on everyone who
                                                                       receives or views this information.

                                                                    These individuals are not concerned
                                                                       with presenting the facts, nor do
                                                                       they consider the potential negative
                                                                       consequences of creating and
                                                                       sharing this information in perpetual
                                                                       motion.

 Spreaders of mistruths                 Impacted (unknowingly)    Virtue.
                                                                    These individuals may be
 Owners of key social media platforms   Influencer and impacted
    and digital technology                                             well-intentioned, but their decisions
                                                                       are more instinctual and subjective,
                                                                       without much consideration of the
                                                                       potential consequences of `clicking
                                                                       and sharing' information.
                                                                    Studies show this group is more
                                                                       likely only to read the headline
                                                                       before sharing this information.
                                                                    Combination of consequentialist and
                                                                       virtue.
                                                                    From an outsider's perspective, and
                                                                       when it comes to big business, the
                                                                       saying `hear no evil, see no evil' rings
                                                                       true.
                                                                    Facebook has had to implement new
                                                                       security measures due to massive
                                                                       data breaches, public outcry, and a
                                                                       government crackdown, while
                                                                       Twitter will now remove any `bot'
                                                                       accounts or fake users.

136 | To What Extent Does Fake News Influence Our Ability to Communicate in Learning Organizations?
 End-users of technology   Impacted                  Consequentialist.
 Education system          Influencer and impacted   Users of technology find themselves
 Organizations             Influencer and impacted
                                                          with the privilege of using
                                                          state-of-the-art digital tech, only to
                                                          be bombarded with a plethora of
                                                          information.
                                                       They have to make difficult decisions
                                                          on what information to believe and
                                                          what if anything to do with it.
                                                       End users can also become key
                                                          players in the further transmission of
                                                          fake news (intentionally or not).
                                                       Combination of deontological/
                                                          consequentialist.
                                                       Education is guided by government
                                                          legislation, curriculum, and policies,
                                                          and is also bound to consider the
                                                          potential consequences of edtech
                                                          and open learning.
                                                       Blindly accepting or being `fooled' by
                                                          mistruths can have serious
                                                          implications for the quality of
                                                          learning opportunities, and can hurt
                                                          the reputation and perceived
                                                          effectiveness of educational
                                                          institutions and what type of safe
                                                          learning environments they are
                                                          capable of providing.
                                                       This will place more pressure on
                                                          educators to come up with new ways
                                                          of combating the problem of fake
                                                          news while also encouraging digital
                                                          learning opportunities.
                                                       Combination of deontological/
                                                          consequentialist.
                                                       Organizations have the responsibility
                                                          to balance the needs of their internal
                                                          and external audiences.
                                                       The onus is on leaders to ensure a
                                                          source of factual and helpful
                                                          information is available at all times to
                                                          mitigate the emergence of fake
                                                          news.
                                                       Organizations are also required to
                                                          adhere to laws, policies and
                                                          procedures.
                                                       Many organizations and boards may
                                                          choose to walk the fine line with the
                                                          information they communicate,
                                                          thereby contributing to or
                                                          influencing public conversations.
                                                          The approach they choose will help
                                                          to shape its reputation.

To What Extent Does Fake News Influence Our Ability to Communicate in Learning Organizations? | 137
 Media/journalists   Influencer and impacted   Consequentialist.
 Communicators                                  The majority of mainstream media
                      Influencer and impacted
                                                    outlets and journalists adhere to
                             Conclusion             industry based ethical standards and
                                                    procedures (such as the Canadian
                                                    Association of Journalists, CRTC,
                                                    etc.). Conversely, the CBC has an
                                                    Ombudsman to address any
                                                    improprieties or ethical issues.
                                                 The media agenda centres on making
                                                    daily choices on what they report on,
                                                    at what lengths they go to get the
                                                    story, and how they source and
                                                    package the `stories' for their
                                                    audiences. Profit and being first are
                                                    also paramount. They can add `fuel to
                                                    the fire' on any topic, and can drive
                                                    the cycle and spread of mistruths to
                                                    the public. Isn't the onus on them to
                                                    provide balanced story coverage?
                                                 Combination of deontological/
                                                    consequentialist.
                                                 Similar to journalists, public relations
                                                    staff or professional communicators
                                                    are embedded in ethical standards
                                                    through either the Canadian Public
                                                    Relations Society or the International
                                                    Association of Business
                                                    Communicators. These professionals,
                                                    who may work in profit, not for
                                                    profit, private or government
                                                    settings also have to balance
                                                    organizational needs. This may
                                                    include finding creative ways around
                                                    laws, policies and procedures, and
                                                    balancing requirements under FOIP
                                                    among others. Communicators make
                                                    daily choices on how they shape
                                                    messages, but the final decision on
                                                    what is released or shared publicly
                                                    rests with leadership.

Impact on Education

There are many positive societal implications associated with widespread access to and use of digital technology and
platforms. However, some individuals cross the line with their messaging, and, as a result, fake news can go viral
very quickly. These actions have impactful ramifications on education -- especially for knowledge-seekers scouring
online for references and various learning resources. Educators, organizations, and journalists, among others, have
a common desire to inform and educate, and to provide factual and helpful information on a variety of topics. One
researcher has signified the importance of this, while also recognizing the associated ethical challenges. In his article
A Framework for the Ethics of Open Education, Farrow (2016) offers the following insight: "as openness increasingly
enters the mainstream, there is concern that the more radical ethical aspirations of the open movement are becoming
secondary" (p. 94).

138 | To What Extent Does Fake News Influence Our Ability to Communicate in Learning Organizations?
Action research provides the opportunity to link theory and practice. In my experience, utilizing this approach to
prepare a risk/crisis communications plan is more effective than using the `traditional' public relations method. The
key research steps of planning, acting, observing, and reflecting (McNiff, 2014) offers a pragmatic yet theoretically based
and informed approach to strategic preparations. Moreover, when innovating possible solutions, it is equally important
to incorporate a design thinking process such as Ostrom's design principles (Rheingold, 2012) in a way that is also
applicable and relevant in real-world contexts (Kelly, 2016). The constant cycling method of action research provides
regular opportunities to help finetune even the most complex business practices.

Moreover, adopting a relatively new mindset in the field of crisis communications, namely "creative readiness" (Fichet,
2018), was also beneficial to me as a professional communicator. Fichet (2018) describes this approach as "improvising in
acute situations based on creativity and earlier experiences" (p.34). The ability to respond more creatively as a particular
crisis unfolds is a helpful strategy and can provide another way to mitigate falsehoods and to protect an organization's
reputation.

Rheingold (2012) reminds us that when we are navigating in the digital world, the onus of being responsible and ethical
end users is something we should not take for granted. Everything we write, say, or do via social media platforms quickly
becomes a part of the bigger picture: "if you tag, favourite, comment, Wiki edit, curate or blog, you are already part of
the web's collective intelligence" (Rheingold, 2012, p. 148). But unfortunately, presently, and in the amount of time it takes
to `post' or hit `send,' most people are already being negatively impacted by falsehoods being presented as facts.

Herein lies the importance of being able to appropriately detect fact from fiction when it comes to what we hear or
view on the news or via social media circles. A proliferation of mistruths online will only serve to cast doubt on the
credibility of information available to learners from K-12 to post-secondary, potentially resulting in a host of other issues.
Regan & Jesse (2018) raise the importance of addressing ethical issues initiated by a spike in the use of edtech and big
data in school systems. There is certainly a need for more research in this area, as we still have much to learn. The big
question moving forward is what else can we do to more effectively navigate and protect ourselves against fake news
while reaping the learning benefits of digital technology in our ever-evolving digital climate?

                                        References

Baly, R., Karadzhov, G., Alexandrov, D., Glass, J., & Nakov, P. (2018). Predicting factuality of reporting and bias of news
   media sources [Conference session]. Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
   Processing, Brussels, Belgium. https://www.doi.org/10.18653/v1/D18-1389

CBC News. (2019a, July 5). So, you think you've spotted some `fake news' -- now what. CBC. https://www.cbc.ca/news/
   technology/fake-news-disinformation-propaganda-internet-1.5196964

CBC News. (2019b, September 16). CBC's chat bot helps you spot `fake news' -- and avoid spreading it. CBC.
https://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/chat-bot-canada-federal-election-disinformation-1.5270765

Charlton, E. (2019, March 6). Fake news: What it is, and how to spot it. World Economic Forum.
   https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2019/03/fake-news-what-it-is-and-how-to-spot-it/

Cybenko, A. K., & Cybenko, G. (2018). AI and fake news. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 33(5), 1-5. https://doi.org/10.1109/
   mis.2018.2877280

Dewey, C. (2016, June 17). 6 in 10 of you will share this link without reading it. NDTV. https://www.ndtv.com/off beat/
   6-in-10-of-you-will-share-this-link-without-reading-it-a-new-depressing-study-says-1420091

                                         To What Extent Does Fake News Influence Our Ability to Communicate in Learning Organizations? | 139
Dulhanty, C., Deglint, J. L., Daya, I. B., & Wong, A., (2019, November 27). Taking a stance on fake news: Towards automatic
   disinformation assessment via deep bidirectional transformer language models for stance detection [Conference
   session]. AI for Social Good Workshop at NeurIPS 2019. https://arxiv.org/abs/1911.11951

Farrow, R. (2016). A framework for the ethics of open education. Open Praxis, 8(2), 93-109. https://doi.org/10.5944/
   openpraxis.8.2.291

Fearn-Banks, K. (2016). Crisis communications: A casebook approach. Taylor & Francis Group.

Fichet, E. S. (2018). Creativity readiness in crisis communications: How crisis communicators' ability to be creative is
   impacted at the individual, work team, and organizational levels (Publication No. 10831554) [Doctoral dissertation,
   University of Washington]. ProQuest Dissertations and Theses Global.

Gabielkov, M., Ramachandran, A., Chaintreau, A., & Legout, A. (2016). Social clicks: What and who gets read on Twitter?.
   ACM SIGMETRICS Performance Evaluation Review, 44(1), 179-192. https://doi.org/10.1145/2964791.2901462

Garcia, R.T, (2020, March 20). As Brazil confronts coronavirus, Bolsonaro and his supporters peddle fake news. Quillette.
   https://quillette.com/2020/03/20/as-brazil-confronts-coronavirus-bolsonaro-and-his-supporters-peddle-fake-
   news/

Holmes, A. (2020, March 10). A coronavirus fake news `infodemic' is spreading online faster than tech companies' ability
   to quash it. Business Insider. https://www.businessinsider.com/tech-companies-and-governments-are-fighting-
   coronavirus-fake-news-2020-3

Jacobson, L. (2017, October 24). Schools fight spread of `fake news' through news literacy lessons. K-12 Dive.
   https://www.educationdive.com/news/schools-fight-spread-of-fake-news-through-news-literacy-lessons/
   507057/

Kelly, R. W. (2016). Creative development: Transforming education through design thinking, innovation, and
   invention. Brush Education Inc.

Manzini, E. (2015). Design, when everybody designs: An introduction to design for social innovation. MIT Press.

McLauchlan, P., & Wadhwani, A. (2020, March 29). Social media a blessing and a curse during time of crisis. Cloverdale
   Reporter. https://www.cloverdalereporter.com/news/social-media-a-blessing-and-a-curse-during-time-of-crisis-
   b-c-communication-expert/

McNiff, J. (2014). Writing and doing action research. Sage Publications Ltd.

Media Bias Facts Check. (n.d). Search and learn the bias of news media. https://mediabiasfactcheck.com/

Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe. (2017). Joint declaration on freedom of expression and "fake news",
   disinformation and propaganda. OSCE. https://www.osce.org/fom/302796

Regan, P. M., & Jesse, J. (2018). Ethical challenges of edtech, big data and personalized learning: Twenty-first century
   student sorting and tracking. Ethics and Information Technology, 21(3), 167-179. https://doi.org/10.1007/
   s10676-018-9492-2

Rheingold, H. (2012). Crap detection 101: How to find what you need to know, and decide if it's true. In Net Smart:
   How to Thrive Online (pp. 77-111). MIT Press. https://ieeexplore-ieee-org.ezproxy.lib.ucalgary.ca/servlet/
   opac?bknumber=6757883

Reality Check Team. (2020, March 13). Coronavirus: What misinformation has spread in Africa? BBC News.
   https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-51710617

140 | To What Extent Does Fake News Influence Our Ability to Communicate in Learning Organizations?
Telg, R. (2018). Risk and crisis communication: When things go wrong. University of Florida IFAS Extension.
   https://edis.ifas.ufl.edu/wc093

Tworek, H. (2019). News from Germany: The competition to control world communications, 1900-1945. Cambridge,
   Massachusetts; London, England: Harvard University Press. www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctvckq588

University of Waterloo. (2019, December 16). New tool uses AI to flag fake news for media fact-
   checkers. ScienceDaily. www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2019/12/191216122422.htm

Vosoughi, S., Roy, D., & Aral, S. (2018). The spread of true and false news online. Science, 359(6380), 1146-1151.
   https//doi.org/10.1126/science.aap9559

Watters, A. (2017). Education technology and `fake news'. Hacker Education. http://hackeducation.com/2017/12/02/
   top-ed-tech-trends-fake-news

World Health Organization. (2020). Managing the COVID-19 infodemic: Call for action. https://www.who.int/
   publications/i/item/9789240010314

Zarocostas, J. (2020). How to fight an infodemic. The Lancet, 395(10225), 676. https://doi.org/10.1016/
   S0140-6736(20)30461-X

Media Attributions

   Figure 9.1 Five-step source assessment process for fake news  Dean Parthenis is licensed under a CC BY
      (Attribution) license

   Figure 9.2 Source assessment matrix tool  Dean Parthenis is licensed under a CC BY (Attribution) license
   Figure 9.3 Eight-step communications process for risk and crisis situations  Dean Parthenis is licensed under a

      CC BY (Attribution) license
   Figure 9.4 Chain reaction cause and effect of fake news  Dean Parthenis is licensed under a CC BY (Attribution)

      license

                                          To What Extent Does Fake News Influence Our Ability to Communicate in Learning Organizations? | 141
