This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

      Exploring Physical Phenomena
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.
                    This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

 Exploring Physical Phenomena

What happens when light from the Sun shines on the Earth?
     EMILY VAN ZEE AND ELIZABETH GIRE

                                    OREGON STATE UNIVERSITY
                                              CORVALLIS, OR
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Exploring Physical Phenomena Copyright © 2020 by Emily Van Zee & Elizabeth Gire is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

Publication of this textbook was possible due to grant support from Oregon State
University Ecampus.
Privacy (open.oregonstate.education/privacy)
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Contents

Preface                                                                                                       ix
<em>Exploring Physical Phenomena</em>: What happens when light from the Sun
shines on the Earth?                                                                                     xxxvi
                                                                                                         xxxvii
About the Authors

About This Book

Unit 1: Exploring the Nature of Light Phenomena

I. Introduction                                                                                          9

II. Identifying Student Resources                                                                        12

III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence                                                          18

IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanation for Intriguing Phenomena                               40

V. Developing Mathematical Representations of Pinhole Phenomena                                          58

VI. Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate an Interesting Quantity                               73

VII. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence                                               86

VIII. Using Additional Central Ideas about Light to Explain an Intriguing                                117

Phenomenon

IX. Historical and Current Perspectives on the Nature of Light                                           125

X. Making Connections to Educational Policies                                                            132

XI. Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 1 140

Unit 2: Exploring the Nature of Thermal Phenomena

I. Introduction                                                                                          151

II. Identifying Student Resources                                                                        153

III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence                                                          156
                 This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

IV. Using Central Ideas about Thermal Phenomena to Explain an Intriguing                  172

Phenomenon

V. Developing Additional Central Ideas about Thermal Phenomena                            174

VI. Developing an Additional Central Idea about Thermal Phenomena and Its                 190

Mathematical Representations

VII. Developing a Mathematical Representation of Thermal Phenomena Based on 206
Theoretical Considerations

VIII. Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate a Quantity of Interest               214

IX. Engaging Friends or Family Members in Exploring Thermal Phenomena                     219

X. Making Connections to Educational Policies                                             223

XI. Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit              229

2

U2.Solving a Thermal Math Problem                                                         232

Unit 3: Considering the Influence of Light and Thermal Phenomena on Local
Weather

I. Introduction                                                                           239

II. Identifying Student Resources                                                         241

III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence                                           244

IV. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence                                 273

V. Using Central Ideas to Explain Intriguing Phenomena Involving Local Weather            288

at the Beach

VI. Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate a Quantity of Interest                 295

VII. Making Connections to Educational Policies                                           304

VIII. Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 3                    309

Unit 4: Considering the Influence of Light and Thermal Phenomena on Global
Climate

I. Introduction                                                                           321

II. Identifying Student Resources                                                         323
                 This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence                                           326

IV. Using Central Ideas about Light and Thermal Phenomena to Explain the                  350

Greenhouse Effect

V. Considering the Evidence for Global Climate Change                                     370

VI. Using Central Ideas Based on Evidence to Consider the Impact of Global                397

Climate Change

VII. Developing Mathematical Representations of Changing Quantities                       414

VIII. Exploring Internet Resources about Taking Action to Address Climate                 443

Change Issues

IX. Making Connections to Educational Policies                                            451

X. Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 4 458

Unit 5: Exploring the Nature of Astronomical Phenomena in the Context of the
Sun/Earth/Moon System

I. Introduction                                                                           475

II. Identifying Student Resources                                                         477

III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence                                           491

IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop Two Explanatory Models For Day And Night               537

V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the              550

Moon

VI. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence about the Sun, Earth,           595

and Stars

VII. Using Central Ideas Based on Evidence to Develop Two Explanatory Models              622

for Seasonal Patterns in the Constellations Visible at Night

VIII. Using Central Ideas Based on Evidence to Develop an Explanatory Model for           627

the Earth's Seasons

IX. Estimating the Tilt of the Earth                                                      633

X. Developing and Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate an Intriguing 654
Quantity

XI. Pondering Additional Issues                                                           669

XII. Making Connections to Educational Policies                                           698
                  This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

XIII. Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for                  706

Unit 5

Units 1 Handouts

Unit 2 Handouts

Unit 3 Handouts

Unit 4 Handouts

Unit 5 Handouts

10 week Example Schedule                                                                   735

Example Equipment for Remote Learning                                                      736

Example Homework                                                                           741

Creative Commons License                                                                   742

Recommended Citations                                                                      743

Versioning                                                                                 745
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Preface

<em>Exploring Physical Phenomena</em>: What happens when light
from the Sun shines on the Earth?

   This textbook is intended for use in laboratory-centered physics courses for
prospective and practicing elementary and middle school teachers. By exploring physical
phenomena in class, participants learn science in ways in which they are expected to
teach science. The emphasis is upon questioning, predicting, exploring, observing,
discussing, reading, and writing about what one thinks and why.

   This textbook also is appropriate for use in general science courses that explore some
of the physical phenomena underlying global climate change. In addition, organizations
such as museums, youth groups, or senior citizen programs may find one or more units
a feasible framework for offering extended science learning experiences to the public
during workshops and/or special events. Some of the activities also could form the basis
for on-going exhibits.

   The text assumes that the participants will be working at tables in small groups rather
than sitting in rows listening to lectures. However, the course has been adapted for
remote learning. Most of the equipment involves everyday materials available in homes,
schools, and offices. Regular bulb thermometers can be substituted for the digital
temperature probes described in the text. Participants can use a cell phone app to
measure reflectivity if they do not have light sensors. Those without access to motion
detectors can use the graphs provided in the text to learn about the phenomena explored
with these devices.

   The level of mathematics required assumes proficiency in mathematics taught in K-8
classrooms. Also assumed is the willingness to strengthen some high school mathematics
skills as needed. These include using the geometry of similar triangles, interpreting the
heights and slopes of line graphs, and solving linear algebraic equations.

                                                                                                                                                                           Preface | ix
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

A. Unit Structure

     Each unit follows the same structure:

         · Identifying resources participants bring to the study of a topic from their prior experiences.
         · Developing central ideas based on evidence from exploring physical phenomena with everyday

             equipment and materials.
         · Using these central ideas to explain intriguing physical phenomena.
         · Developing mathematical representations of the phenomena.
         · Using these mathematical representations to estimate a quantity of interest.
         · Making connections to educational policy and the US Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS Lead

             States, 2013).

By central ideas, we mean understandings about physical phenomena that students
develop while making sense of their observations. These ideas emerge from the students'
discussions with one another as well as with the instructor. These central ideas also are
powerful ideas because they form conceptual models useful in describing and explaining
the phenomena explored. The units also develop expertise in generating and interpreting
multiple representations of phenomena such as sketches, geometric figures, line graphs,
and algebraic equations.

   The theme for the course is: What happens when light from the Sun shines on the Earth?
The first unit focuses on the nature of light phenomena. Students explore questions
such as how light travels from a source, what affects the size and shape of shadows,
how pinhole cameras work, how light reflects from both smooth and rough surfaces, and
what happens when light shines through materials such as water and prisms? Students
develop central ideas based on evidence from exploring these phenomena and use these
understandings to think about what causes rainbows.

   When light from the Sun shines on the Earth, things often get hot, so the second unit
explores the nature of thermal phenomena. Why, for example, do some things feel hot or
cold, how is energy conserved when mixing hot and cold water, and what happens when
ice melts, liquid water warms, and then boils?

   The third unit considers the influence of light and thermal phenomena on the water
cycle and local weather. Students develop central ideas about forms of energy transfer
such as radiation, reflection, absorption, conduction, and convection. They also explore
properties of materials such as thermal conductivity and specific heat. They then use

x | Preface
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

these ideas to explain weather phenomena. In particular, students develop explanations
for why, after a sunny day at the beach, the sand is hot, water cool, and cloudy skies often
occur along with sea breezes in the afternoon.

   The fourth unit considers the influence of light and thermal phenomena on global
climate (van Zee, Roberts, & Grobart, 2016). Questions include what happens to energy
from the sun as it gets reflected or absorbed by the oceans, land forms, and atmosphere?
What is the greenhouse effect and how does it modulate global temperatures? Students
review websites presenting climate change indicators in the US, social issues, military
issues, and ways to take action. They also review websites presenting local, state, national,
and international efforts to understand and address concerns about changes in the global
climate. As part of this unit, the students also explore motion to think about how to
interpret graphical representations of changing phenomena- where something is, its
position or current value; how that position or value is changing, its speed or rate of
change; and how its speed is changing, its acceleration, where the `it' may be a car
speeding up but also could be the mass of melting glaciers all over the Earth.

   The fifth unit extends throughout the course. On-going observations of the Sun and
the Moon provide evidence for thinking about why day and night occur, why the Moon
seems to have different shapes at different times, and why many places on the Earth
experience different seasons at different times of year. Excerpts from writings by Galileo,
Newton, and other scientists provide insights into the history of thoughts about the
Earth's place in the Universe. Explorations throughout the course also provide contexts
for reflecting upon the nature of science as well as upon the nature of science learning
and teaching.

   Each unit ends by making connections to educational policy, such as recommendations
articulated in the US Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS Lead States, 2013). In
particular, students reflect upon ways in which their explorations and developing
understandings exemplify the science and engineering practices, crosscutting concepts,
and disciplinary core ideas presented in this document.

                             B. Class Sessions

   This textbook can support classroom-based, hybrid, and online courses. Our course
meets twice a week for 2.5 hours each session for ten weeks. The supplementary materials
may be used to extend instruction for a semester. Class sessions include documenting

                                                                                                                                                                           Preface | xi
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

initial knowledge, exploring phenomena, recording progress during explorations,
discussing interpretations, writing to solidify understandings, and closing by reflecting
upon what learned and what one is still wondering.

                           1. Identifying Student Resources

   Each unit begins with a diagnostic question to which students respond in order to
document what they already know about some aspect of the phenomena they will be
exploring. Some diagnostic questions require drawing and/or writing responses
individually. Others involve small group conversations and brief presentations to the
whole group. Responses to these diagnostic questions are not graded.

   Diagnostic questions alert students to the context of upcoming explorations; they alert
the instructor to prevalent ideas on which the students can build as well as to those
that may need refining. Many initial ideas are reasonable within everyday circumstances
rather than misconceptions that need to be corrected. The notion that a force is necessary
to keep something moving, for example, is reasonable when thinking about everyday
experiences in pushing objects along rough surfaces. Refining that notion involves
considering the effect of different surfaces on the force needed; less force is needed to
keep something moving at the same speed on smooth surfaces such as ice. If no friction
with the surface and no air resistance occurs, no force is needed to keep something
moving at the same speed in the same direction. Recognizing such conditions of
applicability is an important aspect of learning physics. Instead of memorizing Newton's
first law with a shrug as a counterintuitive abstraction impossible to believe, students can
understand it as a sensible statement, that a moving object stays in motion with the same
speed and in the same direction unless acted upon by an unbalanced force.

   Responding to diagnostic questions can activate resources from prior experiences that
students can build upon in thinking about and exploring physical phenomena. The focus
on reflecting upon one's own learning in this course also activates epistemological
resources, from prior experiences that students can build upon in thinking about and
exploring learning phenomena (Hammer & Elby, 2003). Students respond to some
diagnostic questions again later in the course, compare their initial and current responses,
and write about their learning processes with evidence drawn from their initial and
current responses to support their claims. In an on-campus course, such diagnostic
questions have been initially asked on handouts that students completed in class. The

xii | Preface
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

instructor collected, viewed, and stored the responses until returning them after students
had completed handouts documenting their current understandings near the end of the
course. In the remote learning setting, the students responded in class to ungraded
surveys, both initially and near the end of the course. Both responses were accessed and
stored electronically.

                               2. Exploring Phenomena

   The units focus on doing and interpreting explorations of phenomena in class. Most
equipment can be found in everyday settings such as kitchens, playrooms, and offices.
Some activities and assignments assume students have access to a computer and to
the Internet both inside and outside of class. Suggestions in the text reflect our setting
of a classroom with tables at which small groups work together. Online students could
collaborate in small groups via their course's electronic network or in breakout rooms. It
would be best for interested individuals not enrolled in a course to explore phenomena
with friends and/or family members rather than alone, but access to a variety of
perspectives will be possible through reading the example student findings and
interpretations.

   The text presents the explorations as numbered Questions with bulleted statements
that suggest what to do. These directions are not intended, however, to be handed out
in class. The expectation instead is that the instructor will pose these general questions,
provide the small groups with equipment needed, and offer some initial oral suggestions
that the students see what they can find out by using the equipment to explore the
phenomena. This open-ended format encourages active student engagement in designing
explorations and interpreting findings.

   This instructional approach assumes active engagement by the instructor and assistants
as well. We recommend arranging for one or more graduates of the course to serve
as learning assistants (LAs) for independent study credit or for stipends if department
funding is available. Physics majors interested in teaching careers also have served as LAs
for us as well as graduate students as teaching assistants (TAs). The instructor and such
assistants circulate among the tables, listen in to what group members are saying, observe
what the students are drawing or doing, and then ask a question or offer a comment only
as needed to help a group to make progress. This process proved difficult in the remote
learning setting as one cannot monitor what is happening across multiple groups while

                                                                                                                                                                          Preface | xiii
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

assisting one group. It is important to listen first to what is happening when joining a
breakout room before intervening, or not.

   A staff member may simply ask a small group "what are you doing?" to initiate a
conversation that encourages students to clarify for themselves whether what they are
doing and thinking makes sense in moving toward whatever is the goal. The staff member
may follow up with "why are you doing that?" and/or "how is that helping you?" Such
gentle guidance is essential for nudging groups along while also providing opportunities
for students to design and undertake inquiries in ways that interest them. Alan Schoenfeld
(1992) suggests asking these questions to help students avoid going down unproductive
paths in solving mathematics problems. Such questions also can help students learn
how to monitor their own progress eventually in designing, conducting, and interpreting
explorations.

                     3. Recording Progress During Explorations

   Keeping track of what one is doing and thinking is important. In our course, students
use a template for a physics notebook page on which to record their notes during class.
When students submit homework assignments, the instructor may ask them to submit
these notebook pages as well, perhaps for a grade or just to get a sense of how students
are doing. This textbook assumes students are using this physics notebook page but
instructors may prefer to have other ways for students to document what they are doing
and thinking in class.

   The recommended physics notebook page is for students to use to keep track of what
they are doing and thinking during explorations: here (docx) or here (pdf).

This physics notebook page template is shown with explanations of the various
sections: here (docx) or here (pdf). Sections on the front of the physics notebook page
include the Topic of the exploration, the students' initial ideas and plans Before starting
their exploration, their observations and thoughts about what they are observing
During their exploration, and relevant Vocabulary.

xiv | Preface
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

     Example: Front of Physics Notebook Page

        Topic: State the focus of the exploration: what question(s) are you asking?
        Before column. Before starting your exploration, think about and discuss with your group members what you
     know already about this topic, how you plan to conduct the exploration and what you think you might find out.
     Record these initial ideas in the "Before" column. Draw pictures to represent your plans and predictions.
        During column. During your exploration, record what is happening, what you observe, and what you are
     thinking about what you are observing. Include sketches of equipment and observations. Confirm or disconfirm
     predictions and describe some possible next steps.
        Vocabulary. Note any words that are new and their definitions.

Sections on the back page refer to what happens after collecting data and recording these
findings. These sections include Central Ideas that emerge from interpreting findings, the
Relevant Evidence on which you are basing those ideas, the Rationale that justifies how
the evidence supports the claims being made with these ideas, a Reflection about the
exploration, and What you are Still Wondering.

     Example: Back of Physics Notebook Page

        After: Central Ideas. After your exploration, record any central ideas that have emerged from your
     observations and discussions.

        After: Relevant Evidence. Also note the evidence on which you have based these ideas.
        After: Rationale. State explicitly how the evidence is relevant and supports the claims you are making in
     stating the central ideas. Also explain why this result is important.
        After: Reflection. Then write a reflection about whatever you want to remember about this experience -
     perhaps how what you learned connects to other experiences, how you learned what you learned, and what
     implications these findings might suggest for the next exploration or for teaching this topic in your own
     classroom.
        After: Wonderings. In addition, briefly state what you are still wondering in this context.

   Our students make copies of the template of the two-sided physics notebook page,
punch holes in the copies, and use a 3-ring binder in which they store the notebook pages
and handouts. They bring copies of the physics notebook page to class to use during
explorations. Instructors may prefer to recommend other processes for documenting
explorations in this course.

                                                                                                                                                                           Preface | xv
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   Entries on the physics notebook pages in class serve as notes for writing a coherent
summary of questions, initial thoughts and plans, findings, and interpretations as a
laboratory report after class. For the most effective learning experience, students
complete explorations and summaries before reading the example student findings and
interpretations included in the online text.

   Adam Devitt designed these physics notebook pages when he was assisting in this
course. He was a special education elementary school teacher enrolled in a graduate
program in science education. He based his design of these physics notebook pages by
analogy with "before, during, and after" reading strategies that enhance literacy learning
(Devitt, 2010; Winegrad & Devitt, 2009). The pages have been slightly modified with the
addition of a Rationale section and revision of some of the suggestions in the template
with explanations of the various sections.

                      4. Discussing Interpretations of Findings

   Initial discussions interpreting findings occur in the small groups. It is important,
however, for the whole group to come to consensus on what the observations were and
what these findings mean. There should be a clear articulation of one or more central
ideas that emerge from the exploration, the evidence upon which the claims are based,
and the rationale that discusses how the evidence supports the claims and why this result
is important. This coming to a shared understanding about what happened and what
one can infer from the findings can occur through small group presentations and/or
instructor facilitated whole-group discussions.

   Small group presentations maximize the involvement of individual students in
developing interpretations and ways to present these interpretations to the whole group.
Students need to plan and rehearse how every member of the group will contribute
to what they are reporting about their findings and interpretations. If the small groups
have been exploring the same phenomena in different ways, suggesting a different focus
to different groups will help multiple small group presentations remain interesting and
informative.

   As small groups are working on their presentations, the instructor and assistants visit
each group briefly to look at what the students are putting on a poster (large whiteboard)
and to listen to what each student is planning to say. This way the instructor and assistants
can help shape what the students choose to present and address any issues that need

xvi | Preface
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

refining. The group members should include the process of resolving any such issues as
part of their presentation.

   Facilitating whole group discussions involves listening to what students say, welcoming
contributions from a variety of individuals, and encouraging student/student
interactions. One way to encourage student questioning is to paraphrase what someone
just said and wait before saying anything more. Listening to statements puts students into
a conversationally appropriate position to ask a question. If the instructor waits without
responding to that question, another student may venture an answer, which may prompt
yet another student to risk offering a contribution to the thinking (van Zee & Minstrell,
1997). Although time-consuming, such vigorous student/student discussions can create a
meaningful context for students to make sense of their findings before leaving class.

   It is important for the instructor to resist the temptation to present a quick coherent
summary of what was to be learned. If this occurs frequently, students tend to wait for it
and not engage as well in making their own sense of what has happened. The extent to
which the instructor feels compelled to `tell answers' likely will vary, however, with the
time to the end of class, the importance of the current topic to later topics, the apparent
engagement of the students, and everyone's patience. We believe that the more group
members can generate their own ideas, resolve puzzles themselves, and develop coherent
arguments supporting their claims, the more they will learn.

   Fostering small group presentations and/or whole group conversation near the close
of the students' explorations is an important step in helping to clarify and refine
understandings. Such presentations and conversations also will help students develop
the skills in argumentation advocated in the US Next Generation Science Standards (Lead
States, 2013). The intent is for the students to be the ones who articulate emergent
central ideas, state relevant evidence, and provide rationales to explain how that evidence
supports the claims being made and why the result is important.

   Similar interpretative processes occur during subsequent sessions when students use
the central ideas developed previously in order to explain intriguing phenomena that they
have just explored, to develop mathematical representations of the phenomena, and/or to
use these mathematical representations to estimate a quantity of interest.

                        5. Writing to solidify understandings

   Scheduling time near the end of class for students to write about what they have

                                                                                                                                                                         Preface | xvii
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

understood helps solidify understandings about the physical phenomena explored and
the learning that occurred during the session. Sometimes this can be an open-ended
opportunity to reflect on what seems most interesting and/or important to the students
but often the instructor may choose to provide some structure such as a table to
complete, a drawing to be made, or a prompt for a summary statement. Many of the
optional handouts provide such structure. These efforts do not need to be collected nor
graded. They are intended to be the beginnings for students to write a coherent summary
prepared at home.

           6. Reflecting Upon What Learned and What Still Wondering

   At the close of class, members of each small group reflect together upon what they
have just learned in class, write a brief statement of what was most interesting to them,
and articulate a question that expresses what they are still wondering. They record these
thoughts briefly on exit tickets that the small groups turn in as they leave class. In the
remote learning setting, the students responded individually to ungraded surveys with
the essay questions What was most interesting about what you learned today and What are
you still wondering. This provided immediate feedback to the instructor, which was very
helpful in becoming aware of issues that students might otherwise have not expressed.

   If a member of each group reports orally to the whole group, students also hear what
others have learned and are still wondering. These brief reflections often provide insights
into what was puzzling and needs clarification, next steps that might not otherwise have
been contemplated, and practical matters that need attention. Sometimes the students'
questions get the whole class thinking about the next exploration! Although time-
consuming, such oral as well as written reflections can foster a sense of community
and enrich the wonderings as well as the understandings with which students leave the
classroom.

   This practice was inherited from Dr. John Layman, a physics professor who taught a
similar physics course at the University of Maryland College Park. One of his graduates
strongly recommended continuing this closing ceremony as she had found it very
meaningful. Apparently some of our graduates feel this way as well as several have
reported choosing to continue this practice with their own elementary students.

   The instructor can indicate sections of the online text that are relevant to the
explorations undertaken during that class and/or to some of the questions just raised.

xviii | Preface
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Many of the students' questions will not be addressed in this course, however. It is
important to acknowledge such questions as an aspect of doing science. Scientists
frequently generate intriguing questions that they cannot immediately explore within
their current research. Generating questions about whatever one is doing and thinking
can become a helpful practice no matter in what field of endeavor one is engaged.

   After class, we have posted the relevant sections of the text online. Earlier access to
the text may inhibit student learning. We believe that students will learn more, as well as
build confidence and competence in doing science, if they use the online text as a means
for confirming understandings that they have already developed themselves through their
explorations and discussions in class.

                              C. Assignments

   As is typical in physics courses, assignments include solving a variety of word problems
related to the physical phenomena explored in class. The students also report their
ongoing observations of the Sun and the Moon on a weekly basis. These form the evidence
later in the term for developing explanatory models of day and night, the phases of the
Moon, and the Earth's seasons.

   Assignments also emphasize integrating science and literacy learning, such as speaking
clearly, listening closely, writing coherently, reading with comprehension, and creating
and critiquing information provided through electronic media (van Zee et al., 2013a,b). As
prospective teachers, our students create a children's book based on their explorations
in class. They also make connections in each unit to the US Next Generation Science
Standards (NGSS Lead States, 2013) adopted by many departments of education.

   Suggested assignments also include engaging friends and family members in learning
about the phenomena that students just explored in class (Crowl et al., 2013). Such
assignments can enhance the students' confidence in teaching science as well as
contribute to educating citizens about the nature of science as well as about the evidence
underlying concerns about climate change. The students write reflections about what
happened, what the learner(s) asked, said, did, and found, and what they learned about
science learning and teaching. By posting these reflections on an electronic discussion
board, they can learn from one another's experiences.

   The students also reflect upon their learning processes, how they are making sense
out of what they are learning each week, what aspects they want to remember, and what

                                                                                                                                                                          Preface | xix
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

questions they still have. These reflections also are helpful for alerting the instructor to
issues that need to be addressed and for suggesting ways to connect topics in the course
to the students' interests.

   Readings include articles by teachers reflecting upon exploring similar phenomena with
their students as well as internet resources relevant to phenomena explored in class.
The suggested before, during, and after reading strategies (Winegard and Devitt, 2009) are
shown here (docx) or here (pdf).

   The students access and critique internet resources relevant to university, state,
national, and international efforts to address issues related to global climate change.
They also explore websites presenting climate change indicators, social issues, military
issues, and ways to take action. The expectation is that students will read enough to
become aware of such resources and to find something interesting to report; they are not
expected to read these materials in depth.

   Students submit printed homework and reading assignments in class; some instructors
prefer submission through an electronic platform (Canvas). Midterm and final
examinations complete these formal assessments of students' learning. Currently the
midterm is a `sit down' affair during a class session where students can use their
notebooks (but not their cell phones) for up to the full 2.5 hours of class if needed. The
final currently involves preparing at home a file with responses to the questions and
submitting this file online. Some of the questions include comparing students' responses
on the same diagnostic questions early and late in the course and discussing how they
learned what they learned based on the evidence provided by these responses.

                               D. Equipment

   This course is laboratory-centered, which means every session involves some kind of
exploration. Most of the equipment involves everyday materials found in homes, schools,
and offices such as toilet and paper towel rolls, aluminum foil, wax paper, cardboard,
flashlights, pots, hot plates, jars, plastic containers, etc. The Instructor's Guide includes a
detailed list, or you can find it here. Access to the internet is assumed inside and outside
of class. Usually at least one member of a small group has a computer laptop that can be
brought to class. We use three digital probes:

  1. A light probe (TI light intensity probe, https://www.vernier.com/products/sensors/

xx | Preface
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

      tilt-bta/, $16 with Go-Link interface ($69). (This is no longer in production but may
      still be available via a web search.) Many students, however, have cell phones that
      include a light meter application so a web search for current light meter apps would
      be helpful, particularly for remote learning courses.)
 2. A temperature probe (Go!Temp, http://www.vernier.com/products/sensors/
      temperature-sensors/go-temp/, $39).
 3. A motion detector ( Go!Motion, http://www.vernier.com/products/sensors/
      motion-detectors/go-mot/, $129).

   Each group uses 1 light probe, 2 temperature probes, and 1 motion detector. If
necessary, the instructor can use only one motion detector with the entire class. Regular
bulb and tube thermometers can be used rather than the digital temperature probes. The
students can use a cell phone app for measuring reflectivity rather than a light probe. The
text also includes screen shots of the relevant graphs so that students without access to
digital equipment can still think about the topics addressed. They will miss, however, the
wonderful learning experiences these devises can provide.

       E. Connection to US Next Generation Science Standards

   This course addresses aspects of the following disciplinary core ideas, crosscutting
concepts, and science and engineering practices suggested in the Next Generation Science
Standards (Lead States, 2013) http://www.nextgenscience.org:

   Relevant Disciplinary Core Ideas Addressed

           Physical Sciences:
           PS1A:Structure and Properties of Matter
           PS2A:Forces and Motion
           PS3A:Definitions of Energy
           PS3B:Conservation of Energy and Energy Transfer
           PS4A:Wave Properties
           PS4B:Electromagnetic Radiation

           Earth and Space Sciences:
           ESS1B: Earth and the Solar System

                                                                                                                                                                          Preface | xxi
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           ESS2D: Weather and Climate
           ESS3D: Global Climate Change
   Crosscutting Concepts

           Patterns
           Cause and effect
           Scale proportion and quantity
           Systems and systems models
           Energy and matter, flows, cycles and conservation
           Structure and function
           Stability and change
   Science and Engineering Practices

              Asking questions and defining problems.
           Developing and using models.
           Planning and carrying out investigations.
           Analyzing and interpreting data.
           Using mathematics and computational thinking.
           Constructing explanations and designing solutions.
           Engaging in argument from evidence.
           Obtaining, evaluating and communicating information.
   At the close of each unit, the students write reflections about which of these dimensions
of science learning they have been experiencing and how they might engage their own
students in similar ways.

                           Acknowledgements

   We deeply appreciate the encouragement of Professor Henri Jansen in the design and
implementation of this course when he was chair of the Physics Department. Professor
Kenneth Winegrad, a literacy faculty member in the College of Education, contributed
many helpful insights to our endeavors to integrate science and literacy learning in
this course. This open-source textbook includes work supported earlier by the National
Science Foundation under Grant No. 0633752-DUE, Integrating Physics and Literacy
Learning in a Physics Course for Elementary and Middle School Teachers. Any opinions,

xxii | Preface
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
grantees and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.

   Two papers describe this effort to integrate science and literacy learning in a physics
course for prospective teachers (van Zee, Jansen, Winegrad, Crowl, & Devitt (2013a, b).
Another describes ways we later included global climate change issues (van Zee, Roberts,
& Grobart, 2016). Professor Winegrad and Adam Devitt, a graduate assistant who was
an experienced elementary special education teacher, developed a handout describing
before, during, and after reading strategies for use in the course (Winegrad & Devitt,
2009). Adam also created the before, during, and after design of the Physics Notebook
Page in analogy to those reading strategies. In addition, he documented literacy activities
he initiated in the course (Devitt, 2010). Michele Crowl, a graduate assistant who was a
former science museum educator, invented the friends and family assignments (Crowl,
Devitt, Jansen, van Zee, & Winegrad, 2013). Katie Kizer, an undergraduate peer instructor,
created a website documenting the course at http://sites.science.oregonstate.edu/
physics/coursewikis/ph111/doku81aa.html?id=start .

   Many of the suggested readings were written by teachers participating in NSF No.
MDR-9155726, Investigation of Questioning Processes during Conversations about Science,
Emily H. van Zee, PI, University of California-Berkeley; NSF No. 9986846, Case Studies
of Elementary Student Inquiry in Physical Science, David Hammer, PI; Emily van Zee, co-
PI, University of Maryland College Park; and a series of small grants from the Spencer
Foundation under the Practitioner Research program, including Fostering Teachers'
Inquiries into Science Learning, Emily H. van Zee, PI, University of Maryland, College
Park. Participating teachers included Mary Bell (2006), Claire Bove (2007), Kathleen Hogan
(2007), Christopher Horne (2007), Marletta Iwaysk (1997), Akiko Kurose (2000), Diantha Lay
(2000), Jamie Mikeska (2006), Constance Nissley (2000), Jessica Phelan (2006), Deborah
Roberts (1999, 2000, 2007), Patricia Roy (2006), Dorothy Simpson (1997), and Kathy Swire
(2006).

   With consent forms approved by the Oregon State University Institutional Review Board
(IRB), we ask students for permission to video-record class sessions, to make copies of
student writings and drawings, and to photograph artifacts such as large white boards
that small groups create to present and discuss their findings. Students contributing
their work to this open-source textbook in these and other ways include Nicole Acadio,
Mackenzie Belden, Alexia Berg, Lauren Bickhaus, Rachael Brickson, Lindsay Carlton, Sierra
Christianson, Erica Chelgren, Kirsten Clark, Nina Coleman, Natalia Cox, Maddison Cruz,
Bridget Eby, Colleen Ellis, Kirby Erdman, Judith Ford, Nathalie Gaebe, Emma Grobart,
Jorgan Hanson, Rebecca Huber, Justine Hynes, Tylyn Jones, Mikaela Kerr, Andrea Kenagy,

                                                                                                                                                                        Preface | xxiii
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Camryn Kimberly, Katie Kizer, Alison Latham-Ocampo, Emily Lemons, Jordan McCarty,
Hannah Nealy, Paige Noonan, Natasha Ostertag-Hill, Andie Porta, Kortney Reddick, Zhanè
Richardson, Shanna Roast, Sage Robertson, Kathryn Rodriggs, Erin Ross, Kaila Smith,
Maggie Stewart, Joslyn Strickler, Danielle Taylor, Nathan Tran, Sarah Van Kessel,
Courteney Vogt, Trinity Whitaker, and Stacey Zaback.

   We have been very fortunate to have had excellent mentors and many opportunities
to participate in and/or to learn about research and curriculum development projects
while teaching and learning science with preschoolers, school children, undergraduates,
graduate students, teachers, and the public, inside and outside of formal settings:

   The first author, Emily van Zee, would like to thank Professor Gerald Holton for
introducing her to the community of physicists who care about teaching when she worked
for him as a research and editorial assistant during the early years of Project Physics
(Holton, 2003; Rutherford, Holton, & Watson, 1971). She enjoyed learning not only about
ways to engage students in exploring physical phenomena but also about historical,
philosophical, and cultural aspects of the development of physics principles. The
importance of providing access to such broader views underlies her inclusion of aspects
of these perspectives in this Exploring Physical Phenomena open-source textbook.

   Betty Roald, a talented elementary school teacher, welcomed the first author, as a stay-
at-home Mom, to teach science to wiggly first grade students. The first author remembers
sitting on the floor with the children around her while engaging them in explorations
suggested in a book about how bodies work (Allison, 1976). Similar volunteer experiences
with young children and older scouts in both formal and informal settings prompted
her later support of a graduate assistant's initiative in inventing the friends and family
assignments, now a regular part of our course (Crowl et al., 2013). The first author learned
about the Moon from Leslie DeWater, a talented fifth grade teacher as well as master
teacher in the University of Washington's physics programs for teachers.

   The first author also would like to thank Professor Arnold Arons (1972, 1977) and
Professor Lillian C. McDermott (1993, 2016) for changing the way she teaches. The first
author joined the Physics 101-102, 103 staff at the University of Washington when it was
the setting for the development of the Physics by Inquiry curriculum (McDermott, 1990;
McDermott and the Physics Education Group, 1996; McDermott, Rosenquist, & van Zee,
1983). Earlier, as a new middle school science teacher, the first author had taught students
in the way she had been taught, by telling them what she thought they should know.
Here, however, she learned how to teach in a new way, by moving among small groups of
students sitting at tables as they worked together exploring phenomena. She learned to
listen closely to what the students were saying to one another, to intervene (or not) with a

xxiv | Preface
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

comment or question, and to answer a question with a question designed to help prompt
the next step in thinking.

   Petra Carrera, Rafael Escribano, Gabriel Florentino, Luanna Gomez, KimBerly Petitt, and
Darrell Simms were particularly insightful about their learning processes as students and/
or peer instructors in the Physics 101 series. The first author's experiences in teaching
these courses motivated the inquiry-based pedagogical approach as well as some of the
light, thermal and astronomy activities that she adapted while designing and teaching this
physics course for prospective teachers. Also relevant was the emphasis on documenting
and interpreting student learning, such as ways students used multiple representations,
particularly those involving motion graphs (McDermott, Rosenquist, & van Zee, 1987). In
addition, the first author became aware here of the extensive science curricular resources
developed earlier with NSF support for use with elementary and middle school students
(National Academy of Science, 1996).

   With expert guidance from Professor Lee Beach (1990), the first author undertook
studies of cognition and metacognition, particularly in exploring ways people use
information while making decisions (van Zee, Palunchowski, & Beach, 1992). She also began
studies of the ethnography of communication with Professor Gerry Philipsen (1994) about
ways in which people talk thoughtfully with one another; she was particularly interested in
the role of questioning during such discussions. These studies contributed to her interest
in and awareness of many aspects of discourse that affect how students think and learn.

   The first author enjoyed collaborating with a high school physics teacher, Jim Minstrell,
in documenting and interpreting how he used questioning to guide student thinking (van
Zee & Minstrell, 1997a,b). Her post-doctoral research focused upon An Investigation of
Questioning Processes during a Cognitive Approach to Physics Instruction with support
from the James S. McDonnell Foundation. We found that he asked questions to help
students make their meanings clear, to consider various points of view in a neutral
manner, and to monitor the discussion and their own thinking. He had developed a
computer program, Diagnoser, based on facets of student knowledge that he had
identified through research in his own classroom (Minstrell, 1988, 1992; Minstrell & Hunt,
1990). The students could work through a series of questions to diagnose their current
thinking; then they could take next steps that the Diagnoser suggested based upon their
responses. The diagnostic questions that begin each unit in this Exploring Physical
Phenomena open-source textbook are a similar effort to alert the students and the
instructor to students' initial ideas about a topic, both those useful for building deeper
understandings as well as any needing refinement. The first author's experiences here
deeply influenced her adoption of a positive instructional perspective of helping students

                                                                                                                                                                         Preface | xxv
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

to expand their areas of competence rather than screening student responses for
misconceptions that need to be corrected.

   As an instructor in an innovative combined program for future teachers and future
researchers at the University of California, Berkeley (Lowery, Schoenfeld, & White, 1990),
the first author modeled video recording her own class sessions to gather data for doing
research on one's own teaching practices and students' learning (van Zee, 2000). She
enjoyed learning more about cognitive science along with her students, particularly
through many conversations with Claire Bove, Ming Chiu, Miriam Gamoran, Sean
Hutcherson, Lawrence Muilenburg, Marcelle Siegel, and Erica Street as well as with
teaching colleagues Stan Fukunaga, Don Hubbard, and Dan Zimmerman. She learned
about causal models from Professor Barbara White (1993) and about ways to use
computers as learning partners from Professor Marcia Linn(1991). She also learned from
Professor Andy diSessa (1993) about phenomenological primitives (p-prims), or pieces of
knowledge that students may use in generating responses when asked physics questions.
This perspective contrasts with interpreting students' responses as revealing
misconceptions firmly embedded in students' brains, wrong ideas that need to be elicited,
confronted, and changed. In addition, she learned from Professor Alan Schoenfeld (1992)
about metacognitive processes that help students stay aware of what they are doing and
why. These perspectives underlie this course's emphasis on explorations to expand and
refine the prospective teachers' understandings of physical phenomena.

   With expert mentoring from Professors John Layman, Randy McGinnis, and Jim Fey, the
first author taught courses on methods of teaching science for prospective elementary
and middle school teachers as a faculty member in the Department of Curriculum and
Instruction at the University of Maryland, College Park. She also appreciated the warm
welcome by Professor Joe Redish to activities in the Department of Physics. She noticed a
distinct difference in students who were graduates of Physics 115, a course that served as
one of the development sites for the American Association of Physics Teachers' Powerful
Ideas in Physical Science curriculum (American Association of Physics Teachers, 1995;
Ukens, Hein, Johnson, & Layman, 2004). Rather than being bewildered by her inquiry-
based instructional approach, Physics 115 graduates understood what to do and seemed to
enjoy doing it, modeling for their classmates learning science by working together asking
their own questions and exploring phenomena without detailed step-by-step directions.
The first author enjoyed observing the Physics 115 course occasionally. She chose to adapt
some light and thermal activities from this resource.

   Collaboration with Professor David Hammer and a group of practicing elementary
and middle school teachers broadened the first author's vision of what teaching science

xxvi | Preface
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

through inquiry can mean. Developed under NSF-9986846, Case Studies of Elementary
Student Inquiry in Physical Science included engaging the teachers in learning physics
during the summer as well as in documenting and interpreting their students' science
thinking during the academic year (Hammer & van Zee, 2006). The emphasis was on
recognizing and refining epistemological resources as well as initial science
understandings (Hammer, 2000; Hammer & Elby, 2003). In teaching the physics course
for prospective elementary and middle school teachers and preparing this open-source
textbook, the first author drew on many of these experiences in the context of exploring
light phenomena (van Zee, Hammer, Bell, Roy, & Peter, 2006).

   Participating in the Carnegie Academy for the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning
(Shulman, 2002) increased the first author's proficiency in video recording her own
instructional practices and in writing interpretations of her students' thinking and
learning. She also encouraged her students and graduates of her courses to document
and interpret their own teaching practices and students' thinking and learning (van Zee,
Lay & Roberts, 2003). This emphasis on focused reflection, based on evidence collected in
class, underlies the extensive use of students' writing in preparation of this open source
textbook.

   The first author was invited to design this physics course for prospective elementary
and middle school teachers after retiring from the University of Maryland and moving to
Corvallis, Oregon. She deeply appreciates the welcome by Professors Larry Flick and Larry
Enochs and the opportunity to collaborate with Rebekah Elliot, Nam Hwa Kang, and Janice
Rosenberg in the Department of Science and Mathematics Education at Oregon State
University. She learned a lot about teaching mathematics and using technology during a
series of collaborations with Professor Maggie Niess.

   The first author would like to thank Professor Fred Goldberg for his thoughtful
encouragement as she grew more confident in teaching physics in interactive ways. The
process of developing explanations in Physics and Everyday Thinking (Goldberg, Robinson,
& Otero, 2007; Goldberg, Otero, & Robinson, 2010; Goldberg, Price, Robinson, Boyd-
Harlow, & McKean, 2012) influenced the first author's design of assignments in this course.
In starting to work on a physics problem, for example, students review the conceptual
model they have developed for the relevant physical phenomenon before attending to the
specific information provided. The Physics and Everyday Thinking curriculum's explicit
emphasis on learning about learning as well as learning about physics also influenced
our attention to engaging students in developing pedagogical as well as physical science
understandings as integral to class activities, homework assignments, and examinations.

   The second author, Elizabeth Gire, also enjoyed talking with Professor Goldberg about

                                                                                                                                                                       Preface | xxvii
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

interactive engagement strategies while he was teaching a course for prospective
teachers with the Physics and Everyday Thinking curriculum. In addition, she was
mentored by Charles De Leone in teaching an adaptation of CLASP (Collaborative Learning
through Active Sense-Making in Physics), a course that supports students in building
understanding by making observations, working in small groups to generate ideas,
presenting those ideas to the rest of the class, and whole class discussion of those
ideas (Potter, Webb, Paul, West, Bowen, Weiss, & De Leone, 2014). During that time, she
studied how students' success on physics problems correlated with their use of non-
algebraic representations (graphs, diagrams, etc) to make sense of physical situations
and to communicate their understanding (DeLeone and E. Gire, 2006). Since then, her
teaching and research has focused both on how students engage in physics sensemaking
and how they use different representations to make sense of physical systems (Gire,
Nguyen, & Rebello, 2011; Gire & Price, 2015; Hahn, Emigh, Lenz, & Gire, 2017).

   Now a physics faculty member at Oregon State University, the second author is the
current instructor for our physics course for prospective teachers and has been enriching
this effort to create the Exploring Physical Phenomena open-source textbook. Her
research focuses upon ways in which to engage students in seeking coherence among
different representations of physics knowledge. She and her colleagues are developing
a set of hands-on, discovery-style, discussion-based classroom activities that use dry-
erasable three-dimensional plastic surfaces to represent physical systems that depend on
multiple variables (Gire, 2017; Gire, A. Wangberg & R. Wangberg, 2018).

   The second author also is developing a physics course for majors that explicitly engages
students in developing knowledge of sense-making strategies, metacognitive skills, and
productive beliefs about the nature of doing physics as well as in increasing their
awareness and appreciation of physics sense-making processes (Gire, Emigh, Hahn, and
Lenz, 2018). Her explicit focus on such physics education research contributes to her
positive pedagogical approach in meeting the needs of the prospective elementary and
middle school teachers, many of whom seem to perceive themselves initially as reluctant
science learners. She has introduced circle conversations, for example, in which the small
groups gather to share their findings, sometimes through multiple iterations of thoughtful
discussions, until they come to consensus on their interpretations of what they have
observed.

   Both authors have enjoyed collaborating with Professor Corinne Manogue in the physics
department's on-going research and curriculum development in the context of upper
division courses for physics majors, Paradigms in Physics (Gire, Kustusch, & Manogue,
2012; Gire & Manogue, 2011; Manogue, Cerny, Gire, Mountcastle, Price, & van Zee, 2010;

xxviii | Preface
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Manogue, Gire, & Roundy, 2013; Manogue & Krane, 2003; van Zee & Manogue, 2010, 2018).
These courses are unusual in their organization of the physics content studied as well as in
their use of interactive engagement strategies in class. Although the level of mathematics
and conceptual content in the course for prospective teachers is different, the emphasis
on encouraging students to enjoy learning with and from one another is similar. We both
have grown in pedagogical as well as physics knowledge through our participation in the
Paradigms in Physics program.

   We are deeply grateful to the colleagues who have educated and encouraged us. We
also have greatly appreciated the care and thoughtful assistance from Stefanie Buck,
Dianna Fisher, Kenya Hazell, Baylee Bullock, Derek Ostrom, and Mark Lane of OSU Open
Educational Resources. Our families also have been wonderfully supportive of this
endeavor. However, any errors in these materials are our own. Please email us at
vanzeee@oregonstate.edu and/or giree@oregonstate.edu if you have suggestions for
improving these materials.

                                References

L. Allison, Blood and Guts: A Working Guide to Your Own Insides (Brown Paper School Book
for Young Readers, Little, Brown, Boston, 1976).

   American Association of Physics Teachers. Powerful Ideas in Physical
Science (AAPT,College Park, MD, 1995). https://www.aapt.org/Publications/pips.cfm

   A. Arons, Anatomy of a physical science course for non-science students, Journal of
College Science Teaching, I, 30-34 (April, 1972).

   A. Arons, The Various Language: An Inquiry Approach to the Physical Sciences (Oxford
University Press, New York, 1977).

   L. R. Beach, Image Theory: Decision Making in Personal and Organizational
Contexts (Wiley, Chichester, England, 1990).

   M. Bell, Fifth and sixth graders discuss a dropped pendulum, in Seeing the Science
in Children's Thinking: Case Studies of Student Inquiry in Physical Science, edited by D.
Hammer and E. H. van Zee, (Heinemann, Portsmouth, NH, 2006), pp. 47-70.

   C. Bove, Student teaching as collaboration, in Teacher Research: Stories of Learning and
Growing edited by D. Roberts, C. Bove, and E. H. van Zee (National Science Teachers
Association Press, Arlington, VA, 2007), pp. 72-86.

   M. Crowl, A. Devitt, H. Jansen, E. H. van Zee and K. Winograd, Encouraging prospective

                                                                                                                                                                        Preface | xxix
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

teachers to engage friends and family in exploring physical phenomena, Journal of Science
Teacher Education, 24(1), 93-110 (2013). DOI 10.1007/s10972-012-9310-3

   C. J. DeLeone and E. Gire, Is instructional emphasis on the use of non-mathematical
representation worth the effort? American Institute of Physics Conference Proceedings, 818,
45-48 (2006).

   A. Devitt, Integrating science and literacy with prospective teachers, Master's project.
Oregon State University (2010).

   A. diSessa, Toward an epistemology of physics, Cognition and Instruction 10(2-3),
105-225 (1993).

   E. Gire. Collaborative Research: Raising Physics to the Surface, National Science
FoundationGrant No. 1612480 (2017).

   E. Gire, P. J. Emigh, K.T. Hahn, and M. K. Lenz, Making sense of physics sensemaking,
Forum on Education Newsletter, American Physical Society, 94 (1), 9-11 (Fall, 2018).
https://www.aps.org/units/fed/newsletters/fall2018/making-sense.cfmE

   Gire, M. B. Kustusch, and C. A. Manogue, Supporting and sustaining the holistic
development of students into practicing physicists, 2012 Physics Education Research
Conference, Philadelphia, PA, AIP Conference Proceedings, 1513, 19-22 (2012).

   E. Gire and C. Manogue, Making sense of quantum operators, eigenstates and quantum
measurements, 2011 Physics Education Research Conference, Omaha, NE, AIP Conference
Proceedings, 1413, 195-198 (2011).

   E. Gire, D. H. Nguyen, and N. S. Rebello, Characterizing students' use of graphs in
introductory physics with a graphical analysis epistemic game, Proceedings of the
National Association of Research in Science Teaching 2011 Annual Meeting, Orlando, FL,
(2011).

   E. Gire and E. Price, Structural features of algebraic quantum notations, Physical Review
Special Topics -Physics Education Research, 11, 020109 (2015).

   E. Gire, A. Wangberg, and R. Wangberg, Multiple tools for visualizing equipotential
surfaces: Optimizing for instructional goals, Proceedings of the 2017 Physics Education
Research Conference,Cincinnati, OH, edited by L. Ding, A. Traxler, and Y. Cao,
140-143(2018), doi:10.1119/perc.2017.pr.030.

   F. Goldberg, V. Otero, and S. Robinson, Design principles for effective physics
instruction: A case from Physics and Everyday Thinking, American Journal of Physics 78
(12), 1265-1277 (2010).

   F. Goldberg, E. Price, S. Robinson, D. Boyd-Harlow, and M. McKean, Developing the
learning physical science curriculum: Adapting a small enrollment, laboratory and

xxx | Preface
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

discussion based physical science course for large enrollments, Physical Review Special
Topics -Physics Education Research 8, 010121-1-24 (2012).

   F. Goldberg, S. Robinson, and V. Otero, Physics and Everyday Thinking (It's about Time,
Herff Jones Education Division, Armonk, NY, 2007).

   K. T. Hahn, M. Lenz, P. J. Emigh, and E. Gire. Student sense-making on homework in
a sophomore mechanics course, in Proceedings of the 2017 Physics Education Research
Conference, Cincinnati, OH AIP Conference Proceedings, pp. 160-163, (2018).

   D. Hammer, Student resources for learning introductory physics, Physics Education
Research, American Journal of Physics Supplement 68(7), S52-S59 (July 2000).

   D. Hammer and A. Elby, Tapping students' epistemological resources, Journal of the
Learning Sciences, 12(1), 53-91(2003).

   D. Hammer and E. H. van Zee (Eds.) Seeing the Science in Children's Thinking: Case
Studies of Student Inquiry in Physical Science. (Heinemann, Portsmouth, NH, 2006)

   R. Hawkins, Science beyond labeling, in Inquiring into Inquiry Learning and Teaching in
Science edited by J. Minstrell and E. H. van Zee (American Association for the Advancement
of Science, Washington, D.C, 2000), pp. 169-175. https://www.aaas.org/sites/default/
files/s3fs-public/InquiryPart2.pdf

   K. Hogan, How can playing with a motion detector help children learn to write clear
sequential directions? in Teacher Research: Stories of Learning and Growing edited by D.
Roberts, C. Bove, and E. van Zee, (National Science Teachers Association Press, Arlington,
VA, 2007), pp. 2-9.

   G. Holton, The Project Physics Course, then and now, Science & Education, 12, 779-786
(2003).

   C. Horne, Becoming a teacher researcher: Giving space, finding space, in Teacher
Research: Stories of Learning and Growing, edited by D. Roberts, C. Bove, and E. van Zee,
(National Science Teachers Association Press, Arlington, VA, 2007), pp. 100-109.

   M. Iwasyk, Kids questioning kids: Experts' sharing, Science and Children, 35(1), 42-46
(1997). Also in Inquiring into Inquiry Learning and Teaching in Science edited by J. Minstrell
and E. H. van Zee (American Association for the Advancement of Science, Washington,
D.C, 2000), pp. 130-138. https://www.aaas.org/sites/default/files/s3fs-public/
InquiryPart2.pdf

   A. Kurose, Eyes on science: Asking questions about the moon on the playground, in
class, and at home, in Inquiring into Inquiry Learning and Teaching in Science edited by
J. Minstrell and E. H. van Zee (American Association for the Advancement of Science,
Washington, D.C, 2000),pp. 139-147. https://www.aaas.org/sites/default/files/s3fs-
public/InquiryPart2.pdf

                                                                                                                                                                        Preface | xxxi
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   D. Lay, Science Inquiry Conference -a better way! in Inquiring into Inquiry Learning
and Teaching in Science edited by J. Minstrell and E. H. van Zee (American Association for
the Advancement of Science, Washington, D.C, 2000), pp. 164-168. https://www.aaas.org/
sites/default/files/s3fs-public/InquiryPart2.pdf

   M. Linn, The computer as learning partner: Can computer tools teach science? This Year
in School Science, 31-39 (1991).

   L. Lowery, A. Schoenfeld, and B. White, Master's and Credential in Science and
Mathematics Education (MACSME) Program, (National ScienceFoundation TPE91--50028).
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, 1990).

   C. A. Manogue, L. Cerny, E. Gire, D. B. Mountcastle, E. Price, and E. H. van Zee, Upper-
division activities that foster "Thinking Like a Physicist." AIP Conference Proceedings
1289 (1), 37-40 (2010).

   C. A. Manogue, E. Gire, and D. Roundy, Tangible metaphors. Physics Education Research
Conference, AIP Conference Proceedings, 27-30 (2013).

   C. A. Manogue and K. S. Krane, Paradigms in Physics: Restructuring the upper
level. Physics Today 56 (9), 53-58 (2003). doi: 10.1063/1.1620835

   L. C. McDermott, Millikan Lecture 1990: What we teach and what is learned - Closing
the gap. American Journal of Physics 59 (4), 301 (1991). https://doi.org/10.1119/1.16539

   L. C. McDermott and the Physics Education Group, Physics by Inquiry (John Wily, New
York, 1996).

   L. McDermott, M. L. Rosenquist, and E. H. van Zee, Student difficulties in connecting
graphs and physics: Examples from kinematics. American Journal of Physics 55,
503-513 (1987).

   J. Minstrell, The Diagnoser Project. (http://www.facetinnovations.com/daisy-public-
website/fihome/resources/diagnoser.html; http://www.diagnoser.com).

   J. Minstrell and E. Hunt, The development of a classroom based teaching system
representing students' knowledge structures and their processing of instruction,
Technical report to the James S. McDonnell Foundation. (Mercer Island School District
and University of Washington, Mercer Island, WA, 1990).

   National Academy of Science. Curriculum projects past and present, Chapter 5 in
Resources for Teaching Elementary School Science. (The National Academies Press,
Washington, D.C., 1996), pp. 122-129. https://doi.org/10.17226/4966.

   NGSS Lead States. Next Generation Science Standards: For States, By States. (The
National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2013). https://www.nextgenscience.org

   C. Nissley, Giving children a chance to investigate according to their own interests, in
Inquiring into Inquiry Learning and Teaching in Science edited by J. Minstrell and E. H. van

xxxii | Preface
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Zee (American Association for the Advancement of Science, Washington, D.C, 2000), pp.
151-156. https://www.aaas.org/sites/default/files/s3fs-public/InquiryPart2.pdf

   J. Phelan, Eighth graders discuss the rock cycle, in Seeing the Science in Children's
Thinking: Case Studies of Student Inquiry in Physical Science, edited by D. Hammer and E.
H. van Zee, (Heinemann, Portsmouth, NH, 2006) pp. 96-115.

   G. Philipsen, The ethnography of speaking, in The Encylopedia of Language and
Linguistics, Vol. 3, edited by R. E. Asher and J. M. Y. Simpson (Pergamon, Oxford, 1994) pp.
1156-1160.

   W. Potter, D. Webb, C. Paul, E. West, M. Bowen, B. Weiss, L. Coleman and C. De Leone,
Sixteen years of collaborative learning through active sense-making in physics (CLASP) at
UC Davis, American Journal of Physics 82,153-63 (2014).

   D. Roberts, The sky's the limit: Parents and first-grade students observe the sky, Science
and Children, 37(1), 33-37 (1999).

   D. Roberts, Learning to teach science through inquiry: A new teacher's story, in
Inquiring into Inquiry Learning and Teaching in Science edited by J. Minstrell and E. H. van
Zee (American Association for the Advancement of Science, Washington, D.C., 2000), pp.
120-129. https://www.aaas.org/sites/default/files/s3fs-public/InquiryPart2.pdf

   D. Roberts, Learning about motion: Fun for all!, in Teacher Research: Stories of Learning
and Growing edited by D. Roberts, C. Bove, and E. van Zee, National Science Teachers
Association Press, Arlington, VA, 2007), pp. 124-137.

   S. Robertson, Inquiring into Temperature. (Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, 2007).
   P. Roy, Third graders discuss bubbles, in Seeing the Science in Children's Thinking: Case
Studies of Student Inquiry in Physical Science, edited by D. Hammer and E. H. van Zee,
(Heinemann, Portsmouth, NH, 2006) pp.116-133.
   J. Rutherford, G. Holton, and F. Watson, Project Physics. (Holt, Rinehart & Winston, New
York, 1970).
   A. Schoenfeld, Learning to think mathematically: Problem solving, metacognition, and
sense-making in mathematics, in Handbook for Research on Mathematics Teaching and
Learning edited by D. Grouws (MacMillan, NewYork, 1992), pp. 334-370.
   L. Shulman, Forward. in Ethics of Inquiry: Issues in the Scholarship of Teaching and
Learning edited by Pat Hutchings (The Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of
Teaching, Menlo Park, CA, 2002) pp. v-viii.
   D. Simpson, Collaborative conversations: Strategies for engaging students in productive
dialogues, The Science Teacher, 64(8), 40-43 (1997). Also in Inquiring into Inquiry Learning
and Teaching in Science edited by J. Minstrell and E. H. van Zee (American Association for

                                                                                                                                                                       Preface | xxxiii
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

the Advancement of Science, Washington, D.C, 2000), pp. 176-183. https://www.aaas.org/
sites/default/files/s3fs-public/InquiryPart2.pdf

   K. Swire, Second graders discuss magnets, in Seeing the Science in Children's Thinking:
Case Studies of Student Inquiry in Physical Science, edited by D. Hammer and E. H. van Zee,
(Heinemann, Portsmouth, NH, 2006) pp.134-146.

   L. Ukens, W. W. Hein, P. A. Johnson, and J. W. Layman, Powerful Ideas in Physical Science,
Journal of College Science Teaching, 33(7), 38-41 (2004).

   E. H. van Zee, Analysis of a student-generated inquiry discussion, International Journal
of Science Education, 22, 115-142(2000).

   E. H. van Zee, D. Hammer, M. Bell, P. Roy, and J. Peter, Learning and teaching science
as inquiry: A case study of elementary school teachers' investigations of light, Science
Education, 89(6), 1007-1042 (2005).

   E. H. van Zee, H. Jansen, K.Winograd, M.Crowl, A. Devitt, Fostering scientific thinking by
prospective teachers in a course that integrates physics and literacy learning, Journal of
College Science Teaching, 42(5), 29-35 (2013a).

   E. H. van Zee, H. Jansen, K. Winograd, M. Crowl, and A. Devitt, Integrating physics
and literacy learning in a physics course for prospective elementary and middle school
teachers, Journal of Science Teacher Education, 24(3), 665-691 (2013b). DOI 10.1007/
s10972-012-9323-y

   E. H. van Zee, D. Lay and D. Roberts, Fostering collaborative inquiries by prospective and
practicing elementary and middle school teachers, Science Education, 87, 588-612 (2003).

   E.H. van Zee and C. A. Manogue, Documenting and interpreting ways to engage students
in thinking like a physicist, 2010 Physics Education Research Conference, Portland, OR:
AIP Conference Proceedings, 1289, 61-64 (2010).

   E. H. van Zee and C. A. Manogue, A study of the development of the Paradigms in
Physics Program. (Department of Physics, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR (2018).
http://physics.oregonstate.edu/mathbook/P20/html/

   E. H. van Zee and J. Minstrell, Reflective discourse: Developing shared understandings
in a high school physics classroom, International Journal of Science Education, 19, 209-228
(1997a)

   E. H.van Zee and J. Minstrell, Using questioning to guide student thinking, The Journal of
the Learning Sciences, 6, 229-271 (1997b).

   E. H. van Zee, T. F.Paluchowski, and L. R. Beach, The effects of screening and task
partitioning upon evaluations of decision options, Journal of Behavioral Decision Making,
5, 1-19(1992). Reprinted in Beach, L.R. (Ed.) (1998). Image Theory: Theoretical and Empirical
Foundations (Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ, 1998), pp. 61-72.

xxxiv | Preface
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   E. H. van Zee, D. Roberts, and E. Grobart, Ways to include global climate change in
courses for prospective teachers, Journal of College Science Teaching, 45(3), 28-33(2016).

   B. White, Thinker tools: Causal models, conceptual change, and science education,
Cognition and Instruction, 10 (1), 1-100 (1993).

   K. Winegrad and A. Devitt, Suggested reading strategies. Oregon State University
(2009).

                                                                                                                                                                        Preface | xxxv
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

About the Authors

Emily van Zee
                                        Emily van Zee is a retired associate professor of science

                                     education at Oregon State University. She designed and taught
                                     this physics course for prospective elementary and middle
                                     school teachers. She also taught graduate courses in science
                                     education. Her research has included documenting and
                                     interpreting ways to engage students in "thinking like a
                                     physicist." She also has explored student and teacher
                                     questioning during conversations about science in pre-college
classrooms. In addition, she has collaborated with K-12 teachers interested in inquiring
into their own teaching practices and students' learning. She can be reached at vanzeee at
oregonstate.edu.

   Elizabeth Gire
                                  Elizabeth Gire is an associate professor of physics at Oregon

                               State University. She is the current instructor of this physics course
                               for prospective elementary and middle school teachers. She also
                               teaches physics courses for majors. Her research focuses upon
                               ways in which to engage students in seeking coherence among
                               different representations of physics knowledge. She also has
                               designed and taught a course that explicitly engages students in
                               developing knowledge of sense-making strategies, metacognitive
                               skills, and productive beliefs about the nature of doing physics as
well as in increasing their awareness and appreciation of physics sense-making processes.
She can be reached at giree at oregonstate.edu.

xxxvi | About the Authors
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

About This Book

This course is intended for prospective and practicing elementary and middle school
teachers. By exploring physical phenomena in class, you will learn science in ways in
which you are expected to teach science in schools or in informal settings such as
afterschool programs, youth group meetings, and museum workshops. This course also is
appropriate for general science students and others interested in exploring some of the
physical phenomena underlying global climate change.

                                                                                                                                                         About This Book | xxxvii
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

xxxviii | About This Book
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

UNIT 1: EXPLORING THE NATURE
OF LIGHT PHENOMENA

Exploring Physical Phenomena: What happens when light from the Sun shines on the Earth?

                             Table of Content

     I. Introduction ................................................................................................................................9
        II. Identifying Student Resources ........................................................................................ 12
              A. Learning about ways to foster science learning ................................................ 12
                     Question 1.1 What have you learned about light at some time in your life,
                 inside or outside of school, during an experience when you enjoyed the learning
                 process? ............................................................................................................................ 12
                    1. An example of student work identifying resources for science learning
                   ............................................................................................................................................ 13
              B. Documenting initial ideas about light phenomena ............................................ 16
                     Question 1.2 What do you already know about how you see a basketball? . 16
        III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence ............................................................ 18
              A. Documenting your explorations ............................................................................. 18
              B. Exploring the nature of light phenomena ............................................................24
                     Question 1.3 What happens when light from a source shines on a screen? 24
                     Question 1.4 What happens when you place a barrier between a lamp and a
                 screen? .............................................................................................................................26
                     Question 1.5 How does light seem to travel from a source to a screen? ....... 27
                     Question 1.6 How many shadows can you see when looking at a light source,
                 barrier and screen? ........................................................................................................29
                     Question 1.7 What can you find out about light and shadows with a lamp,
                 barrier, and screen? ...................................................................................................... 30
                    1. Example of student work summarizing a series of explorations of light
                 phenomena ......................................................................................................................0

                                                                                                                   Unit 1: Exploring the Nature of Light Phenomena | 1
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                     Question 1.8 What happens when exploring light and shadows with a friend
                 or family member ..........................................................................................................34

                    2. Examples of students' explorations of light and shadows with friends
                 and/or family members ..............................................................................................34
        IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanation for Intriguing Phenomena ...... 40
              A. Exploring pinhole phenomena ................................................................................ 41

                     Question 1.9 What happens when light passes through a tiny pinhole and
                 shines on a screen? ........................................................................................................ 41

                    1. Example of student work about exploring pinhole phenomena ..............42
              B. Explaining pinhole phenomena ...............................................................................44

                     Question 1.10 Why are you seeing what you are seeing when looking at a
                 bright bulb through a pinhole camera in a dark room? ........................................44

                    1. Student's example explanation of pinhole phenomena ..............................46
                    2. Some nuances in representing and explaining pinhole phenomena ...... 47
              C. Exploring a critical issue ...........................................................................................49

                          Question 1.11 How does someone see this projection on the screen? ....49
                    1. Example of student work about how one sees the projection on the
                 screen ............................................................................................................................. 50
              D. Exploring variables affecting pinhole phenomena .............................................52
                     Question 1.12 What variables affect what one is seeing on the screen? .......52
                    1. Example of student work about variables that affect pinhole
                 phenomena .....................................................................................................................53
              E. Exploring pinhole phenomena with friends and/or family members ..........54
                     Question 1.13 What happens when exploring pinhole phenomena with a
                 friend or family member? ............................................................................................54
                    1. Examples of student explorations of pinhole phenomena with friends
                 and/or family members .............................................................................................55
        V. Developing Mathematical Representations of Pinhole Phenomena ......................58
              A. Representing pinhole phenomena geometrically ...............................................58
                     Question 1.14 How can you describe pinhole phenomena geometrically? ...58
                    1. Example of student work representing pinhole phenomena
                 geometrically ..................................................................................................................62
                    2. Some nuances in representing pinhole phenomena geometrically .......63
              B. Representing pinhole phenomena algebraically .................................................65
                     Question 1.15 How can you represent pinhole phenomena algebraically? .65

2 | Unit 1: Exploring the Nature of Light Phenomena
                     This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           1. Example of student work representing pinhole phenomena algebraically
          ............................................................................................................................................ 67
           2. Nuances in representing pinhole phenomena algebraically .................... 67
VI. Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate an Interesting Quantity ...... 73
     A. Using pinhole phenomena to estimate the diameter of the Sun .................... 73

            Question 1.16 How can you use pinhole phenomena to estimate the diameter
        of the Sun? ....................................................................................................................... 73

           1. Example of student work in estimating the diameter of the Sun ........... 75
           2. Some nuances in using mathematical representations of pinhole
        phenomena ................................................................................................................... 80
           3. Using pinhole phenomena to estimate the Sun's diameter with friends
        and/or family members ..............................................................................................83
            Question 1.17 What happens when estimating the diameter of the Sun with
        a friend or family member? .........................................................................................83
           4. Some thoughts about the nature of science in this context ...................84
VII. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence ......................................86
     A. Exploring reflection phenomena ............................................................................86
            Question 1.18 What happens when light shines upon a smooth surface? ....86
            Question 1.19 What happens when light shines on a rough surface? ...........89
           1. Example of student work about reflection phenomena ........................... 90
           2. Some nuances in explaining reflection phenomena ...................................92
            Question 1.20 How well do different materials reflect light? .........................94
           3. Example of student work about the property of reflectivity ................. 96
           4. Some nuances about exploring the property of reflectivity .................... 97
     B. Exploring refraction phenomena ..............................................................................0
            Question 1.21 What happens when light travels from one medium into
        another medium, such as from air into water or from water into air? ...........98
           1. Example of student work about exploring refraction phenomena ...... 102
           2. Nuances about exploring refraction phenomena ...................................... 104
            Question 1.22 What happens when exploring refraction with friends or
        family members? ..........................................................................................................109
           3. Exploring refraction phenomena with a friend and/or family member
          ..........................................................................................................................................109
           4. Thoughts about the nature of science exemplified by these explorations
          ............................................................................................................................................111
     C. Exploring dispersion phenomena .......................................................................... 112

                                                                                                     Unit 1: Exploring the Nature of Light Phenomena | 3
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                     Question 1.23 What happens when light from the Sun passes from air into a
                 prism or water droplet? ............................................................................................. 112

                    1. Example of student work about exploring dispersion phenomena ........ 113
                    2. Nuances about exploring dispersion phenomena ...................................... 114
        VIII. Using Additional Central Ideas about Light to Explain an Intriguing
     Phenomenon ................................................................................................................................. 117
                     Question 1.24 How are rainbows formed? .......................................................... 117
                    1. Example of student work explaining rainbows ............................................118
                    2. Nuances in using centrall ideas about reflection, refraction, and
                 dispersion to explain rainbows ................................................................................ 120
        IX. Historical and Current Perspectives on the Nature of Light ............................... 125
                    1. Historical interpretations of the spectrum of colors dispersed by a prism
                   .......................................................................................................................................... 125
        X. Making Connections to Educational Policies ............................................................ 132
                     Question 1.25 What are the current standards for teaching science at
                 various grade levels in your community? ............................................................. 132
               A. Learning about the US Next Generation Science Standards: Science and
           engineering practices .......................................................................................................... 132
                    1. Example of student work about relevant educational policies ............... 135
               B. Reflecting upon this exploration of light phenomena ..................................... 132
               C. Making connections to NGSS understandings about the nature of
           science ................................................................................................................................... 132
         XI. Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit
     1 ....................................................................................................................................................... 140

                                  Figures

          FIG. 1.1 A small group's drawings of enjoyable experiences learning about light. .. 14
          FIG. 1.2 List of ways to foster science learning identified by physics students. ..... 15
          FIG. 1.3a Front of physics notebook page with explanations.........................................0
          FIG. 1.3b Back of physics notebook page with explanations..........................................0
          FIG. 1.4 Physics notebook page template (front and back).............................................0
          FIG. 1.5 Predict what you will see when turning on a clear light bulb near a
         screen..........................................................................................................................................25

4 | Unit 1: Exploring the Nature of Light Phenomena
                     This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

FIG. 1.6 Predict what you will see when placing a barrier in front of the screen. .. 27
FIG. 1.7 A straight stick can provide a physical model for how light travels. ...........28
FIG. 1.8 Two kinds of shadows are formed when a barrier is placed between light
and screen................................................................................................................................. 30
FIG. 1.9 Table summarizing a student's explorations of light and shadows in class
and at home.................................................................................................................................0
FIG. 1.10 Child's drawing of tree with sun and flowers....................................................0
FIG. 1.11 Looking at a light bulb through a pinhole camera. .........................................42
FIG. 1.12 What one sees when looking at a light bulb through a pinhole camera. .43
FIG. 1.13 Student's sketch of exploring pinhole phenomena........................................43
FIG. 1.14 Student's ray diagram representing the explanation of pinhole
phenomena. ...............................................................................................................................46
FIG. 1.15 Ray diagram for pinhole camera including light getting to viewer's
eyes. ............................................................................................................................................. 51
FIG. 1.16 Student's table of variables in exploring pinhole phenomena. ...................53
FIG. 1.14 (repeated) Student's ray diagram representing explanation of pinhole
phenomena. ...............................................................................................................................59
FIG. 1.17 Stylized ray diagram representing pinhole phenomena. ................................0
FIG. 1.18 Triangles ACB and FCE.......................................................................................... 61
FIG. 1.19 Student's ray diagram showing corresponding congruent angles.............62
FIG. 1.20 Ray diagram representing pinhole phenomena with labeled vertices.... 66
FIG. 1.21 Using pinhole phenomena to estimate the diameter of the Sun..................0
FIG. 1.22 Sketch of estimating the sun's diameter with pinhole phenomena. ......... 76
FIG. 1.23 Ray diagram and mathematics used to estimate the diameter of the
Sun. .............................................................................................................................................. 77
FIG. 1.24 Student's report of the status of variables in estimated of the diameter of
the Sun........................................................................................................................................ 79
FIG. 1.25 Ray diagram representing pinhole phenomena with an object very far
away. ............................................................................................................................................ 81
FIG. 1.26 Who can see the light from the flashlight in the mirror?............................ 87
FIG. 1.27 Student's entry about reflection in table 1.1..................................................... 91
FIG. 1.28 Angles defined with respect to a normal line rather than to the
mirror. .........................................................................................................................................92
FIG. 1.29 Light rays reflecting in different directions from bumps in a rough
surface. .........................................................................................................................................0
FIG. 1.30 A ball rebounding from a surface. .....................................................................94

                                                                                                     Unit 1: Exploring the Nature of Light Phenomena | 5
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

          FIG. 1.31 Using a light probe connected to a computer to compare the reflectivity
         of various materials. ................................................................................................................95
          FIG. 1.32 Student graph from exploring reflectivity of various materials................. 97
          FIG. 1.33 An observer's eye is just below the point where the person can see the
         dot in the cup..............................................................................................................................0
          FIG. 1.34 Pencil appearing bent in a glass of water...........................................................0
          FIG. 1.35 Student's entry in a table about explorations of light phenomena,
         including refraction...............................................................................................................103
          FIG. 1.36 Diagram of the dot in a cup with and without water as seen by an
         observer. .......................................................................................................................................0
          FIG. 1.37 Light rays bouncing in many directions off the real dot in the water. .......0
          FIG. 1.38 Dashed line representing a ruler modeling the apparent straight path
         that light rays are traveling from the apparent dot to the eye.......................................0
          FIG. 1.39 Dashed and solid lines representing apparent and actual paths for light
         rays traveling from the apparent and real dots to the eye..............................................0
          FIG. 1.40 Ray of light bouncing off the tip of pencil and bending at the surface on
         way to eye. ...................................................................................................................................0
          FIG. 1.41 Where should you aim when spear fishing? ......................................................0
          FIG. 1.42 Student's entry in a table about exploring dispersion phenomena. ........ 113
          FIG. 1.43 Dispersion of white light into its spectrum of colors. ....................................0
          FIG. 1.44 Sun, person, cloud, and rain when a person is seeing a rainbow. ............118
          FIG. 1.45 Ray diagram for two raindrops and person seeing a rainbow. ..................119
          FIG. 1.46 White light ray from the sun refracts as it enters a raindrop. .....................0
          FIG. 1.47 Light ray of a particular color is reflected at the smooth inner surface of
         the raindrop.................................................................................................................................0
          FIG. 1.48 Light ray of a particular color is refracted again as it moves from water to
         air. ..................................................................................................................................................0
          FIG. 1.49 Red and violet rays as seen from different drops. ...........................................0
          FIG. 1.50 Seeing different colors from different raindrops. ...........................................0
          FIG. 1.51 Excerpt from Newton (1671/72) showing white light (SF) dispersed by
         prism (ABC) into rays that are converged by lens (mn) back into white light on a
         piece of paper (HI) at Q (p. 3086). .......................................................................................127
          FIG. 1.52 Example of waves formed by rain falling in a puddle of water. ....................0
          FIG. 1.53 Primary colors of the spectrum of light from the Sun as represented by
         waves with different wavelengths. ....................................................................................130
          FIG. 1.54 Wave diagram showing wave length and amplitude. ......................................0

6 | Unit 1: Exploring the Nature of Light Phenomena
                     This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

FIG. 1.55 Student's response indicating use of science and engineering practices in
this unit..................................................................................................................................... 135

                             Tables

TABLE 1.1 Explorations of light phenomena.......................................................................0
TABLE 1.1 Explorations of light phenomena (continued) ............................................. 50
TABLE 1.2 Variables in exploration of pinhole phenomena..........................................52
TABLE 1.1 Explorations of light phenomena (continued) ................................................0
TABLE 1.1 Explorations of light phenomena (continued) ............................................ 102
TABLE 1.1 Explorations of light phenomena (continued) ............................................. 113
TABLE 1.4 Science and engineering practices (NGSS Lead States, 2013) ............... 134

                                                                                                     Unit 1: Exploring the Nature of Light Phenomena | 7
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

8 | Unit 1: Exploring the Nature of Light Phenomena
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

I. Introduction

   This course is intended for prospective and practicing elementary and middle school
teachers. By exploring physical phenomena in class, you will learn science in ways in
which you are expected to teach science in schools or in informal settings such as
afterschool programs, youth group meetings, and museum workshops. This course also is
appropriate for general science students and others interested in exploring some of the
physical phenomena underlying global climate change.

   The theme for the course is: What happens when light from the Sun shines on the Earth?
The emphasis is on questioning, predicting, exploring, observing, discussing, reading, and
writing about what one thinks and why. This first unit focuses on exploring the nature of
light phenomena. Among the unit's many goals are two primary ones: to learn about light
phenomena and to learn about ways to foster science learning for yourself and others
such as your family, friends, and students.

     What does it mean to "explore the nature of light phenomena"? You will be:

  · identifying resources such as positive experiences you already have had in learning
      about light and

  · developing central ideas based on evidence that you record while exploring everyday
      phenomena such as light and shadows.

By central ideas, we mean understandings about physical phenomena that emerge from
your discussions with your group members as well as with the instructor. These also are
powerful ideas because they form conceptual models useful in:

  · explaining an intriguing phenomenon such as what happens when you look through
      a pinhole camera, something most find surprising, yet even children can understand.

After developing conceptual understandings of the relevant physics principles, you will be:

  · developing mathematical representations of this phenomenon and using these when
  · estimating a quantity of interest, such as the diameter of the Sun.

                                                                                                                                                                  I. Introduction | 9
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Throughout the course you will be reflecting upon ways that are helping you learn
science. In reflecting upon this learning process, you will be:

  · making connections to educational policy, such as the Next Generation Science
      Standards (NGSS Lead States, 2013). This document has been adopted by many
      departments of education as the science standards for grades K-12 in the United
      States.

   Other light phenomena that you will be exploring during this unit include reflection,
refraction, and dispersion. You will develop additional central ideas based upon these
explorations; then use this expanded conceptual model for light to explain another
intriguing but more complex phenomenon: rainbows.

   Because K-8 curricula emphasize learning to read and write well, this course also
models ways to integrate science and literacy learning. By literacy learning, we mean
learning to speak clearly, listen closely, write coherently, read with comprehension, and
create and critique media.

   The main sections present questions with suggestions for exploring topics and for
writing reflections about your findings. The text in gray font indicates that these are
suggestions; you may think of better ways to explore the topic. You are encouraged to
ask and explore your own questions about light phenomena as well as those posed here.
Check with your instructor if you choose to devise an alternative approach.

   Keeping track of what one is doing and thinking is important. This course uses a
physics notebook page that can organize how you record your notes during class. This
physics notebook page can help you remember your thoughts before, during, and after
an exploration. An experienced elementary teacher, Adam Devittt, designed this physics
notebook page to mirror the structure of before, during, and after reading strategies:

   Before starting your exploration, think about and discuss with your group members
what you know already about this topic, how you plan to conduct the exploration, and
what you think you might find out.

   During your exploration, record what is happening, what you are observing, and what
you are thinking about what you are observing. Include sketches of equipment and
observations. Note any words that are new and their definitions.

   After your exploration, record any central ideas that have emerged from your
observations and discussions. Also note the evidence on which you have based these ideas.
State explicitly how the evidence is relevant and supports the claims you are making in
stating the central ideas. Also explain why this result is important. Then write a reflection

10 | I. Introduction
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

about whatever you want to remember about this experience. In addition, briefly state
what you are still wondering in this context.

   After class, use your physics notebook pages and any handouts to write a summary of
your exploration and findings. Writing such a summary after every class is a good way to
prepare for the midterm and final examinations.

   Next, to be sure you have understood the physics involved, read this text and some
examples of student work. The student authors first wrote drafts, received feedback for
ways to enhance content and clarity, and submitted these final versions. Also read about
some nuances to consider when explaining the phenomena explored.

   You may also find helpful student reflections about teaching a friend or family member
about what they had just learned in class, historical information about ways knowledge
about the topic developed, and some relevant aspects of the nature of science in the
context of the topic explored. These sections of the text may broaden your understanding
of science and of science learning and teaching.

                                                                                                                                                                  I. Introduction | 11
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

II. Identifying Student Resources

   What do you already know about light? When did you learn this? Where were you? With
whom? Why were you interested? How did this learning occur? These prior experiences
in learning about light provide resources upon which you can draw in learning more about
light in this course.

   These "question words" -What? When? Where? Who? Why? and How? - represent an
important aspect of science for which you are already expert in everyday life: asking
questions. In this unit, you will explore questions that you and others generate about
science learning in general and also about learning about light.

A. Learning about ways to foster science learning

Here is the first question:

Question 1.1 What have you learned about light at some time in your life, inside or outside
           of school, during an experience when you enjoyed the learning process?

          Equipment for each small group: Use a piece of chart paper, magic markers (all colors), and some masking
       tape if there is room on a nearby wall to display your work.

  · What did you learn about light? How did you learn this? With whom were you
      learning? Where were you doing this learning? When did this happen? Why were you
      enjoying this learning process?

     Think about what you may have learned about light in a science class at school but
     also consider what you learned outside of school by playing with flashlights, looking in
     mirrors, swimming, wearing glasses, painting, seeing rainbows, sitting by campfires,
     growing plants, noticing the moon, watching a sunset, looking up at the stars...

12 | II. Identifying Student Resources
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

     If you are working with a group, share some of these learning experiences with one
     another.

  · Choose one of these positive science learning experiences on which to focus. Draw a
      picture of yourself learning about light while enjoying the process. This course
      models integrating art and science so make a large vivid, colorful picture that will
      interest others.

  · Note the age you were when you were learning this.
  · While drawing a picture of yourself learning about light, think about why this

      experience had `worked' for you. What had helped you learn about light in this
      instance?
  · Add to your drawing words or phrases that convey some of the ways that this
      experience had helped you learn about light.
  · If you are working with others, introduce yourselves by describing your positive
      experiences learning about light, the ages you were when you had these experiences,
      and some of the ways that these experiences had fostered your science learning.
  · Based upon the evidence provided by this process, make a list of ways to help
      someone learn science in the context of learning about light.
  · Make a claim about one way to foster such science learning. Support your claim with
      evidence drawn from the positive science learning experiences you and others
      reported.

After completing your exploration of ways to foster such science learning, look at an
example of student work to see how others have thought about this process.

1. An example of student work identifying resources for fostering science learning

   On the first day of class, for example, physics students in this course reflected upon
their experiences in learning about light at some time in their lives, inside or outside
of school, when they learned some science and enjoyed the process. Figure 1.1 shows
some examples of positive science learning experiences that members of one group
remembered and represented with drawings of ways in which they had learned about
light.

                                                                                                                                        II. Identifying Student Resources | 13
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                 FIG 1.1 A small group's drawings of enjoyable experiences learning about light.

A student wrote about looking up at the stars, "didn't understand why sometimes you
would see a bunch of stars and other times you wouldn't...Remember being amazed when
learning about them because they feel so close but are actually far away." Another student
wrote, "Exciting to see rainbow colors in my hand and not in the sky!...I thought it was
crazy that these bright colors were coming from glass."

   This array of experiences, drawn from multiple individuals, provides evidence upon
which one can base claims. As shown in Fig. 1.2, students identified the following ways
that had fostered their science learning: learning hands-on, access to books/resources,
support from families, education, use of the environment: outdoor, camps, OMSI (Oregon
Museum of Science and Industry), going to museums/planetarium, visual experiences,
doing experiments, and asking questions.

14 | II. Identifying Student Resources
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                              FIG. 1.2 List of ways to foster science learning identified by
                              physics students.

This list is an example of findings from a qualitative study. The students based these
findings on analyzing data that consisted of self-reported experiences by multiple
individuals. The list forms an initial framework for thinking about ways to foster science
learning. These ways "worked" for the individuals who generated the list and may help
others learn science too.

   The following is an example of a student making a claim and beginning to construct
an argument to support that claim with evidence drawn from an array of personal
experiences:

              Claim: The use of the environment is an important aspect that fosters science
           learning.

              Evidence: During the summertime I used to lay on a sleeping bag in my backyard

                                                                                                                                        II. Identifying Student Resources | 15
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           with my dad and we would watch the sky. I would spot stars, planets, the moon, and
           airplanes flying by. Observing my environment made me more aware and it got me
           to ask my dad questions about what was happening around us. Science is all around
           us, and using natural examples makes learning more exciting and more memorable.

                                                                                     Physics student, Spring 2015
This student began supporting her claim with an example drawn from a personal
experience involving her home and family. Additional examples could strengthen this
claim. Including group member's experiences of seeing rainbows, for example, could add
support to this claim by illustrating other environmental contexts within which positive
science learning occurred.

   Your responses to Question 1.1. recorded some of what you already know about light
and what you already know about ways to foster science learning. Next you will be
documenting what you already know about the specific aspects of light that you are about
to explore.

B. Documenting initial ideas about light phenomena

   Question 1.2 is called a Diagnostic Question (DQ). Your response to a Diagnostic
Question documents what you already know about a particular topic. Your response will
not be graded.

      Question 1.2 What do you already know about looking at something like a ball?

          Equipment: Place a ball near a lamp without a shade in a dark room.

  · Find a ball or another object and place it near a lamp without a shade in a dark room
      so that you can see it well.

  · How can you see the ball?
  · How could someone on the other side of the room see the ball?
  · Explain with words and a sketch

16 | II. Identifying Student Resources
                            This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                        Diagnostic Questions: Science & Science Learning
How would you define a "scientific explanation"?

How would you define "inquiry approaches to learning and teaching"?

To what extent are you interested in learning science?

Not interested in  1  2  3  4  5                        Interested in
                                                        learning science
learning science

Comment:

To what extent are you interested in teaching science?

Not interested in  1  2  3  4  5                        Interested in
                                                        teaching science
teaching science

Comment:

Later in the course, you will respond to the same questions again. Hopefully you will know
more! Then you can compare your initial and current knowledge about this topic and
reflect upon what has been fostering your science learning in the context of this course.

                                                        II. Identifying Student Resources | 17
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

III. Developing Central Ideas Based on
Evidence

   In this section, you will be developing some central ideas about the nature of light
by playing with light and shadows. Keeping track of what you are doing and thinking is
important.

A. Documenting your explorations

One way to document what you are doing and thinking is to write an on-going record in
a science notebook. The physics notebook page shown in Figures 1.3 and 1.4, for example,
can help you remember your thoughts before, during, and after an exploration. First view
the front of the physics notebook page:

           Topic: What are you exploring?
           Before column. Before starting your exploration, discuss with your group
members what you already know about this topic, what ideas you have, what questions
you are asking, how you plan to conduct the exploration, and what you think you might
find out. Record these briefly in the "Before" column along with any relevant drawings.
           During column. During your exploration, record what is happening and what
you are thinking about what you are observing. Include sketches of equipment and
observations. Indicate whether you confirm or disconfirm your predictions and what
these findings suggest for next steps.
           Vocabulary. Note any words that are new and their definitions.
Then view the back of the physics notebook page:
           After: Central Ideas. After your exploration, record any central ideas that have
emerged from your observations and discussions.

18 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           After: Evidence. Also note the relevant evidence on which you have based these
ideas.

           After: Rationale. State explicitly how the evidence is relevant and supports the
claim you are making in stating the central ideas. Also note why this result is important.

           After: Reflection. Then write a reflection about whatever you want to remember
about this experience - perhaps what you have done and learned, how you learned this,
and what implications this experience might have for teaching this topic in your own
classroom...

           After: Wonderings. In addition, briefly state what you are still wondering at this
point.

   Adam Devitt designed these notebook pages when he was assisting in this course.
He was a special education elementary school teacher enrolled in a graduate program
in science education. He based his design of these physics notebook pages on "before,
during, and after" reading strategies that enhance literacy learning. Some of the entries
have been slightly modified.

                                                                                                                   III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 19
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

20 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                           This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

FIG. 1.3 Front and back of physics notebook page with explanations

                                                                                                             III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 21
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

22 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

FIG. 1.4 Physics notebook pages template

                                          III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 23
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

B. Exploring the nature of light phenomena

Asking questions is an important aspect of doing science. Question 1.3 is a "what
happens..." question:

        Question 1.3 What happens when light from a source shines on a screen?

  Equipment: a light source in a dark room; a screen such as a large white board covered
                                            with a piece of chart paper

  · Find a dark room in which to explore the nature of light such as a room with no
      windows or a room with windows that have dark shades to keep out daylight.
           For a vertical screen, use a plain white wall or make one by taping a piece of chart
           paper on a whiteboard or large piece of cardboard that you can lean against a
           stool or box on a table.
           For a light source, use a lamp without a shade, that has a clear unfrosted
           incandescent bulb or a frosted bulb with LEDs.*

   (*Look at the inside of the incandescent bulb. The narrow wire inside the bulb is called its filament. The
filament is made out of a metal that glows when electricity flows through the lamp. LEDs (light emitting
diodes) emit light by a different process that requires much less energy. LEDs have been marketed in a
frosted bulb to imitate light from incandescent bulbs.)

  · Place the lamp near the screen. Figure 1.5 illustrates the set-up.

24 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                                 FIG. 1.5 Predict what you will
                                                 see when turning on a clear
                                                 light bulb near a screen.

  · What will you see on the screen?
  · Talk with your group members about what you think and why you think that.
  · Begin to keep track of what you are doing: At the top of your physics notebook page,

      record the Topic of this exploration.
  · Under Before, draw a picture of the set up. What do you predict will happen? Why do

      you predict this will happen?
  · Turn on the light bulb in the dark room: what do you see on the screen?
  · Under the During section of your physics notebook page, record what you see and

      interpret these results.
  · Discuss your findings and formulate a relevant central idea. In the After section of

      the physics notebook page, report this idea and the evidence on which it is based.
  · Use this physics notebook page and additional pages as needed to keep track of what

      you are doing and thinking during a series of related explorations.
In summarizing this exploration, a student noted, for example:

           The demonstration started with a vertical light bulb being placed in front of a white
           piece of paper. We made predictions about what we thought would happen when the

                                                                                                                  III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 25
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           light was turned on in a dark room and I thought that the light would make a circle
           on the white paper, which gets dimmer as the circle gets bigger.
   Some students predict that they would see light in the shape of the filament on the
screen. A student reported:
           When a lamp is turned on in a dark room, light from the lamp shines on a screen.
           If the light source is a clear incandescent bulb, the light on the screen is not limited
           to the shape of the filament. The area of the screen directly in front of the lamp may
           appear brighter than areas of the screen farther away from the lamp, but all of the
           screen is lit. In addition, light from the lamp shines on the ceiling and the other walls
           of the room, as well as on the faces of those looking at the lamp and screen.
   This suggests a central idea, that light leaves a source in all directions. A student may
note, however, that light leaves lasers in a particular direction. A further refinement
involves pondering the use of all, whether one can be sure that light leaves a source
in every direction. This suggests that light leaves most light sources in many directions.
   Have you ever used your fingers to make shadow shapes when playing with a flashlight
in a dark room? Question 1.4 poses another "what happens?" question.

Question 1.4 What happens when you place a barrier between a lamp and screen?

   Equipment: Find a barrier of some kind to add to your set up. This can be a card or a
              book that can stand up on its edge or even just fingers on your hand.

  · Predict what you will see when you place the barrier between the lamp and screen as
      shown in Fig. 1.6.

26 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
   This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   FIG. 1.6 Predict what you will
   see when placing a barrier in
   front of the screen.

  · Place a barrier between a lamp and a screen: What do you see on the screen?
  · Try a variety of ways of placing the barrier with respect to the lamp and screen.

      Making different shadows with a barrier can be a lot of fun! What do you observe?

   Another kind of question asks "how" something is happening:

Question 1.5 How does light seem to travel from a source to a screen?

A meter stick or yard stick is a useful tool to explore how light travels from one place to
another:

·  Use a straight stick such as a meter stick or yard stick to explore how light gets from the lamp past

   the barrier to the edge of a shadow on the screen.

  · Keep talking and refining ideas until your group and the other groups reach a
      consensus on several central ideas about light and shadows based on this
      exploration.

For example, here is what one student reported seeing:

                                                                                                                   III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 27
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           We had a white piece of paper against the wall with the bottom of the paper touching
           the table. There was a light bulb set up to shine light toward the paper. There was
           a wooden block set up in front of the white paper and when the light bulb shined
           upon the block, the light was obstructed and as a result a shadow of the block was
           produced on the screen.
           We placed one end of a meter stick on the side of the light bulb; then we placed the
           meter stick against the edge of the wooden block and finally placed the opposite end
           of the meter stick against the white paper.
           We observed that the edge of the shadow, the edge of the wooden block, and the side
           of the light source all lined up in a straight line.
   This suggests that light can be envisioned as rays traveling in straight lines.
   Figure 1.7 shows an example of using a straight stick as a physical model for how light
can be envisioned as rays traveling in a straight line from a light source past the edge of a
barrier to the edge of a shadow on a screen.

                                            FIG. 1.7 A straight stick can provide a
                                            physical model for how light travels.

Looking closely at a lamp and barrier setup suggests Question 1.6, a "how many?" question:

28 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Question 1.6 How many shadows are there when a light source shines on a barrier and
screen?

  · Look at both sides of the barrier as well as at the screen.

  · Keep talking and refining ideas until your group and the other groups reach a
      consensus about how many shadows there are when a light source shines on a
      barrier in front of a screen.

     Here is what one student reported:
              The first shadow that I observed was one on the white piece of paper. When an

           object was placed in front of a white piece of paper with a light shining on it, the
           object's shadow was seen on the nearby piece of paper. The second shadow that I
           observed was on the back side of the object. The back side of the object...was dark and
           had a shadow on itself.

                                                                                     Physics Student, Spring 2016
   This suggests another central idea about light and shadow phenomena as shown in Fig
1.8: There are two kinds of shadows: An object blocks light a) from shining on a nearby
surface (ground, table, wall, screen) and b) from shining on the back side of the object itself.
   A student supported this idea as follows:

              An argument based on evidence to support this idea is that a shadow was seen on
           the piece of paper, which is the object blocking light from hitting the nearby surface,
           and a shadow was seen on the back side of the object which was the object blocking
           light from hitting the backside of itself, which shows that there are two different
           kinds of shadows created by an object.

                                                                                     Physics Student, Spring 2016

                                                                                                                  III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 29
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                      FIG. 1.8 Two kinds of shadows are formed
                                      when a barrier is placed between a light
                                      source and screen

   Question 1.7 introduces an open-ended question that invites you to explore additional
light and shadow phenomena by yourself, with a small group of colleagues, and/or with
friends and family members:

Question 1.7 What can you find out about light and shadows with a lamp, barrier, and
screen?

                Equipment: Play with lamp, barrier, and screen to find out what else you can learn about light and
                                                                             shadows.

  · Describe your explorations, evidence from your observations, central ideas about
      light and shadows that you infer from these explorations, the argument that
      supports those ideas and any relevant vocabulary.

  · Reflect upon what you have learned and what you are still wondering.
  · Write a summary of the central ideas based on evidence that emerged from the small

      group conversations and whole group discussion.

30 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

A useful way to organize outcomes from a series of explorations is to summarize them in
a table as in Table I.1.

                                                                                                                   III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 31
                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                TABLE I.1 Explorations of light phenomena

                TABLE I.1 Explorations of light phenomena

Description of  Evidence                                 Central Ideas                   Vocabulary
 Exploration    Observed

                                                      Light leaves most
                                                      sources in many
                                                      directions

                                                      Light can be
                                                      envisioned as rays
                                                      traveling in straight
                                                      lines

                                                      There are two kinds
                                                      of shadows:
                                                      An object blocks light

                                                      a) from shining on a
                                                      nearby surface
                                                      (ground, table, wall,
                                                      screen...) and

                                                      b) from shining on the
                                                      back side of object
                                                      itself

                                                      *

                                                      *

32 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                       TABLE I.1 Explorations of light phenomena

                                                                       *

* Central idea(s) about light and shadows developed during exploration with group members and/or friend/
family

   During class, some groups decide to explore what happens when they move the barrier
closer or farther from the light source. Others choose to move the light source. A whole
group discussion of their findings suggests another central idea:

   Changing the position of the barrier with respect to the lamp and/or the screen,
changes the size, shape, and sharpness of the shadow on the screen.

   This completes our initial exploration of the nature of light phenomena. Based on the
evidence from your observations, summarize the central ideas that you have inferred
about:

  · How does light leave most light sources?
  · How can light be envisioned as traveling from one place to another?
  · What kinds of shadows form when light shines on an object?
  · What influences the size, shape, and sharpness of a shadow on a screen?
These ideas form a conceptual model that you can use to explain interesting phenomena
you observe during additional explorations.
After summarizing your explorations in class, enjoy some students' reflections on teaching
friends and children about light and shadows.

                                                                                                                  III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 33
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Question 1.8 What happens when exploring light and shadows with a friend or family
member?

1. Examples of students' explorations of light and shadows with friends and/or
family members.

A student reported:

           During this exploration my friend and I began by discussing the previous ideas.
           When talking about light and shadows, we began to talk about how when we were
           younger we could use light to create shadow puppets with our hands. We decided
           to get out a lamp, turn the lights off, and use the light to create shadows onto the
           ceiling. During this exploration we noticed how the closer our hands were to the
           light source the shadow of our hand on the ceiling was bigger, and when we moved
           our hands further from the light source our shadows would become smaller and
           more defined. During this exploration I learned that as the one teaching the concepts
           and ideas I can also be learning and exploring with my students, the activities can
           be guided by both the student and the teacher experiences.

                                                                                     Physics Student, Spring 2016
   Another observed the following when exploring shadows with a friend:

           When exploring shadows, my friend and I took a particular interest in the effects of
           having more than one light source when facing the barrier. Introducing a new light
           source from a new position in the room changes both the area and the position of the
           shadow that the barrier is making, depending on which way it is facing.

                                                                                          Physics Student, Fall 2015
   One student chose to explore all of the set of central ideas we had developed in class
with three children whom she babysat. This was more than expected but a delightful
example of a prospective elementary school teacher gaining experience teaching what she
had just learned herself in class. She chose to use the initial version of the first central idea
with these young children. Her verbatim quotes provide an excellent window into what
preschool and elementary age children know, think, and wonder about light:

           While working on this project I enlisted the help of three girls that I babysit. The ages
           of these girls are as follows: Lucie-7, Ava-4, Ruby-4. The names of these girls have

34 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                         This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

     been changed for the purpose of this assignment and for other assignments in future.
     I had the girls explore with light and used their own words and findings to help them
     understand more about how and why light works.

- Light leaves a source in all directions.
        For this idea the girls and I went to a room where I could close the door and there

     were no windows. I then placed a lamp with no lamp shade in the center of the room
     on a table and had each girl sit on her own bed in the room. I turned off the room
     light and asked the girls what they noticed about the light.

     Lucie: "The light shines up and down, up towards the ceiling and down towards the
     ground so we can see both."

     Ava: "The light in the center is brighter than the top and bottom"

     Me: "what do you mean by that Ava?"

     Ava: "The light in the middle of the light bulb is brighter than it is on the ceiling or
     the floor or the walls."

     Me: So where is the light shining?

     Ruby: "Everywhere."

     Me: Everywhere?

     A: Well everywhere in the room its shining.

     Me: Where is the light shining from. Does it start at the walls and move in, is it just
     here, does it have a place where it starts?"

     Lucie: "The light is coming from the light on the lamp. And it shines in all of the
     room"

     So our evidence that the light leaves a source in all directions was as follows:

     -Light could be seen in all corners of the room.

     -Light could be seen on the floor and ceiling of the room.

     -The light came from the lamp (source) and then filled the room in all areas.

                                                                                                          III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 35
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

     - Light can be envisioned as rays traveling in straight lines
              For this idea the girls and I went outside the house to where a light post was

           shining light onto a wall of the barn and onto the ground. We then examined our
           shadows to see what we could find out about how light works. The following are
           observations made by the girls that allowed us to make connections to the idea that
           light can be envisioned as rays traveling in straight lines. They will be serving as
           evidence for this idea

           -"When an object blocks the light it casts a shadow."

           -"Even if we move or change our spots in the light, our shadows always fall the same
           way. So the light is traveling in only that one way."

           -"If we stand outside the light and look we can see the edges of where the light shines
           because the light stand tunnels -focuses- the light into one spot, like a flashlight.

           -When one girl stood in the light I handed a long yard stick to the other girls and
           asked them to make a series of lines from different positions ie. make a line with
           the yard stick from Lucie's hand to the same spot on Shadow Lucie's hand. The girls
           did so many times and ultimately decided that since the shadows blocked light in a
           straight line, that the light must be going in a straight line as well.

     -For someone to see something, light has to travel to the person's eyes.

                 For the purpose of our project it is important to note that I changed the order
           in which these experiments took place. I first worked with the girls on the idea for
           someone to see something, light has to travel to the person's eyes. We then explored
           light bounces off of objects such as someone's nose in many different directions.

           For this experiment I had the girls return to the room in which we found out that
           light leaves a source in all directions. In this room I changed the lights multiple times
           and asked the girls questions; while doing so I had the girls also switch between
           covering and closing their eyes and opening their eyes. The following are a list of
           what was changed and what the girls' answers were.

           -Lucie covers and closes her eyes, but Ava and Ruby do not. I ask "who can see me?
           Raise your hand" Lucie is the only girl who does not raise her hand. I ask her: "why

36 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                         This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

     couldn't you see me?" Lucie responds that she couldn't see me because she "can't see
     with her eyes closed."

     -Next, I had all three girls cover their eyes and asked if they could see me, the lights
     were on at this time. All three girls reported they could not see me.

     - I then turned off the lights and had all three girls open their eyes and asked if they
     could see me. All three girls reported that no, they could not see me. When asked why
     Ava responded " it's too dark to see you."

     -I then turned on the light and asked the girls if they could see me with their eyes
     opened. All three girls said yes. When I asked them what they thought their eyes
     needed to see they responded "Light!" When I asked if they only needed to open their
     eyes to see they said "No, because we opened our eyes with no lights on and couldn't
     see." So I asked them again what was needed in order for eyes to see, the girls told me
     you must open your eyes and also have the lights on which means that our eyes need
     light to see.

- Light bounces off of objects such as someone's nose in many different directions.

            Since the girls had already made the connection that light is needed to see, and
     that it must travel to their eyes to see, this project was fairly easy. I turned off the
     light in the room and shined a flash light at one object at a time and asked questions
     as to what the girls saw. I then turned on the light and asked more questions to the
     girls. The following serves as our evidence for this idea.

     - When the light is shined on one object such as Lucie's teddy bear the girls could all
     see it. When I asked why that was the girls said " because our eyes can only see what
     the light sends back to us, we can only see what is in the light, because our eyes need
     light to see."

     -I then turned on the light and asked what the girls could see, they said "everything."
     When I asked why that was they said it was "because the lights are on." I asked if this
     meant the light was traveling to their eyes like earlier and they said "Yes!"

     -I then pointed to my nose and asked everyone who could see it to raise their hand.
     All three girls raised their hand.

     -I asked the girls how they could see my nose and they said because the light was on

                                                                                                          III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 37
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           it and coming back to their eyes. I asked how each girl could see it from where they
           were standing. Can the light reach all of those spots or does the light only bounce off
           of something in one direction?

           After some thought and deliberation as well as Lucie shining a flashlight at my nose,
           the girls came to a conclusion. In order for all of them to see my nose in different
           spots, my nose must be bouncing back light to all of their eyes. This means that light
           bounces off of objects in many different directions.

     -Two kinds of shadows

                 For this part of the experiment I had the girls return outside to the light post. I
           then asked a series of questions about shadows, as well as where shadows could be
           seen. The following is what was discovered and decided upon as evidence.

           Me: What is a shadow?

           Lucie: "A shadow is where something blocks the light from traveling any farther and
           reflects the light only backwards."

           Me: What does a shadow look like?

           Ava: " Shadows are darker than the parts where the light shines through. You can't
           see them as much."

           -I then stood with my back to the light so my back would be lit up and my front would
           be shadowed. In front of me a shadow was cast on the ground. I asked the girls to
           come touch where they saw a shadow. All three touched the shadow on the ground.

           - I then asked the girls again what shadows look like and the same answer was given.
           So I asked the girls to look for any other areas on me or near me that looked like
           a shadow. After some deliberation and much circling Ava exclaimed "Your face and
           Belly are dark, they don't have light!" I asked if this counted as a shadow, Ava said
           "Yes." The other two girls were unconvinced. So I asked Ava if she could explain what
           she had found.

           -Ava explained that "(her) back is blocking the light from reaching to her front. A
           shadow is when something blocks the light and doesn't let it go forwards. So (her)
           front is in shadow cause the light can't reach there!"

38 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           -The girls then decided that in fact there were two kinds of shadows, one on the
           ground and one on the back of the object casting the shadow.

                                                                                         Physics Student, Fall, 2015
The students generate many ideas about light and shadows through such conversations,
often exploring well beyond what they might have undertaken if simply given a set
of directions in class. Also teaching in a non-threatening environment with friends or
family members can enhance a prospective teacher's confidence. As one student reflected,
"During this experience I learned that teaching science is not as scary as I initially thought."

                                                                                                                  III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 39
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop an
Explanation for Intriguing Phenomena

     So far we have developed two central ideas based on evidence about the nature of
     light:
      Light leaves most sources in many directions.
      Light can be envisioned as rays traveling in straight lines.
These ideas form an initial conceptual model of light. These are ideas that most people find
easy to understand; they even are evident in the art of young children, who typically draw
a sun as a circle with straight rays streaming out from the circle. Figure 1.10 is an example.

                  FIG. 1.10 Child's drawing with with rays from the Sun.

40 | IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanation for Intriguing Phenomena
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

You can use these two central ideas to explain intriguing phenomena such as what
happens when light passes through a tiny pinhole.

A. Exploring pinhole phenomena

   Question 1.9 What happens when light passes through a tiny pinhole and shines on a
                                             screen?

   There are many ways to explore what happens when light passes through a tiny pinhole.
One way involves making a pinhole camera with materials typically available at home. This
is called a camera but no photograph is made as no film is used in this exploration.

    Equipment for each student: a toilet paper or paper towel roll, square piece of wax
 paper, square piece of aluminum foil, two rubber bands. Equipment for each small group:
 a push pin. A meter stick (or yard stick) and ruler also will be helpful in developing an
 explanation of what one sees when looking through such a pinhole camera at a bright
 light bulb in a dark room.

    In a remote learning situation, students might have access to a paper cup or a
 cardboard box with a open end such as a snack box whose bottom can be made light
 tight with duct tape. Possible substitutions for the wax paper include a translucent
 cereal box liner or plastic vegetable bag from a grocery store to cover the open end. A
 chocolate bar liner might be a source of aluminum foil if a student has an empty paper
 roll with both open ends.

        A student described making such a pinhole camera as follows:

           First I laid the wax paper over one opening of the toilet paper roll and snuggly
           wrapped the edges down and secured the wax paper with a rubber band. I then laid
           the aluminum foil on the other end of the toilet paper roll and secured the edges of
           the aluminum foil with a rubber band. I took a push pin and made a single hole in
           the middle of the aluminum foil. I held the camera up so that the light from the light
           bulb on the table could shine through the pinhole in the aluminum foil and the wax
           paper faced me.

                                                                                     Physics student, Spring 2016

                                                                           IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanation for Intriguing Phenomena | 41
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

  · Make a pinhole camera as described above.
  · When you look through a pinhole camera at a bright light bulb in a dark room, what

      do you think you will see on the wax paper screen? Record your prediction and your
      reasoning in the Before section of your physics notebook page.
  · After making a pinhole camera, darken the room and turn on a light bulb without a
      shade. Look at the light bulb through the pinhole camera. Hold the camera away
      from your face and point the aluminum foil end at the bulb as shown in Fig. 1.11. Move
      your hand around until you clearly see something on the wax paper screen. You may
      need to move closer or farther from the lamp.
  · Also move your head from side to side while holding the camera steady. Does this
      change what you see on the wax paper screen? If so, how?

                                      FIG. 1.11 Looking at a light bulb through a
                                      pinhole camera made out of a paper towel roll.

  · Record what you are doing in the During section of your notebook page in both
      words and a sketch of the set up. Include a sketch of what you are seeing on the wax
      paper screen.

  · Complete your entry on your physics notebook page before reading an example of
      student work about exploring pinhole phenomena.

1. Example of student work about exploring pinhole phenomena

   Figure 1.12 shows what one sees when looking at a bright light bulb through a pinhole
camera in a dark room.

42 | IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanation for Intriguing Phenomena
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                 FIG 1.12 What one sees when looking at a light bulb through a pinhole camera.

A student described the surprising effect visible on the wax paper screen:, "On the wax
paper, I observed the projection of the light bulb but it looked like it was upside down!"
The student drew the sketch in Figure 1.13 to represent the set up and what was visible on
the wax paper screen.

                                FIG. 1.13 Student's sketch of exploring pinhole
                                phenomena.

Sketches are free form. This student wanted to show both the pinhole in the aluminum
foil at one end of the roll and the upside down projection of the light bulb on the wax
paper screen at the other end of the roll and so has shown both ends of the roll, although
one would not see that in a 3-dimenional view. Labels include the light bulb, identified as
the light source, the pinhole, foil and rubber bands holding the foil in place on one end of
the paper roll, the wax paper screen on the other end of the paper roll, and the upside

                                                                           IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanation for Intriguing Phenomena | 43
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

down image of the light bulb.

B. Explaining pinhole phenomena

After observing what is happening... and how something is happening, one likely will be
asking a why question such as Question 1.10:

 Question 1.10 Why are you seeing what you are seeing when looking at a bright light bulb
                          through a pinhole camera in a dark room?

  · Discuss with your group members some possible explanations for what you are
      seeing on the wax paper screen.

  · Sketching what is happening can help suggest and evaluate ideas. Get a large white
      board or piece of chart paper and work together to sketch the ideas you have
      generated.

  · Every so often step back and ask yourselves:*
          What you are doing?
          Why are you doing that?
          How is that helping you?

(*Alan Schoenfeld (1992) suggests this questioning sequence to help people help themselves stay aware of
whether what they are doing is likely to be useful in solving a complex mathematics problem.)

  · Draw the light bulb and its projection (what you are seeing on the wax paper screen).
  · Omit drawing the camera itself; just draw the light bulb and its projection roughly

      parallel to each other and some distance apart.
  · How can you use your conceptual model of light (the two central ideas developed so

      far) to explain why you are seeing what you are seeing on the wax paper screen?

           How, for example, are light rays leaving the light source? Draw some rays.
           How are some of these rays traveling from the light bulb to its projection on the
           screen?

44 | IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanation for Intriguing Phenomena
                            This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

· How can you use your physical model of light rays (meter stick or yard stick) traveling
   from one place to another to think about how light is getting from the top of the
   light bulb to where the top of the projected bulb is on the wax paper screen?

· Use your physical model of light rays to draw multiple rays traveling from various
   parts of the light source to where you are envisioning that they land on the screen to
   form the projection of the light bulb you are seeing.

        In particular, draw rays leaving the top of the light bulb, the middle of the light
        bulb, and the bottom of the light bulb and traveling through the pinhole to form
        the projection of the bulb on the wax paper screen.

· Where is the pinhole located through which you are envisioning the light rays
   traveling from the source to the screen?

        Represent the pinhole with an open circle and add the rest of the pinhole camera
        to your sketch.

· Do not erase the sketch that you have been drawing. This likely is quite messy.
   Admire it as a document representing some of your thought processes in developing
   this explanation of why you are seeing what you are seeing when light from a source
   passes through a pinhole to a screen.

· A careful drawing with straight lines showing how one is envisioning light rays
   traveling from one place to another is called a ray diagram.

        On a new large white board or piece of chart paper, draw a careful ray diagram of
        this situation by using the meter stick to draw straight lines representing how you
        are inferring light rays leave the light bulb, travel through a tiny pinhole, and form
        a projection of the light bulb on the wax paper screen.

· In the "After" section of your physics notebook page, draw a careful ray diagram by
   using a ruler to draw straight lines to represent what happens when light passes
   through a tiny pinhole and shines on a screen.

· Also record new central ideas, the evidence that supports these claims, and a

                                                                       IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanation for Intriguing Phenomena | 45
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

      rationale that explains clearly why this happens.
  · Also write a reflection about what you have learned.
  · What are you still wondering?
Complete your entries on your physics notebook page before reading a student's example
response and some nuances about exploring, representing, and explaining pinhole
phenomena.

1. Student's example explanation of pinhole phenomena

     In (Question 1.3 and 1.5), we discussed how light goes everywhere and that light rays
     travel in straight lines. With these ideas in mind, we inferred that all of the light rays that
     travel through the pinhole are traveling in straight lines. Because not all of these lines
     can travel straight forward, some of the lines end up traveling diagonally. As a result,
     the top of the light bulb gives off light rays that travel diagonally straight so that they
     travel through the pinhole and this diagonal line ends up projecting onto the bottom of
     the screen of the wax paper as shown by the blue line in (Fig. 1.14).

                                   FIG. 1.14 Student's ray diagram representing
                                   explanation of pinhole phenomena.

        The light rays from the center of the light bulb travel straight forward through the
     pinhole and project the image of the center of the light bulb on the screen of wax paper.

        The orange line in Fig. (1.14) shows that the light rays given off of the bottom of the light

46 | IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanation for Intriguing Phenomena
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

     source travel in a straight line that is diagonal and projects onto the top of the screen of
     wax paper.

        There are many light rays given off of the light bulb between the top and the bottom
     that all travel through the pinhole and project the image of the light bulb to appear
     upside down on the screen of wax paper.

                                                                                     Physics student, Spring 2016

The separate discussion of rays from the top, middle, and bottom of the light source is
helpful when explaining pinhole phenomena. Also helpful is tracing each line with one's
finger while discussing each ray if one is talking about the ray diagram with someone just
learning about these phenomena.

2. Some nuances in representing and explaining pinhole phenomena

   Note that in the ray diagram in Fig. 1.14, the student has represented the pinhole as
an open circle, where the lines representing the top, middle, and bottom light rays cross
in the diagram. A filled-in circle would not be appropriate in a ray diagram representing
pinhole phenomena because this would represent a solid barrier through which light rays
could not pass. The student also used a ruler when representing light rays traveling in
straight lines and put arrows on the lines to indicate the direction that the student was
envisioning the light rays to be traveling.

   Also note that in Fig. 1.14 the student has drawn some short rays that are leaving the top
of bulb but are not heading toward the pinhole. This represents a further refinement of
the first central idea about how light leaves a source.

   Children's drawings of the Sun typically show rays leaving the Sun in many directions
as in Fig. 1.10. Each ray, however, seems to leave a point on the source in only one
direction, straight outward. Such single rays are arrayed around the circle representing
the Sun. This conception of how light leaves a source prompts an issue in explaining
pinhole phenomena: if rays only leave in a perpendicular direction from a source, how
can any rays from near the top of the bulb be traveling at an angle, diagonally downward,
toward the pinhole?

   One way to address this issue is to cover the light bulb with aluminum foil or a dark
cloth so that light only shines out from a hole near the top of the bulb. Does light shine
from the hole only in one direction perpendicular to the surface there? Or are the ceiling,
floor, walls of the room and people's faces still lit, at least dimly? If so, this suggests

                                                                           IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanation for Intriguing Phenomena | 47
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

an additional refinement to the first central idea: light leaves a point on most sources
in many directions. This is an example of an aspect of the nature of science articulated
in the US Next Generation Science Standards that science is open to revision in light of
new evidence (NGSS, Lead States, 2013, Appendix H, https://www.nextgenscience.org/
resources/ngss-appendices ).

   The student who drew Fig. 1.14 seems to be grappling with this issue in the language
used: the top of the light bulb gives off light rays that travel diagonally straight so that they
travel through the pinhole. This student's language also illustrates a nuance that sometimes
confuses students: the meaning of the word straight. For some people, straight only means
horizontal rather than the more general meaning of without any bends. This student
invented the phrases straight forward to mean traveling horizontally without bends, as in
the center gray rays, and diagonally straight to mean traveling at an angle without bends,
as in the top blue rays and the bottom orange rays. Such elaboration is not required in this
course; simply discussing light as envisioned as rays traveling in straight lines is sufficient.

   It is important to realize that nothing happens within the pinhole. This explanation
envisions the light rays as simply passing through the pinhole in a straight line on their
way to where they are going, some light rays from the top of the bulb traveling straight
through the pinhole to near the bottom of the screen, some light rays from the middle of
the bulb traveling straight through the pinhole to near the middle of the screen, and some
light rays from the bottom of the bulb traveling straight through the pinhole to near the
top of the screen. The light rays are envisioned as simply passing through the pinhole on
their way to separate places on the screen.

   Sometimes students use the word flipped to refer to the upside down projection that
they see on the screen. This word is not appropriate here, however, because it suggests
that something happened to the rays to cause a flip but nothing happens to flip the rays
that form the projection. The rays forming the upside down projection are envisioned as
simply continuing to travel in straight lines from the source through the pinhole toward
the screen. One can see the upside down bulb because the aluminum foil blocks other rays
from traveling to the screen.

   A confusion also can occur over the use of the word projection. Does the phrase top of
the projection refer to what one sees near the top of the screen (which is the projection
of the bottom of the bulb) OR does the phrase top of the projection refer to the projection
of the top of the bulb (which occurs near the bottom of the screen)? To avoid confusion,
it is important to use the cumbersome but clear phrase "where these light rays form the
projection of the top of the bulb near the bottom of the screen." The word projection

48 | IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanation for Intriguing Phenomena
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

is preferred over the word image here as the word image in physics typically refers to
different light phenomena involving mirrors and lenses.

   Like adults, children typically are surprised and intrigued by seeing an upside down light
bulb when they look through a pinhole camera. As indicated by their drawings of the sun,
children already know the key idea for understanding pinhole phenomena, that light can
be envisioned as rays traveling in straight lines.

   When discussing pinhole phenomena, with both children and adults, it is helpful to use
a finger to trace the line on a ray diagram while discussing how rays from a particular part
of the source are traveling:

   Some light rays from the top of the light bulb are traveling straight through the pinhole
to form the projection of the top of the light bulb near the bottom of the screen,

   Some light rays from the middle of the light bulb are traveling straight through the
pinhole to form the projection of the middle of the light bulb near the middle of the
screen,

   Some light rays from the bottom of the light bulb are traveling straight through the
pinhole to form the projection of the bottom of the light bulb near the top of the screen
and

   Some light rays from all up and down the light bulb are traveling straight through the
pinhole to form the rest of that upside down projection of the light bulb on the screen.

C. Exploring a critical issue

   Missing from the discussion so far is a critical issue, how is information about what is
happening getting to an observer?

              Question 1.11 How does someone see this projection on the screen?

  · Look again at what you see when looking at a bright light bulb through a pinhole
      camera.

  · Hold the camera steady while moving your head from side to side. Does your view of
      the projection change? If so, how? What does this imply about how light travels
      through translucent materials such as the wax paper screen?

  · Also consider what has to happen for someone to see something: How did the light

                                                                           IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanation for Intriguing Phenomena | 49
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   rays get from the projection on the wax paper screen to your eye?
· Where on your ray diagram would you represent your eye looking at the projection

   on the screen?
· How would you represent on the ray diagram what is happening when you see the

   projection on the screen?

Complete your entry on your physics notebook page and Table 1 (continued). Then write a
summary of what you have learned before reading example student work explaining how
one sees pinhole phenomena.

                TABLE I.1 Explorations of light phenomena (continued)

                TABLE I.1 Explorations of light phenomena (continued)

Description of  Evidence Observed  Central Ideas                         Vocabulary
 Exploration

                                     Light rays emerge                   translucent
                                      from translucent
                                   material (such as wax
                                       paper) in many
                                    different directions

                                    For someone to see
                                   something, light has
                                   to get to the person's

                                              eyes.

1. Example of student work about how one sees the projection on the screen

   A student reported, "I was still able to see the projection on the wax paper when I would
move my head from side to side" and offered an explanation "We are able to see the image
even when we move our head because the light rays travel in many directions as they emerge
from the translucent wax paper so some of them still travel to our eyes."

   This student was invoking two additional central ideas developed in class:

50 | IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanation for Intriguing Phenomena
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Light rays emerge from translucent material (such as wax paper) in many different
directions. Some of those directions are toward the eye.
For someone to see something, light has to get to the person's eye.
The student added an eye to the ray diagram, with straight lines from the projection to the
eye to represent light leaving the projection and traveling to her eye as shown in Fig. 1.15.

                      FIG. 1.15. Ray diagram for pinhole camera that includes light getting
                      to viewer's eye.

The student explained the complete ray diagram as follows:
           The orange line represents light rays traveling from the bottom of the light bulb
           through the pinhole to the top of the screen and then some of the rays travel in a
           straight line to the eyeball.
           The middle grey line represents the light rays that travel from the center of the light
           bulb through the pinhole, creating the image of the middle of the bulb on the screen,
           then some travel to the eyeball.
           The blue line represents the light rays that travel straight from the top of the light
           bulb diagonally down through the pinhole and then project the image of the top of
           the light bulb onto the bottom of the screen of wax paper. Some of the blue rays then
           travel ...to the eyeball.

The notes added near the top and bottom on the right side of this diagram illustrate the
confusion of the meaning of the word projection - does this refer to what one is seeing?
(bottom of the bulb near the top of the screen) or to the entity itself ( the top of the
projection refers to what is at the top of the screen)? In this course, avoid the phrases

                                                                           IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanation for Intriguing Phenomena | 51
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

"bottom of projection" and "top of projection" and use instead the clear phrase "where
these light rays form the upside down projection of the top of the bulb near the bottom of
the screen."

D. Exploring variables affecting pinhole phenomena

Another type of question focuses upon identifying what is important to notice in a
situation:

Question 1.12 What variables affect what one is seeing on the screen?

· Discuss with your group members ways you can change the pinhole camera you
   made and ways that you are using it.

· Also consider making new ones such as comparing what happens when one uses an
   empty toilet paper roll, paper towel roll, or holiday wrapping paper roll.

· Another possibility is to make an "open" pinhole device without an enclosing body.
   Make a pinhole holder by cutting out an area within a piece of cardboard, taping a
   "cover" of Aluminum foil over the area, and poking a hole in the Al foil. Make a firm
   screen by taping a piece of copy paper to a piece of cardboard the same size. Then
   hold the pinhole holder in one hand and the firm screen in the other hand in front of
   a lamp without a shade until you see the upside down projection. Then observe how
   the projection changes as you change how you hold the pinhole holder and screen
   with respect to the lamp.

· Explore and report on some of these possibilities in Table I.2

TABLE I.2 Variables in exploration of pinhole phenomena

Variable                                                                         Observation

52 | IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanation for Intriguing Phenomena
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

  · In the "After" section of your physics notebook page, record two new central ideas,
      the evidence that supports these claims, and a rationale that explains how the
      evidence supports the ideas and why these are important.

  · Also write a reflection about what you have learned.
  · What are you still wondering?

     Complete your entry on your physics notebook page and write a summary of what
     you have learned before reading examples of student work of exploring variables that
     affect pinhole phenomena

1. Example of student work about variables that affect pinhole phenomena.

   How big is the projection? How bright is it? How sharp is it? How many projections does
one see? Do distance from the light source, length of the roll, size of the pinhole, shape of
the light fixture, or number of pinholes matter? As shown in Fig. 1.16, a student included
the following variables in reporting findings: distance from light, multiple pinholes, size of
camera roll, larger pinhole, and light fixtures of different shapes:

                          FIG. 1.16 Student's table of variables in exploring pinhole
                          phenomena.

           This student then described these findings using "projected image" rather than
           the more technically preferred "projection." The multiple examples illustrate well,
           however, the many ways even young students can enjoy exploring pinhole
           phenomena:

              When the distance between the camera and the light bulb increases, the projected
           image of the light bulb on the wax paper screen becomes smaller. When there are
           multiple pinholes in the aluminum foil, there will be multiple projected images of

                                                                           IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanation for Intriguing Phenomena | 53
         This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

    light bulbs on the screen of wax paper. When the length of the paper roll of the
    camera increases, the projected image of the light bulb gets larger. When the pinhole
    is made into a larger hole, the image becomes larger and fuzzier, it is more difficult
    to tell if the image is still upside down or not.

       When the camera is used to view light bulbs of different shapes, the projected
    image of the light bulb on the wax paper screen will change with the light fixture.
    For example, in class we looked at a light bulb that was similar to a tear drop shape
    and our projected image looked similar to an upside down teardrop. When I used the
    camera on a spherical light fixture, the projected image looked like an upside down
    circle. Some other questions that I have is: is this how our pupils work? How did
    people discover the pinhole phenomena?

                                                                              Physics Student, Spring 2016

In this course, we are not exploring what happens within the eye, just getting light
to the eye. If you are wondering what happens next, after the light enters the eye,
consult a book or internet website about how eyes work such as https://nei.nih.gov/kids/
about_the_eye .

The eye's pupil acts like a pinhole with a variable diameter that controls how much

light enters the eye. The projections on the retina are upside down and are turned

`right side up' by your brain. Some additional information about how the eye works

is  at:  http://www.mind.ilstu.edu/curriculum/vision_science_intro/

vision_science_intro.php

Some historical information about pinhole cameras is at https://jongrepstad.com/
pinhole-photography/pinhole-photography-history-images-cameras-formulas/

E. Exploring pinhole phenomena with friends and/or family
members

  Question 1.13 What happens when exploring pinhole phenomena with a friend or family
                                             member

  · Continue exploring pinhole phenomena outside of class with a friend or family

54 | IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanation for Intriguing Phenomena
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

      member.
  · Complete your entry on your physics notebook page and write a summary of what

      you have learned before reading examples of student work exploring pinhole
      phenomena with friends and/or family members .

1. Examples of student explorations of pinhole phenomena with friends and/or
family

     A student explored pinhole phenomena with a cousin:
              I showed the pinhole phenomena with my 15 year old cousin. Before seeing the

           projection he guessed that the projection on the wax paper would be the shape of the
           pinhole. When he saw the projection his exact words were "what the fudge?"

              It took Z. a moment to realize what he saw was an upside down light bulb. When
           asked why he thought the projection was upside down he said "I have no idea.... I
           don't even know how it is projecting the stupid light bulb!"

              I then asked Z. what he knew about light; after some discussion he and I came to
           the conclusion that light travels in all directions and that light travels in straight
           lines called rays.

              I asked Z. to draw on a whiteboard a representation of what he saw, much like
           what I myself did in class with my group. Z. did so, and I then asked him to use a
           ruler and his pen to draw rays leaving the light bulb. At first Z. drew only light rays
           leaving in vertical and horizontal lines. I then asked Z. to tell me again how light
           travels. Z. said that it travels in all directions in straight lines. I asked him to show
           me lines that traveled in all directions, so Z. drew more lines leaving the bulb in all
           directions much like the lines above.

              I then posed the question to Z. of how light was getting through the tube and onto
           the screen. Something seemed to click with Z. then because he erased his original
           drawing and drew a new bulb with about 10 rays some of which went through the
           pinhole and onto the screen. He then told me that since the rays that he drew at
           the top of the bulb "would continue traveling on their downward path and would be
           projected onto the bottom of the screen. The lights from the bottom of my bulb will
           travel towards the top and be projected there. Is that right?"

              I was honestly amazed at how quickly he picked up on the information. I told him

                                                                           IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanation for Intriguing Phenomena | 55
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           he was right and showed him my own ray diagram and he said that it made sense.
           He then helped me find ways to alter the experiment, which are shown in table 2.

              From my experience working with and teaching Z. I realized how frustrating it
           can be to work with older students. I do not mean for this to sound bad, because in
           some ways it was refreshing to work with an older student. Yet, as I worked with Z.
           I found that I am so accustomed to working with younger children, these children
           need a certain amount of guidance, more so than he did. Z. did need my help to
           understand but much of what he was able to figure out on his own was frustrating
           and interesting to me. His mind works so quickly and he needed only a slight push
           in the right direction to understand. Knowing this it was hard to hold my tongue
           and not explain everything to him before allowing his mind to make the connections
           first.

                                                                                          Physics student, Fall 2015
        Another student chose to explore pinhole phenomena with a roommate:

              I explored pinhole cameras with one of my roommates. I began by asking her what
           she knew about light (such as the direction it travels, whether or not it travels in a
           straight line). To my surprise she already knew that light traveled in all directions
           and in a straight line. I told her to keep that in mind.

              I then showed her the pinhole camera I had made in class and explained what she
           would be doing with the light bulb and the camera. Before turning on the light bulb
           I asked her what she thought would happen. She said that she thought the light bulb
           would appear on the wax paper.

               I then turned on the light bulb and asked her to look and tell me what she saw. She
           was puzzled to find that the light bulb that appeared on the wax paper was actually
           upside down. She could not tell me why this happened.

              I gave her a piece of paper and pencil and asked her to draw the entire set up
           including what she had seen. I then asked her again to tell me what she knew about
           light. When she said that light traveled in a straight line I told her to stop and think
           about that.

              She thought for a few seconds and then told me that light was entering the pinhole
           camera in a straight line. I encouraged this by giving her a ruler to add some straight
           light rays to her picture. After drawing straight lines for a few seconds she connected
           the top of the light bulb to the bottom of the light bulb on the camera with a straight
           line. She did the same for the bottom of the light bulb. I asked her to tell me what this
           meant. She explained that the ray coming from the top of the light bulb travels in
           a straight line through the pin hole to the bottom of the screen and the ray coming

56 | IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanation for Intriguing Phenomena
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           from the bottom of the light bulb does the same, except it appears at the top of the
           screen.

              I learned that being patient and providing my roommate with adequate thinking
           time (private reasoning time), she was able to tell me exactly what had happened.
           I prompted her throughout the experiment with questions instead of telling her the
           answers. I also encouraged her to build off of what she already knew ( for example:
           that light travels in a straight line).

                                                                                      Physics student, Spring 2014
This concludes this example of using central ideas based on evidence to explain intriguing
phenomena.

                                                                           IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanation for Intriguing Phenomena | 57
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

V. Developing Mathematical
Representations of Pinhole Phenomena

   Pinhole phenomena can provide useful tools in estimating quantities that are otherwise
hard to measure. To do so, we need to develop ways to represent pinhole phenomena
mathematically, both geometrically and algebraically.

A. Representing pinhole phenomena geometrically

   The visual display provided by a ray diagram suggests describing pinhole phenomena
geometrically. First we simplify the diagram, next name and label angles, and then
interpret geometric aspects of two triangles evident in the refined ray diagram.

           Question 1.14 How can you describe pinhole phenomena geometrically?

   The ray diagram in Fig. 1.14 includes realistic sketches of the light bulb, the upside-down
projection, and the pinhole camera as well as lines representing light rays inferred to be
leaving the source and traveling straight through the pinhole to the screen.

   This realistic portrayal of what we can actually see (the light bulb, camera, and
projection on the screen) was helpful in using our conceptual model for light in explaining
the upside-down projection of the light bulb observed on the screen: We could infer that
light was leaving points on this source in many directions and envision that some light
rays were traveling in straight lines:

  · from the top of the light bulb straight through the pinhole to form the projection of
      the top of the light bulb near the bottom of the screen,

  · from the middle of the bulb traveling straight through the pinhole to form the
      projection of the middle of the light bulb near the middle of the screen, and

  · from the bottom of the bulb traveling straight through the pinhole to form the
      projection of the bottom of the light bulb near the top of the screen.

58 | V. Developing Mathematical Representations of Pinhole Phenomena
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                 FIG. 1.14 (repeated) Student's ray diagram representing
                                 explanation of pinhole phenomena.

A more abstract stylized ray diagram, however, can focus attention on the envisioned light
rays without the details of source, camera, and screen as shown in Fig. 1.17:

  · Instead of a drawing of a light bulb, a vertical line represents the light source.
  · Instead of a drawing of an upside-down projection of the light bulb on the screen, a

      parallel shorter vertical line represents this projection.
  · Instead of an open circle, the pinhole is represented by an opening between short

      vertical lines above and below the point where the lines representing envisioned
      light rays cross. These short vertical lines represent the opaque end of the camera
      through which a pin was pushed to make the pinhole

             FIG 1.17 Stylized ray diagram representing pinhole phenomena.

                                                                                      V. Developing Mathematical Representations of Pinhole Phenomena | 59
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

In Fig. 1.17, vertical black parallel lines represent the source and projection rather than
sketches of the bulb and upside down projection. An opening between two small black
vertical lines represents the open pinhole. The blue straight lines represent rays of light
inferred to be traveling from the top and bottom of the bulb to the bottom and top of
the screen where they form the upside down projection of the light bulb. The rest of the
details of the source and the camera are not shown. The description of what is happening
is the same:

  · We are envisioning rays of light from the top of the vertical line representing the
      light bulb traveling straight through the opening representing the pinhole to form
      the projection of the top of the light bulb near the bottom of the screen.

  · We are envisioning rays of light from the bottom of the light bulb traveling straight
      through the opening representing the pinhole to form a projection of the bottom of
      the light bulb near the top of the screen.

By using straight parallel vertical lines to represent the source and the projection, Fig. 1.17
simplifies the ray diagram so that two triangles become evident.

  · What do these two triangles represent?
  · How are these two triangles related?
One way to describe a ray diagram geometrically is to begin by naming the vertices of the
triangles. In Fig. 1.18 for example, the vertices of the triangle on the left are labeled A, B, C,
whereas the vertices of the triangle on the right are labeled F, E, C. (Later the letter D will
represent the distance between line AB and vertex C, so D is omitted in naming vertices
here.)

60 | V. Developing Mathematical Representations of Pinhole Phenomena
         This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

         FIG. 1.18 Triangles ACB and FCE.

    · How are the angles in these triangles related?

           What does it mean, for example, for two angles to be corresponding?
             Which angle in triangle FCE corresponds to Angle A in triangle ACB?
             Which angle in triangle FCE corresponds to Angle B in triangle ACB?
             Which angle in triangle FCE corresponds to Angle C in triangle ACB?

           What does it mean for two angles to be congruent?
           When are two angles congruent if formed by intersecting lines?

Triangles with three congruent corresponding angles are called similar triangles.

    · Are triangles ACB and FCE similar triangles? If so, which are the three congruent
       corresponding angles?

    · If triangles ACB and FCE are similar triangles, how are corresponding lengths
       related?

If  you  need               to  learn      about  similar  triangles,                    see

www.mathopenref.com/similartriangles.html and     http://www.mathopenref.com/

similartrianglesparts.html

For information about vertical angles, see http://www.mathopenref.com/
anglesvertical.html

   For information about congruent angles created by parallel lines and a transversal

                                           V. Developing Mathematical Representations of Pinhole Phenomena | 61
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

(sometimes called alternate interior angles), see http://www.mathopenref.com/
anglesalternateinterior.html
Complete writing your own response to Question 1.14 before reading an example of
student work and some nuances in representing pinhole phenomena geometrically.

1. Example of student work representing pinhole phenomena geometrically

A student drew the ray diagram in Figure 1.19 at the close of a class session in which the
students developed and then used mathematical representations of pinhole phenomena
to estimate a quantity. This student drew single, double, and triple lines to indicate clearly
the congruent corresponding angles of the two triangles formed in the ray diagram:

   Single lines indicate that angle c of the large triangle on the left corresponds to and is
congruent with angle c of the small triangle on the right

   Double lines indicate that angle a corresponds to and is congruent with angle f.
   Triple lines indicate that angle b corresponds to and is congruent with angle e.

                 FIG. 1.19 Student's ray diagram showing corresponding congruent angles.

The student described this ray diagram geometrically:
              (The figure above) is a ray diagram consisting of two triangles that share a point.

           I have labeled the vertices of each of the triangles a b c, c e f, noticing that their
           shared vertex is c...We can conclude that the two triangles are similar because of two

62 | V. Developing Mathematical Representations of Pinhole Phenomena
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           different properties. The first property, vertical angles property, states that angles
           acb and ecf are congruent. Next, the alternate interior angles property allows us to
           confirm that two different sets of angles are congruent: angles abc and fec as well as
           angles bac and efc. The two triangles above, written acb and ecf, are similar because
           each of their corresponding angles is congruent. We know this because of the AAA,
           or Angle Angle Angle, theorem. Because these triangles are similar, we can set up a
           proportion...

                                                                                     Physics student, Spring 2016
   (This student also included some numerical information on this ray diagram that refers
to the activity involving pinhole cameras discussed below under section VI.)

2. Some nuances in representing pinhole phenomena geometrically

In writing about the ray diagram shown in Fig. 1.19, the student invoked several geometric
ideas:

  · Angles formed by two intersecting lines are called vertical angles (as occurs at the
      pinhole C in Fig. 1.19) and are congruent, that is, they have the same measure; if one
      is 30 degrees, the other also is 30 degrees.

  · Some angles formed by a line (a transversal) intersecting two other lines are called
      alternate interior angles (such as angles a and f; also angles b and e in Fig. 1.19).

     Alternate interior angles are congruent only if the two other lines are parallel. If the
     two other lines are not parallel, the angles will still be alternate interior angles but
     they will not have the same measure, that is, they will not be congruent.

  · Two triangles are similar if all three corresponding angles are congruent:

           Angle a is congruent with Angle f because they are alternate interior angles
           formed by a transveral crossing two parallel lines.

              Angle b is congruent with Angle e because they are alternate interior angles
           formed by a transveral crossing two parallel lines.

              Angle c of the big triangle is congruent with Angle c of the little triangle because
           they are vertical angles

                                                                                      V. Developing Mathematical Representations of Pinhole Phenomena | 63
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

  · Corresponding lengths of similar triangles are proportional.

   In naming the triangles "triangle acb" and "triangle ecf" this student did not follow the
convention to name similar triangles so that the names of the corresponding angles are
in the same position: the position of Angle a in the name "triangle acb" would correspond
to the position of Angle f in name "triangle fce"; the position of Angle c in the name
"triangle acb" would correspond to the position of Angle c in the name "triangle fce"; and
the position of Angle b in the name "triangle acb" would correspond to the position of
Angle e in the name "triangle fce".

   In referring to "angles abc and fec as well as angles bac and efc", however, this student
has followed the convention in that congruent angles a and f are in the same position,
congruent angles b and e are in the same position, as are the angle c's.

   Note that this student used lower case letters, rather than capital letters, to identify
angles on the ray diagram and then named each angle by listing three lower case letters
with the angle letter in the middle. In this course, capital letters placed outside the vertex
as in Fig. 1.18 are preferred in labeling angles of triangles such as Angle A and in naming
triangles, as in the statement "Triangle ABC is similar to Triangle FEC".

   The ray diagram in Fig. 1.19 clearly represents the congruent corresponding angles in
these two triangles. Note that the student has used the space between two short vertical
lines to represent the pinhole as well as a ruler to make straight lines. The line with arrows
drawn from the projection to the viewer's eyes is ok in that light all the way along the
projections bounces off the screen to the viewer's eyes. However, starting this line higher,
at the vertex of Angle e, would better represent rays continuously traveling from the
bottom of the source straight through the pinhole to form the projection of the bottom of
the light bulb near the top of the screen and then travel to the eye.

   Note that the eye is shown to the left of the screen. This represents a scenario in which
the student was looking at a projection on a screen where the light forming the projection
reflected off an opaque screen back to the eye as in Fig. 1.21 below rather than passing
through a translucent wax paper screen as in Fig. 1.15 above.

64 | V. Developing Mathematical Representations of Pinhole Phenomena
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

B. Representing pinhole phenomena algebraically

   The visual display provided by a ray diagram also suggests describing pinhole
phenomena algebraically. First, we name and label lengths as well as angles, identify ratios
of corresponding lengths that are equal, and consider nuances in representing pinhole
phenomena algebraically.

           Question 1.15 How can you represent pinhole phenomena algebraically?

   Representing pinhole phenomena algebraically requires naming aspects of pinhole
phenomena that you can measure and use in a calculation. Identifying such quantities
involves thinking about the variables in a situation: what, for example, affects the size of
the projection that you see?

  · What can you do to make the projection bigger? Smaller?
          What happens to the projection if you move the camera closer to the source?
            Farther from the source?
          What happens to the projection if you make the camera longer? Shorter?
          What happens to the projection if you choose a higher light source? Lower?

  · Give names to those variables and draw a ray diagram that includes identifying those
      variables with symbols, in addition to labeling angles A, B, C, E and F.
     Include, for example, a horizontal line from the middle of the vertical line representing
     the light source, AB, to the middle of the vertical line representing the projection to
     EF.

                                                                                      V. Developing Mathematical Representations of Pinhole Phenomena | 65
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                 FIG. 1.20 Ray diagram representing pinhole phenomena.

   Figure 1.20, for example, includes a line representing light rays leaving the middle of the
source, traveling straight through the pinhole, to form the projection of the middle of the
source on the middle of the screen. This line also can represent two variables, the length,
Distance D, between the light source and the pinhole, and the length, distance d, between
the pinhole and the projection on the screen. The ray diagram in Fig. 1.20 also identifies H
as the Height of the source AB and h as the height of the projection EF.

   Note that the symbols H, D, h and d represent lengths in the two triangles whereas the
symbols A, B, C, E, and F represent angles.

  · How are lengths related in similar triangles?
     If two triangles are similar, their corresponding lengths are proportional.

  · How would you express the relationship of corresponding lengths in similar triangles
      algebraically with symbols?

  · How would you express the algebraic relationship of corresponding lengths in
      similar triangles with words?

Complete writing your own response to Question 1.15 before reading an example of
student work and some nuances in representing pinhole phenomena algebraically.

66 | V. Developing Mathematical Representations of Pinhole Phenomena
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

1. Example of student work representing pinhole phenomena algebraically

   A student summarized the mathematical relationship among the lengths of similar
triangles as follows:

              The property of similar triangles states that triangles can be different sizes as long
           as they have the same shape. The same shape depends on corresponding angles and
           proportionate sides. In the figure we can see the relevant vertices of the triangles
           and proportionate sides where "H" is the height of the bulb and "d" is the distance
           from foil to wax paper. The Height of the bulb over the Distance from the bulb to the
           foil is equal to the height of the projection over the distance from the pinhole foil to
           the wax paper.

                                                                                      Physics student, Spring 2014

   This student understood the basic property of similar triangles, that they have the same
shape but may be different sizes and that this means that the ratios of corresponding
lengths are equal.

2. Nuances in representing pinhole phenomena algebraically

   There are several aspects of representing pinhole phenomena algebraically that need
attention. These include choices made in using language, naming variables, forming ratios,
justifying the equal sign, deciding on an appropriate algebraic representation to use, and
using one's sense-making skills to envision and monitor what one is doing.

   (a) Using language. Part of learning physics is learning to use language precisely. What
words, for example, describe "H/D"? Colloquially this often is referred to as "H over D"
or "height over distance". The use of the word "over" refers to how one expresses this
relationship in writing: one writes the H "over" the D. Such language can be confusing
for someone who does not infer the process represented by the word `over' and the line
drawn between the H and D. A more precise version would be to refer to "H divided by

                                                                                      V. Developing Mathematical Representations of Pinhole Phenomena | 67
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

D" or "height divided by distance". This articulates the mathematical process involved,
division. However, a more informative version would be to refer to "the ratio formed by
comparing H to D" or "the ratio formed by comparing the height of something to some
relevant distance, such as "the ratio formed by comparing the height of the light source to
its distance from the pinhole."

   (b) Naming variables. In developing an algebraic description of a phenomenon, one has
to give names and symbols to the variables that matter, in this case how high the light bulb
and its projection are, and how far they each are from the pinhole. Height and Distance
seem the natural names for these variables with H and D used for the height of the light
source and its distance from the pinhole in the large triangle and h and d used for the
height of the projection and its distance from the pinhole in the smaller triangle.

   The horizontal line representing two distances here, however, would typically be
described as the heights of triangle ABC and triangle FEC. Should one give a name to this
variable that refers to what it is representing, distance from the pinhole, or a name to this
variable that refers to its geometric role in the diagram, height of a triangle?

   To avoid this confusion, sometimes we have used length to refer to the vertical lines,
but the lower-case l looks like a one and L/D = l/d is also confusing. Note in Fig. 1.19, that
this student had used the letters W and w to represent the width of a circular light source
and its projection where use of a D and d might have been expected for representing their
diameters, but D and d were already in use for representing distances from the pinhole.

   The advantage of using the name height for the variables represented by the vertical
lines AB and EF is that this connects the mathematical description to the objects the lines
are representing, the heights of the light bulb and its projection.

   An essential aspect of developing a mathematical representation of a phenomena is that
after deciding on the names and symbols one wants to use, be sure to state clearly what
each variable and its symbol represent.

   (c) Forming ratios. When considering two similar triangles, it can be helpful to form
a ratio with variables in one triangle and set this equal to a ratio formed with the
corresponding variables in the other triangle. The equation with ratios that this student
stated, for example, H/D = h/d, compares two lengths of the large triangle, representing
the height of the light source and its distance from the pinhole, and sets this equal to
a comparison of the two corresponding lengths of the small triangle, representing the
height of the projection and its distance from the pinhole.

   It is important to be able to express the equality of such ratios with words as well as

68 | V. Developing Mathematical Representations of Pinhole Phenomena
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

symbols: With H/D = h/d, one is equating "how the height of the light source compares
to the light source's distance from the pinhole" with "how the height of the projection
compares to the projection's distance from the pinhole."

   One also has the choice of in what order to make such a comparison. With D/H = d/h,
for example, one is equating "how the light source's distance from the pinhole compares to
the light source's height" with "how the projection's distance from the pinhole compares
to the projection's height."

   In both cases, this approach has the advantage that the units used within the same
triangle will match. In this case of comparing one length to another length, with both
lengths measured in the same units, the ratios will be dimensionless. This means that, if
convenient, one can use units for the lengths in the large triangle that differ from the units
for the lengths in the small triangle.

   Sometimes, however, one might want to compare the same variable in the two triangles,
setting the ratio of the heights, for example, equal to the ratio of the distances: H/h =
D/d In this case, one is setting equal "how the light source's height compares to the
projection's height" with "how the light source's distance from the pinhole compares to
the projection's distance from the pinhole." One also could set this equation up as: h/
H = d/D. Here one is setting equal "how the projection's height compares to the light
source's height" with "how the distance of the projection from the pinhole compares to
the distance of the light source from the pinhole."

   Although cumbersome, keeping in mind the word description of what these ratios
represent can prevent randomly setting up an equation that may look appropriate: h/D =
H/d but is not justified in this context.

   (d) Justifying the equal sign. When setting one algebraic expression equal to another in
this course, it is important to justify the equal sign explicitly. For example, one student
wrote:

              In the figure, there are two triangles seen, triangle ABC and triangle FCE. The two
           triangles are similar because they have three sets of congruent angles. The first set
           of congruent angles are vertical angles, in which Angle ACB  Angle FCE. The second
           set of congruent angles are alternate interior angles, in which Angle CAB  Angle
           CFE.
           The third set of congruent angles are alternate interior angles, in which Angle CBA
            Angle CEF.

              Since the two triangles have congruent angles, they are therefore similar triangles
           because of the AAA theorem. The corresponding sides of similar triangles are

                                                                                      V. Developing Mathematical Representations of Pinhole Phenomena | 69
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           proportional, which is why we are able to set up a proportion comparing the two
           triangles.

                                                                                     Physics student, Spring 2016
   Note that this student has not used the convention in naming the triangles. Triangle
ABC puts angle C in the third position but Triangle FCE puts angle C in the second
position. An alternative would be Triangle ABC is similar to Triangle FEC or Triangle ACB
is similar to Triangle FCE. The student has used the conventions in naming angles so that
the angle of interest is the middle letter: Angle ACB and Angle FCE are both referring to
the angle where the two lines cross at C. Angle CAB refers to the angle at A and Angle CFE
refers to the angle at F, a set of alternate interior angles at A and F. Angle CBA refers to
the angle at B and Angle CEF refers to the angle at E, the other set of alternate interior
angles.

   (e) Choosing an appropriate algebraic representation. If H/D = h/d, D/H = d/h, H/h =
D/d and h/H = d/D, which set of equal ratios should one use?

   If you can measure three of the variables and need to calculate the forth, any of these
will work. However, some are easier to use than others.

   Solving for an unknown that is in the numerator for many students is easier than solving
for an unknown in the denominator. If asked to find the height of a projection, h, for
example, choose a version with h in the numerator: H/D = h/d or h/H = d/D . Then
isolate h by multiplying both sides by the variable in the denominator:

                                                                 or

   Note: Avoid using x to represent multiplication in an algebraic equation as this can be
misinterpreted as representing an unknown. Use parentheses or a dot:

                                                      to represent multiplication.

   f) Using sense-making skills to envision what an equation is doing. People in this course
typically differ in their experiences and comfort in setting up and solving algebraic
equations. If you are feeling some anxiety after reading this section, it is important to
give yourself time to connect each symbol with what it means, not only by writing out
its definition and labeling it on your ray diagram but also by visualizing what the symbol
represents within an equation.

   When solving a pinhole problem, for example, write h = height of the projection and
place an h next to the vertical line representing the projection on your ray diagram; then

70 | V. Developing Mathematical Representations of Pinhole Phenomena
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

step back and visualize the size of the upside down projection you saw on the wax paper
screen of the pinhole camera. Do the same for the d, H, and D.

   The goal is to become familiar enough with the symbols that when you see H/D = h/d,
your mind visualizes what those ratios mean:

  · you can "see a comparison in your head of the big Height of the light bulb with the
      big Distance from the light bulb to the pinhole of your pinhole camera;

  · you can "see" a comparison in your head of the little height of the projection with the
      little distance from the pinhole to the wax paper screen of the pinhole camera;

  · and you can "see" that those comparisons seem about equal;
  · that, for example, the big Height of the light bulb is about a tenth of the size of the

      big Distance from the light bulb to the pinhole in the pinhole camera in your hand
  · and that the little height of the upside down light bulb projection seems about a

      tenth of the size of the little distance from the pinhole in the aluminum foil end of
      the tube to the wax paper screen.

   Also use words to tell yourself a story about what the equation is doing, that the
equation is comparing heights to distances in two similar triangles and if the triangles
are similar, the comparisons of heights to distances are equal even when the sizes of the
triangles are very different. Visualizing what the equation is doing is key to clarifying in
your mind whether you have set up the equation in a way that makes sense.

   (g) Using sense-making skills to monitor what one is doing. In addition to visualizing what
an equation is doing, it is important to use sense-making skills to monitor what you and
your group members are doing. In solving a complex problem, it is easy to get focused on
some detail that in the end is not needed. To make productive progress, it is important to
step back for a moment to ponder:

  · What are we doing?
  · Why are we doing that?
  · How will that help us?*

This is particularly important to do periodically when engaged in a multi-step endeavor,
such as designing an experiment, collecting data, and using the data and one's knowledge
of physical phenomena to estimate a quantity that can not be directly measured such as
the diameter of the Sun.

                                                                                       V. Developing Mathematical Representations of Pinhole Phenomena | 71
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   *These questions are suggested by Alan Schoenfeld (1992) as meta-cognitive checks
when engaged in problem-solving.

   Schoenfeld, A. (1992). Learning to think mathematically: Problem solving, metacognition,
and sense-making in mathematics. In D. Grouws (Ed.), Handbook for Research on
Mathematics Teaching and Learning (pp. 334-370). New York: MacMillan

   (h) Using one's knowledge of geometrical and algebraic representations of pinhole
phenomena to explore ways to estimate quantities one wants to know. Suppose you want
to know, for example, how high something is, like a tree. How would you use a pinhole
device to find that out? What would you need to measure and do if you used the equation
H/D = h/d ? You can practice such approaches in a dark room by using data from your
exploration of variables affecting pinhole phenomena (Question 1.12). What would you
need to measure if you wanted to estimate the height of the lightbulb? If H = D(h/d) and
you substitute your measurements in this equation, how does your estimate compare with
an actual measurement of the height of the bulb?

72 | V. Developing Mathematical Representations of Pinhole Phenomena
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

VI. Using Mathematical
Representations to Estimate an
Interesting Quantity

   Pinhole phenomena can provide a way to estimate a quantity that one can not directly
measure.

A. Using pinhole phenomena to estimate the diameter of the Sun

  Question 1.16 How can you use pinhole phenomena to estimate the diameter of the Sun?

   How big do you think the Sun is? It would not be possible to travel to the Sun and
measure its diameter directly. Using pinhole phenomena, however, provides a way to
estimate this quantity from Earth.

  · In the Before section of a notebook page, record your initial estimate of the size of
      the Sun.

     It looks about the same size as the Moon in the sky. Both seem small compared to the
     size of the Earth from which we are viewing them. However both are far away and
     things far away look smaller than they are. How big do you think the Sun's diameter
     might be?

  · How could you use pinhole phenomena here on Earth to estimate the Sun's
      diameter?

  · A good way to start designing an exploration is to draw something that will help you
      think about what to do. For example, draw a ray diagram representing pinhole
      phenomena.
          Which line on your ray diagram could represent the diameter of the Sun?
          Which line could represent a projection of the Sun here on Earth?

                                                                          VI. Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate an Interesting Quantity | 73
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

  · What equipment would you need to make such a projection of the Sun?
  · How would you use this equipment?
Figure 1.21 shows one approach.

FIG. 1.21 Student drawing to illustrate using pinhole phenomena to estimate the diameter of the Sun.

          Equipment: One way to estimate the diameter of the sun involves using a meter stick, some aluminum foil,
       a piece of cardboard to support the aluminum foil, scissors to cut a hole in the center of the cardboard, tape
       to tape the aluminum foil in place, a pin to make a pinhole in the foil, a white paper screen, a piece of
       cardboard to which to tape the white paper screen to keep it firm, a pencil to trace the Sun's projection on
       the white paper screen, and a sunny day.

          [In a remote learning situation, students may not have access to a meter stick or yard stick but they likely
       have a ruler and shoestrings. After tying the shoestrings together to make a long string, use the ruler to
       measure where to tie a knot on the long string to measure 100 centimeters (or 3 feet if the ruler only has
       inches marked). Keep the string taunt when establishing the distance between the pinhole and the screen.]

  · In the During section of your physics notebook page, record what you do to measure
      the projection of the Sun by using such equipment.
     Also draw a ray diagram to represent this setup and identify on the diagram each
     relevant quantity with a word or phrase and symbol.

74 | VI. Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate an Interesting Quantity
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

     In addition, state and justify an algebraic equation that represents the mathematical
     relationship among these quantities. Solve that equation for the diameter of the Sun.

     Also create a table, Table I.3, that organizes the relevant information such as the name
     of each quantity identified, its symbol, its numerical value, and status as measured,
     provided, chosen, or calculated.

  · In the After section of your physics notebook page, record the claim you are making
      about the diameter of the Sun, the evidence that you have used to support that
      claim, and the rationale that explains how you have interpreted the measurement
      you made to calculate an estimate of the Sun's diameter.

  · In the Reflection section of your physics notebook page, comment upon your
      experiences in using mathematical representations of pinhole phenomena to
      estimate an interesting quantity in this way.

     What have you learned not only about the Sun but also about the scientific process of
     designing explorations, using geometrical reasoning, writing and justifying algebraic
     equations, estimating quantities, and considering whether the estimate is reasonable?

  · Also record on your physics notebook page, what you are still wondering.

Complete your entry on your physics notebook page and write a summary of what you
have learned before reading an example of student work in estimating the diameter
of the Sun. Also read about nuances in using mathematical representations of pinhole
phenomena. In addition, you may find interesting reflections about using pinhole
phenomena to estimate the Sun's diameter with friends and/or family members and some
thoughts about the nature of science in this context.

1. Example of student work in estimating the diameter of the Sun

A student described the exploration process as follows:

              First create a camera using foil, a piece of paper, cardboard, a push pin, a meter
           stick, and a sunny day. First cut a square out of the middle of the cardboard and

                                                                           VI. Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate an Interesting Quantity | 75
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           cover that opening with the foil. Poke a hole in the middle of the foil with a push
           pin.

              To carry out the experiment, hold the screen up so that it faces the sun. Another
           person will hold the foil and cardboard between the sun and the screen and direct
           the sun rays that are traveling through the pinhole to project the upside-down
           image of the sun onto the screen. A third person will hold a meter stick with one
           end touching the screen and one end touching the cardboard with foil. A fourth
           person will trace the projected upside-down image of the sun that is on the paper.

                            FIG. 1.22. Sketch of estimating the sun's diameter with pinhole
                            phenomena.

                                                                                     Physics student, Spring 2016
   The student sketched this exploration process as shown in Fig. 1.22. In this class, we
referred to the diameter of the sun as its Width, represented by the symbol capital W, in
order to avoid confusion with the symbol D representing the distance from the sun to the
pinhole. We referred to the diameter of the Sun's projection as its width, represented by
the lower-case symbol w in order to avoid confusion with the symbol d representing the
distance of the screen from the pinhole. Note that in this activity the Sun's rays should be
shown as bouncing off the opaque screen rather than shining through as in the previous
pinhole activity shown in Fig. 1.15.
   This student described her group's interpretative process as follows:

              The group will measure the diameter of the traced projection onto the screen.
           This was estimated to be about one centimeter (1 cm). This will be variable w which
           represents the width of the projection.

              We know that the distance from the pinhole to the projection is one-meter-long (1

76 | VI. Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate an Interesting Quantity
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           m) since we used a meter stick to separate the two. We will convert the one meter (1
           m) to one hundred centimeters (100cm) so that the units are overall easier to work
           with. We will label this distance as variable d.

              We are given the distance from the sun to the earth and our camera, which is
           about one-hundred million miles (100,000,000 mi) and will label this as variable D.

              We want to find out the width of the sun so we will label this as variable W.
              Since we know that this experiment creates triangles that are similar, we can set
           up a proportion using our known and unknown variables to determine the width of
           the sun.

                                                                                     Physics Student, Spring 2016
This student drew a ray diagram and wrote the relevant mathematics as shown in Fig. 1.23.

                                      Figure 1.23. Student ray diagram and relevant
                                      mathematics for estimating the diameter of
                                      the Sun.

The student labeled the diagram well:
  · the long vertical line on the left as representing the Sun, with the symbol W defined
      as the width of the Sun, and ? to indicate that this was the unknown
  · the horizontal line from the "Sun" to the pinhole as the distance D, equal to about
      100,000,000 miles
  · the dotted line representing the foil with a pinhole in the middle as the pinhole
  · the short horizontal line from the pinhole to the projection as d, equal to 1 meter or

                                                                           VI. Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate an Interesting Quantity | 77
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

      100 centimeters
  · the short vertical line on the right as representing the projection of upside down

      image of the Sun, with the symbol lower case w, equal to 1 centimeter.

   Fig. 1.23 clearly shows the representation of pinhole phenomena by this student in
estimating the diameter of the Sun. There are, however, several minor issues to consider
in this otherwise excellent ray diagram. An open circle, rather than a solid line, would
better represent the pinhole through which light rays are envisioned moving. A solid
rather than dotted line would better represent a solid surface that blocks other rays from
traveling through the pinhole. The rays from the Sun bounced off the opaque screen back
to the eyes as shown in Fig. 1.19 rather than continuing through a translucent wax paper
screen as in Fig. 1.14.

   This student wrote out the relevant ratios in words first before representing them with
symbols:

Writing out an equation in words as well as in symbols is important to do when teaching
in order to be sure that students are following the reasoning.
The justification for the equal sign was that the triangle formed by the rays from the Sun
and the pinhole is similar to the triangle formed by the pinhole and rays from the Sun
inside the camera, and that the ratios of corresponding lengths of similar triangles are
equal.
The student solved for the unknown, W = (w/d) (D),

substituted numerical values,

and calculated the estimate for the sun's diameter, 1,000,000 miles.
In this case, the students did not need to convert miles to centimeters because the ratio
w/d was dimensionless, 1 cm/100 cm = 1/100.
The distance of the sun to the pinhole was given as 100,000,000 miles (rather than about

78 | VI. Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate an Interesting Quantity
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

93,000,000 miles) so that calculating the estimate would be easy and the attention would
be on the magnitude of this estimate rather than on details involving a more accurate
value for the distance to the sun. What is one hundredth of a hundred million miles? One
million miles! If you can envision what the equation is representing, one can calculate this
estimate in one's head!

   The student also reported the status of the variables, as shown in Fig. 1.24 below.

                             FIG. 1.24 Student's report of the status of variables in
                             estimate of the diameter of the Sun.

In designing and carrying out a mathematical estimation, it is useful to consider what each
symbol represents. The value represented by the symbol d, for example, the distance of
the projection from the pinhole, was chosen as part of the design of the exploration by the
availability of a convenient tool, a meter stick of length 100 centimeters.
The diameter of the projection, w, 1 centimeter, was measured during the exploration.
Some students' tracing of the projection had a diameter of 0.9 cm; others 1.1 cm; many 1.0
cm. Using 1.0 cm seems a reasonable value given the variation in ways small groups held
the pinhole and screen a meter stick length apart.
The distance D of the Sun from the Earth was an approximate value provided by the
instructor based on an accepted value of about 93 million miles. This approximation made
calculating the estimate easy so the students' focus would be on the phenomena and not
on detailed calculations.
The diameter of the Sun, W, was the unknown, estimated by calculating its value in the
equation based upon the mathematics describing pinhole phenomena.

                                                                          VI. Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate an Interesting Quantity | 79
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Is a diameter of one million miles a sensible result for an estimate of the diameter of the
Sun?

   What sense-making strategies can you use to consider the reasonableness of this
result?

2. Some nuances in using mathematical representations of pinhole phenomena

   Students often use an equal sign to represent "the next step is" to solve for the unknown
variable. That is best represented by an empty space between two equations as the ratio
w/d does not equal W.

   After writing the equal ratios in words and the equivalent mathematical statement in
symbols, this student appropriately solved for the unknown, W, with W = (w/d) (D) before
substituting numerical values. This is a process that is very important to do. Substituting
numerical values before solving for the unknown often leads to calculation errors.

      By solving an equation for the unknown before substituting numerical values, one can
readily check whether the dimensions of both sides match:

      If (W in length units) = (w in length units/d in length units) (D in length units), the w/d
will be dimensionless and the result will be length units on the left and length units on the
right.

      By solving an equation for the unknown before substituting numerical values, one also
can consider whether the mathematics processes indicated are conceptually appropriate:

   W = (w/d) D indicates that first one is finding a ratio of two quantities (w/d) and using
that to find out how much of the distance D in the other triangle, the other width W
would be. If the little width w is half the length of the little distance d for one triangle, for
example, then the big width W would be one half of the big distance D. Such visualizing of
what the equation is doing is a useful way to check whether the equation one has derived
makes sense.

   This form of the equation, W = (w/d) (D), also makes clear that the ratio w/d is
dimensionless (w/d = 1 centimeter/100 centimeters = 1/100) so there is no need to convert
between centimeters and miles when substituting values. This is an example of a detail
that can consume a lot of time, if one just does what one thinks one is supposed to
do, converting centimeters to miles, without monitoring whether it makes sense to do
so. It was necessary to convert 1 meter to 100 centimeters to use centimeters for both

80 | VI. Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate an Interesting Quantity
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

quantities in the ratio of w/d in order to obtain the dimensionless ratio of 1/100 but it was
not necessary to convert centimeters to miles.

   We used the approximate value of 100,000,000 miles for the distance between the Earth
and the Sun (the distance D of the source from the pinhole). This made the calculation
easy, as 1/100 of 100 million miles is 1 million miles. Although the Sun looks small in the
sky, its diameter is very large!

   A "not to scale" note would be helpful, given that rays of light from the Sun are coming
from so far away that they are nearly parallel as they reach the earth rather than coming
in at such a large angle. Such a "not drawn to scale" also would be appropriate given that
the 1 cm projection is shown as larger than the 100 centimeter distance to the pinhole. A
more realistic ray diagram for this situation would be similar to Fig. 1.25:

                 FIG. 1.25 Ray diagram representing pinhole phenomena with an object very
                 far away

You can use your knowledge of pinhole phenomena to generate and solve pinhole math
problems. To make up such a problem, decide on a scenario and specify three of the four
variables involved: height of the object, H; its distance to the pinhole, D; height of its
projection on the screen, h; and its distance to the pinhole, d.

   In this course, the goal in solving a pinhole math problem is not the "answer." The
goal is to build your ability to help someone else understand what to do and why.
Start by helping the learner to understand what is happening by describing the scenario
verbally with words and visually with a sketch. Next review the physics involved by

                                                                           VI. Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate an Interesting Quantity | 81
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

stating what the relevant central ideas are. Also draw a careful ray diagram and use it
and the central ideas to explain why the projection is upside down. Then describe the
ray diagram mathematically, being clear about what each symbol represents, why the two
triangles are similar, and how the lengths of similar triangles are related. Finally write the
equation in both words and symbols, solve for the unknown in symbols, substitute values
and calculate the answer. Be sure to also discuss why that answer seems reasonable. In
facilitating a conversation with someone about pinhole phenomena, ask questions rather
than tell answers throughout this process. In responding to homework problems in this
course, however, follow the format provided here:

                                         Solving a Pinhole Math Problem

 a. Describe the scenario in words
 b. Make a sketch
 c. Review what you know about this phenomenon (the relevant central ideas)
 d. Draw a careful ray diagram. Include:

          light source
          object and projection
          eye
          3 example rays from light source (from top, middle, bottom of object) that pass

            through the pinhole to form the projection
          light rays traveling to eye
          gap representing pinhole (or small circle)
          arrows to show direction light rays are traveling

 e. Tell the `story' of the ray diagram with the relevant central ideas to explain why the
      projection is upside down. Describe what happens to each example ray separately.

  f. Label angles and sides of triangles. Define symbols with words and record any
      numbers you know or can estimate.

 g. Justify that the triangles are similar.
 h. Write an equation that relates the sides of the triangles using words to describe the

      quantities.
  i. Rewrite your equation using your symbols.
  j. Algebraically isolate the unknown quantity.
 k. Plug-in numbers and calculate answer.
  l. Check answer. Does the number you get from the calculation seem reasonable?

82 | VI. Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate an Interesting Quantity
          This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Explain.

3. Using pinhole phenomena to estimate the Sun's diameter with friends and/or
family members

Question 1.17 What happens when estimating the diameter of the Sun with friends or
family members?

   A student reflected upon engaging her sister and mother in estimating the diameter of
the Sun as follows:

              To explore pinhole phenomena, I involved my younger sister to perform the same
           experiment we did in class. I first explained what we did and she stated that she has
           never heard of it before. Because she said she has never heard of pinhole phenomena,
           I was excited to show her. I used the same materials and made my own pinhole on
           a sheet of tinfoil. My mom also helped by holding the meter stick. My mom also said
           she has never heard of it. My mom is a third-grade teacher so she was excited to try
           it out.

              During the experiment, I asked them how big they thought the projection on the
           white sheet was. Like I did, they thought it looked like about one centimeter wide in
           diameter. My sister asked, "How can someone use such a small reflection of the sun
           to help find the diameter of the actual sun since the sun is so large and this is so
           small?" Because my mom and sister don't have as much of a math background as I
           do, I was very careful about what questions I asked.

              I started out by giving them a hint and asked, "Have you heard of similar triangles
           and corresponding angles?" I could tell my mom was a little lost because math isn't
           her strong suit. Much like my sister, she is a lot better at literature. My sister said
           yes! I told them the distance from the sun is 100,000,000 miles, so by using the three
           dimensions, I asked, "How can we use equal fractions to find the missing dimension
           (diameter of sun)?"

              My sister yelled, "Ratios!" My mom seemed a little lost so I then drew similar
           triangles a lot like we did in class and labeled each dimension we knew. I explained
           how the sides and angles were proportionate, which is how we could create equal
           ratios. I asked them if our units needed to be the same and my sister said yes. As a
           group, we found the same results as we did in class.

                                                                          VI. Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate an Interesting Quantity | 83
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

              My sister took calculus in high school and my mom doesn't know much about
           math. Having those two different types of "students" that were at either end of the
           spectrum, gave me the opportunity to practice for when I am trying to explain to two
           students where one is at a higher level than the other. I wanted my sister to explain
           the concept to my mom because I know that some students learn better when they
           explain things to other students.

              Through this experience, I learned that when you have two students where one
           understands the concept faster than the other, it's important to let both students talk
           but also let the one student who understands, explain what they know to the other
           student. This helps them learn from each other.

              I also learned to make sure I give time for the student that doesn't understand to
           ask any questions they have and not let the other student do all the work. I know it's
           important to make sure you leave a lesson knowing that both students understand
           the process.

              The last thing I learned was how to ask questions to give a hint when the student
           is completely lost without giving them the answer. I understand how frustrating
           it is when the teacher asked questions you have no idea what the answer is. It's
           sometimes better to give them a nudge when they are completely lost in the
           beginning and let them do the rest of the work once they understand how they are
           going to find the outcome.

                                                                                          Physics student, Fall 2016

4. Some thoughts about the nature of science in this context:

     This completes an example of the process outlined for each unit:
   Students first identify resources by reflecting upon what they already know about a
topic, such as the nature of light.
   Next, they develop some central ideas based on evidence, such as light leaves a point on
most sources in many directions and light can be envisioned as rays traveling in straight
lines.
   They can use those ideas to explain an interesting phenomenon, such as why the
projection of a light bulb seen through a pinhole camera is upside down.
   Then they develop mathematical representations of the phenomenon, such as an
equation stating that the ratio of the height of the light source to the distance of the

84 | VI. Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate an Interesting Quantity
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

source from the pinhole is equal to the ratio of the height of the projection to the distance
of the projection from the pinhole.

   Finally, they use those mathematical representations to estimate an interesting
quantity, such as the diameter of the Sun. It is not possible for anyone to travel to the
Sun and use a measuring device to directly measure its diameter. An estimate is feasible,
however, using simple equipment, some additional information from a reliable source, and
the scientific process developed here.

   This process illustrates the strength of scientific ways of knowing. One may be able
to estimate a quantity of interest through a similar process of identifying resources,
developing central ideas based on evidence, using these ideas to explain a puzzling
phenomenon, figuring out ways to represent the phenomenon mathematically, and using
those mathematical tools to estimate the quantity one wants to know.

   Several students recognized that this estimation process might be useful in other
contexts such as answering the question: `how big is the Moon"? Note that making the
decision to go there, or not, or to fund creating a settlement on the Moon, or not, is a
question of a different kind, one that involves cultural issues and societal values as well as
the technical and scientific knowledge needed.

   Many students also experienced some of the human aspects of science in their surprise
that the projection was upside down, frustration in making sense of the mathematics, and
perhaps pleasure in persisting through to understanding what seemed for many to be an
initially confusing experience.

   The process involved in estimating the diameter of the Sun assumes that the ratio of
small distances here on Earth can be compared to the ratio of very large distances in
the solar system. This is an example of an aspect of the nature of science articulated
in the US Next Generation Science Standards that scientific knowledge assumes an order
and consistency in natural systems. Third to fifth grade students, for example, should
understand that basic laws of nature are the same everywhere in the universe (NGSS,
Lead States, 2013, Appendix H) https://www.nextgenscience.org/resources/ngss-
appendices).

                                                                          VI. Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate an Interesting Quantity | 85
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

VII. Developing Additional Central
Ideas Based on Evidence

   When you look in a mirror, swim in a pool, or enjoy playing with a prism, you are
experiencing a variety of light phenomena. In this section, you will develop additional
central ideas about reflection, refraction, and dispersion. Then you will use these central
ideas to explain an intriguing phenomenon: seeing rainbows in the sky.

A. Exploring reflection phenomena

The word reflection has many meanings in many different contexts. In physics, the word
reflection has a specific meaning. Reflection refers to one aspect of what happens when
light shines on smooth or rough surfaces.

           Question 1.18 What happens when light shines upon a smooth surface?

          Equipment: To explore reflection phenomena, obtain a flashlight, flat mirror, table, two straight sticks
       such as meter sticks, yard sticks, rulers or pencils, a dark room and at least three people with whom to
       collaborate. Clean the surface of the mirror so that the light reflects from the mirror rather than from dust
       on the surface.[In a remote learning situation, a student working alone with a clear mirror and two rulers,
       can place the mirror on a table next to a wall, lean one end of a ruler against the wall, place the other end of
       that ruler on or next to the mirror, place one end of the other ruler next to the first ruler on or next to the
       mirror, and hold the flashlight so that it is shining on the mirror at the same angle as the ruler. Move that
       ruler (and flashlight) at different angles to see how the reflection of the light moves up and down on the
       wall. Note the angle of the ruler when the reflection on the wall is on the top of the first ruler.]

  · Record the Topic of this exploration on your physics notebook page.
  · What happens when a flashlight shines on a flat mirror in a dark room?

86 | VII. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Note your initial ideas in the Before section of the physics notebook page documenting
your exploration of reflection phenomena.

  · What can you find out about reflection phenomena by playing with the flashlight and
      mirror? Keep track of your explorations in the During section of your notebook page.

  · Next explore reflection in a particular way: place the flat mirror on the table. Ask
      group members to each stand on one side of the table as shown in Fig. 1.26
                 Person 1 is the person holding the flashlight.
                 Person 2 is the person standing at the other end of the table.
                 Person 3 is standing at one side of the table. (If there is a fourth
                 person, Person 4 is standing at the other side of the table.)

  · Persons 1 and 2 start the activity while Persons 3 and 4 report what happens. After a
      while switch positions so that everyone experiences what happens in each location.

  · How can Person 1 aim the flashlight at the mirror so that light shines on Person 2's
      face at the other end of the table?

                      FIG. 1.26 Who can see the light from the flashlight in the mirror?

  · When Person 2's face is lit, who can see light from the flashlight shining on the
      mirror?
                 Person 1 with the flashlight?
                 Person 2 at the other end of the table?

                                                                                                  VII. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 87
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                 Person 3 at one side of the table
                 Person 4 at the other side of the table?

  · If Person 2 goes up on tiptoes or crouches down low, what does Person 1 need to do
      to keep the light reflecting off the mirror onto Person 2's face?

  · Can you see light rays traveling from the flashlight to the mirror?
      Can you see light rays traveling from the mirror to Person 2's face?

  · To envision light rays traveling from the flashlight to the mirror and from the mirror
      to Person 2's face, use a physical model for light rays:
          Hold one meter stick so that it models light rays traveling from the flashlight
            down to the mirror.
          Hold the other meter stick so that it models light rays traveling from the mirror
            up to Person 2's face.
          Make sure the two meter sticks are meeting on the mirror at the spot where
            Person 2 sees the beam of light reflected in the mirror.

  · The meter sticks make angles with the flat mirror. How do these angles compare?
  · Make a sketch showing one meter stick modeling light rays traveling from flashlight

      to mirror and the other meter stick modeling light rays traveling from the mirror to
      Person 2's face.
  · Focus first on the meter stick modeling light rays traveling from the flashlight to the
      mirror. The meter stick and the mirror on the table are modeling the angle that one
      can envision incident light rays making with the mirror. This angle is called the angle
      of incidence.

     About how big is this angle of incidence? (about 15°? 30°? 45°? 60°? 75°? )

  · Now look at the meter stick modeling light rays traveling from the mirror to Person
      2's face. This meter stick and mirror on the table are modeling the angle that one can
      envision reflected light rays making with the mirror. This angle is called the angle of
      reflection.

     About how big is this angle of reflection? (about 15°? 30°? 45°? 60°? 75°? )

  · Draw a ray diagram that represents what you infer is happening when light from the

88 | VII. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

      flashlight reflects off the mirror into Person 2's face.
  · Label the angle of incidence and the angle of reflection. How are these angles

      related?

Question 1.19 What happens when light shines upon a rough surface?

  · Now shine the flashlight on the table rather than on the mirror.

     Who can see the light from the flashlight shining on the table?

                 Person 1 with the flashlight?
                 Person 2 at the other end of the table?
                 Person 3 at one side of the table
                 Person 4 at the other side of the table?

  · How does what you see here or do not see here compare with what you saw or did
      not see when the flash light was aimed at the mirror rather than the table?

  · Although the table may seem smooth, it is a rough surface compared to the mirror.
      What are the similarities and differences in what you observe when a flashlight is
      aimed at the mirror or at the table?

  · Under the During section of your physics notebook page, record your observations
      and interpret these results.

  · Use sketches of light rays reflecting from smooth and rough surfaces to explain
      these differences.

  · Discuss your findings and formulate central ideas about how light is reflected from
      smooth and rough surfaces. In the After section of the physics notebook page, report
      these ideas, the evidence on which they are based, and the rationale that connects
      the evidence to these claims and notes their importance.

To complete this exploration of reflection phenomena:

  · Using the everyday meaning of the word, reflect upon your experiences in exploring
      the nature of reflection phenomena.

  · What are you still wondering?
  · Add the central ideas about reflection from smooth and rough surfaces to Table I.1:

                                                                                                  VII. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 89
       This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

TABLE I.1 (continued) Explorations of light phenomena: Reflection
TABLE I.1 (continued) Explorations of light phenomena: Reflection

Sketch of set up  Evidence                                       Central Idea  Vocabulary
  Ray diagram

                                                                      Light rays reflect
                                                                      from smooth surfaces
                                                                      in a regular way,
                                                                      where the angle of
                                                                      reflection equals the
                                                                      angle of incidence.

                                                                      Light rays bounce
                                                                      from rough surfaces
                                                                      in many different
                                                                      directions.:

Complete entries on your physics notebook page and Table I.1. Then write a summary of

what you have learned about reflection phenomena before reading an example of student

work in response to questions 1.18 and 1.19.

1. Example of student work about reflection phenomena

   As shown in Fig. 1.27, a student added to Table 1.1 about reflection phenomena ray
diagrams for reflection from smooth and rough surfaces. For evidence to support the two
new central ideas stated, the student wrote: "Using the meter sticks to show where the light
rays are going we can see that the light hits the mirror and then reflects off of it at the same
angle it hits at."

90 | VII. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                 FIG. 1.27 Student's addition about reflection in Table 1.1

        Light rays reflect from smooth surfaces in a regular way, where the angle of reflection
     equals the angle of incidence. In this experiment we used two surfaces; the smooth
     surface of a mirror; and the rough wood surface of the table. We found that when the
     light rays traveling in straight lines from the flashlight to the mirror hit the mirror's
     surface, the light is reflected. We can see this when looking at the face of the person on
     the opposite side of the table; light is hitting her face. The angles of the line of incidence
     and the line of reflection appear to be the same. For any one particular light ray the angle
     of incidence equals the angle of reflection.

        Light rays bounce from rough surfaces in many directions. As demonstrated in the ray
     diagram, any one single ray of light that hits the rough surface will still have an equal
     angle of incidence and angle of reflection but individual rays of light hit the surface at a
     different angle.

                                                                                          Physics student, Fall 2015
When shining on a rough surface, the light from a flashlight can be envisioned as rays
traveling in the same direction but that direction will form different angles of incidence
with different parts of a bumpy surface, so that the rays bounce off at many different
angles of reflection.

                                                                                                   VII. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 91
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

2. Some nuances in explaining reflection phenomena

Defining the angles of incidence and reflection with respect to the mirror is a choice made
here because the angle between the meter stick representing the light rays and the mirror
is visually easy for children to perceive and compare.

   Physics texts typically define a different set of angles, however, for the angle of
incidence and angle of reflection. Draw a line perpendicular to the mirror at the point
that the light beam shines on the mirror. This perpendicular line is called the normal line.
As shown in Fig. 1.28, physicists define the angle of incidence as the angle between the
incident beam and the normal to the surface. Physicists define the angle of reflection as
the angle between the reflected beam and the normal to the surface.

                 FIG. 1.28 Angles defined with respect to a normal line rather than to the
                 mirror.

If the surface of the flat mirror were clean, only Person 2 should have been able to see the
light from the flashlight in the mirror. Persons 1, 3, and 4 would not have been able to see
light in the mirror if all of the light rays incident on the mirror were being reflected at the
same angle toward Person 2's face.

   If the surface of the mirror were dusty, however, some of the light rays may have
bounced off the dust in directions toward the other members of the group and they
may have reported seeing the light in the mirror. If the classroom still uses chalk on a
blackboard, one can clap an eraser near the mirror and "see" a beam of light from the
flashlight to the mirror and from the mirror to Person 2's face as some light bounces off
the chalk dust in many directions and makes such beams visible.

   When the flashlight was aimed at the table surface, all members of the group should
have been able to see light on the table as some light rays were being reflected in many
directions by the rough surface of the table as shown in Fig. 1.29.

92 | VII. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                            FIG. 1.29 Light rays reflecting in different directions from
                            bumps in a rough surface.

   There are several ways to think about what happens when light shines on rough
surfaces. One way is to notice what happens when a group of people look at someone
speaking in a room. Who can see that person's nose? Can someone by the window see
the speaker's nose? What about someone over in a corner? Someone on the other side
of the room? One can infer that light is bouncing off that person's nose in many different
directions if all of these people can see that person's nose,

   This visual representation of a model of light in which light rays bounce off a surface
with the angle of incidence equal to the angle of reflection suggests a visual experience
you may have had:

  · What happens when a basketball player dribbles a ball down a court? How does the
      ball bounce off the floor? Or when a tennis player practices by hitting a ball hard
      against a wall with a forehand shot and the ball rebounds to be hit again backhand?

  · Try this by rolling a basketball at an angle toward a wall. How does the basketball
      rebound from the wall?
     Make a sketch of how balls rebound when bouncing at an angle off a floor or wall.

  · If such a sketch is analogous to a diagram showing how light rays reflect from a
      mirror, what does this suggest about the nature of light?

                                                                                                  VII. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 93
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                            FIG. 1.30 A ball rebounding from a surface.

As shown in Fig. 1.30, a ball thrown against a wall rebounds in a way that suggests another
physical model for light: envision light rays as streams of particles traveling in straight
lines and reflecting from a surface with angle of incidence equal to angle of reflection.
When this physical model for light is used, the particles are called photons. Such streams
of photons can be envisioned as rays of light reflecting from a surface with the angle of
reflection equal to the angle of incidence. Thus our initial physical model for light rays
traveling in straight lines, a meter or yard stick, can now be elaborated as a stream of
photons traveling in straight lines from a source.

                 Question 1.20 How well do different materials reflect light?

Sunlight shines on many different materials such as water, sand, soil, asphalt pavement,
grass, trees, people... How each material responds depends upon the material's properties.
Such properties include how well the material reflects light, its reflectivity.

          Equipment: Use a digital light probe connected to a computer or calculator to show a graph of light
       intensity versus time as you move the probe over various materials. Or use a free app on a cell phone,
       search for LUX light meter.

          Try whatever is nearby as well as white paper and various colors including black, wax paper, aluminum
       foil, paper towel, cardboard, and dark cloth.

  · What can you find out about materials' reflectivity with the light probe or light
      meter? In the Before section of a physics notebook page, record your questions and
      your predictions.

  · Begin by playing with the light probe or light meter to see what you can find out

94 | VII. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                            This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   with this device.
     If using a light probe: you may need to reduce the highest value on the vertical axis
    of the graph on the computer screen if you do not have very bright lights in the
    room. Click on the top number on the vertical axis and reduce it until the signals
    from the probe are high enough on the graph to be seen easily.
       How can you use it and the various materials to make a graph that looks like the
    letter W? a sharp W? a rounded one? a letter M ? sharp or rounded M's ? What other
    letters can you make on the graph on the screen?
       Trace one of the graphs with your finger and tell the story of making a line that
    rises steeply or not so steeply. How do you make a line that descends steeply? Not so
    steeply?

· Compare how light reflects from a variety of materials, such as paper of different
   colors, aluminum foil, wax paper, cardboard, dark and light cloth...

· How does the distance from the material affect the intensity reading?
· If using a light probe: one way to keep it the same distance away from each material

   is to use a rubber band to hold a ruler next to the light probe. Attach the ruler so
   that it is extending a certain distance (say 5 cm) beyond the end of the light probe as
   shown in Fig. 1.31.

                              FIG. 1.31 Using a light probe connected to a computer
                              to compare the reflectivity of various materials.

                                                                                              VII. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 95
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

  · In the During section of your physics notebook page, record your findings. If using a
      light probe: draw a picture of the graph and indicate the parts of the graph that
      represent the different materials that you tested. Note any vocabulary that is new to
      you.

  · Discuss your findings and formulate relevant central ideas. In the After section of the
      physics notebook page, report these ideas and the evidence on which they are based.

  · Write a rationale that explains how the evidence supports the ideas and why these
      are important.

  · Also reflect upon this exploration such as what connections can you make to other
      experiences? How might you use what you learned in your own classroom?

  · What have you learned and what are you still wondering?
  · Complete documenting your exploration and writing a summary before looking at an

      example of student work and nuances about exploring the property of reflectivity.

3. Example of student work about the property of reflectivity

        Materials differ in the property of reflectivity, how well they reflect light. Corollary:
     Materials differ in how well they absorb light. To measure the light reflectivity of
     different materials we took a light sensor to the surface of different materials and
     recorded them on a computer. We used the program LoggerLite which records and
     graphs the amount of light being reflected off any particular surface. We used different
     materials like foil, dark cloth, white paper, and even our clothing and nothing at all; we
     tried just pointing the sensor directly at the light.

        In Figure (1.32) below you can see the different levels of reflectivity of light. The furthest
     point to the left that I circled represents when we were covering the end of the sensor
     with our hand; it was reflecting no light at all.

        The next point is circled in close to the top of the graph; this spot in the graph
     represents us pointing the sensor straight at the lights above us. There was quite a bit of
     reaction because we were pointing the sensor at the direct light.

        The next circle that I circled to focus on is close to the bottom of the graph. This spot
     isn't as low as when we were covering the end of the sensor, but we were shining the
     sensor at our hand, which wasn't very reflective.

        The next circled spot in the graph represents when we shined the sensor at a piece of
     tin foil. The graph went very high telling us that this material was very reflective.

96 | VII. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

        The last circled section of the graph represents when we shined the sensor on a piece
     of navy blue fabric. We held it here for a few seconds and the line leveled out, telling us
     that the material wasn't reflective and that this was a consistent reading.

                                 FIG. 1.32 Student graph from exploring reflectivity of
                                 various materials.

This student labeled both axes: "amount of light" on the vertical axis and "time" on the
horizontal axis. The student used small circles to direct attention to different parts of the
sketched graph, based on the graph produced by the computer as the students moved the
light probe from one material to another. The student described the circle at the origin
as "when we would cover end of probe so it couldn't see light." The first labeled peak was
"pointing probe at light above us;" the second labeled peak as "foil;" and the low horizontal
line as "black paper/blue cloth."

4. Some nuances about exploring the property of reflectivity

   Taking a photograph of the graph on the computer screen is helpful for retaining
accurate information. Sketching the graph is helpful for noting important aspects, as this
student did, such as the meaning of peaks and flat lines.

   The peaks in Fig. 1.32 represent pointing the probe briefly at a reflective material; the
flat lines represent pointing the probe at a material for more than a moment. A more
careful graph would have perpendicular axes, with the same labels as those used by the
computer program and with the values represented by the vertical marks noted. One is
puzzled by how the intensity of light reflected by the foil could have been more than

                                                                                                  VII. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 97
     This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

the intensity of the incoming light, perhaps identification of these peaks was switched

later during preparation of this report. Or perhaps this group was near a window and

additional light from the Sun was shining on the foil. However, this graph clearly conveys

the information that the intensity of reflected light varies with materials.

· How can you use your knowledge of reflectivity to design a solar oven? Which two of

the above materials would you choose to use?

See  http://static.lawrencehallofscience.org/diy_sun_science/downloads/

diy_ss_cook_solar_oven.pdf and https://climatekids.nasa.gov/smores/ for examples.

This is a context within which students can participate in engineering design as

advocated in the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS Lead States, 2013). See

Appendix I at https://www.nextgenscience.org/resources/ngss-appendices .

Engineering design involves defining a problem, developing solutions, and optimizing the

solution (see pages 3-6).

B. Exploring refraction phenomena

When light shines on a surface, light reflects from the surface as just discussed but

sometimes some of the light does not. Some of the light refracts instead as it keeps

on traveling through the surface into a new medium. The word medium refers to the

substance through which the light is traveling, such as air or water.

Question 1.21 What happens when light travels from one medium into another medium,
such as from air into water or from water into air?

    Equipment: To explore refraction phenomena, use a pencil or stirring rod, a tray, two
 paper cups, a pen, and access to some water.

  · What happens if you drop something into a pail of water? How does it look different
      if at all? What if you are swimming under water and look up through the water at
      something overhead?

     Note some of your experiences with looking at objects in water in the Before section of
     the physics notebook page documenting your exploration of refraction phenomena.

  · Make a large dot in a paper cup about a third of the way down from the top. Place
      the cup with the dot on a tray. Fill the other cup with water and put it on the tray.

  · Bend down until you can just see the dot in the cup. Then bend a little more so that

98 | VII. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

      you can no longer see the dot as shown in Figure 1.33. What do you think will happen
      when water is poured into the cup and covers the dot?

                             FIG. 1.33 An observer's eye is just below the point where the
                             person can see the dot in the cup.

Light rays bouncing off the dot in the direction toward the eye are blocked from reaching
the eye by the side of the cup near its rim.

  · Have someone pour water into the cup until the water flows above the dot.
      What happens?
      Record what you observe in the During section of your physics notebook page.

  · Why do you see what you see? Discuss with your group members some ideas about
      why someone would see the dot appear to move in the way it does when water is
      poured into the cup and covers the dot.

  · Sometimes when one is puzzled by a phenomenon, it helps to think about a similar
      phenomenon. Put a pencil or stirrer in a glass or tub of water as in Fig. 1.34. What do
      you see?
     Does the pencil appear higher or lower in the water? Does the dot appear to be higher
     or lower in the water in the cup?

                                                                                                  VII. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 99
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                      FIG. 1.34 Pencil appearing bent in a glass of
                                      water.

  · How could you draw rays representing light traveling from the dot to the eye so that
      the eye would perceive the light coming from the "apparent dot" rather than from
      the real dot?

  · Discuss various possibilities with your group members. How can you use the
      technique of drawing rays to represent a straight line path of light in this scenario?

  · As you work together generating ways to think about explaining why the dot appears
      to be moving up as you pour water into the cup, step back occasionally and ask
      yourselves,
          What are we doing?
          Why are we doing this?
          How is this helping us?

  · One way to think about something puzzling is to make a sketch of what is happening.
      On a large white board, draw an outline of the cup without water, dot, and observer's
      eye just below where the observer could see the dot as in Fig. 1.33
     Also draw an outline of the cup with water, dot, and observer's eye in the same
     position. Use a dashed line to outline where the dot appears to be in the cup with
     water.

  · How is light apparently traveling from the apparent dot to the observer's eye?
          Place a physical model of light rays, a ruler, on your drawing in a way that
            represents the path of light rays appearing to travel from the apparent dot

100 | VII. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                            This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

         toward the eye.
       Which part of that path would represent light rays apparently traveling from the

         apparent dot toward the observer's eye?
       Draw a dashed line to represent the apparent path of light rays from the

         apparent dot.
       Which part of that path would represent light rays actually traveling to the

         observer's eye?
       Draw a solid line to represent the actual path of light rays to the eye from the

         end of the apparent path from the apparent dot.
       Interpret the point where the dashed line and solid line meet. What is happening

         at that point? How do the actual light rays get to that point?
       Draw a solid line from the actual dot to the point where the dashed line

         representing the apparent path of light from the apparent dot meets the solid
         line representing the actual path of light to the eye.
       Where is this point?
· Describe in words this envisioned path of light rays when they travel from the actual
   dot to the surface of the water and then to the observer's eye.
· Note any vocabulary that is new to you.
· Discuss your findings and formulate a relevant central idea. In the After section of
   the physics notebook page, report this idea and the evidence on which it is based.
· Write a rationale that explains how the evidence supports this central idea and why
   this is important
· Also reflect upon this exploration such as what helped you learn during this
   exploration and how might you use this in your own classroom?
· What are you still wondering?
· Write a summary of what you have learned about refraction phenomena that states a
   central idea about refraction and explains why the dot seems to move up in the cup
   when covered with water.
· Add this idea about refraction to Table I.1:

                                                                                             VII. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 101
                  This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

TABLE I.1 (continued) Explorations of Light Phenomena: Refraction
TABLE I.1 (continued) Explorations of light phenomena: Refraction

Sketch of set up  Evidence          Central Idea                                           Vocabulary
  Ray diagram                                                                              Refraction
                            Light rays refract (bend,
                            change direction) at the

                               surface when light
                                 moves from one

                              medium into another
                               such as from air to

                            water or from water to
                                           air

  · Complete your entries on your physics notebook page and the continuation of Table
      I.1. Write a summary of what you have learned about refraction phenomena before
      reading an example of student work. Then:

  · Share what you have learned about refraction by engaging a friend or family member
      in the dot-in-the-cup activity. Describe what your learner asked, said, did and found
      in exploring this example of refraction phenomena. Also reflect upon what you
      learned from this experience in learning and teaching science.

  · In addition, read a student's description of engaging a friend in exploring refraction
      phenomena as well as some thoughts about the nature of science exemplified by
      these explorations.

1. Example of student work about exploring refraction phenomena

   A student added to Table 1.1 about explorations of refraction phenomena as shown in
Fig. 1.35. The sketch is labeled "can't see dot" before the water covers it and "can see dot"
after the water is up to the top of the cup. The ray diagram shows the "original" dot with
a solid line showing the path the light traveled and the "perceived dot" with a dotted line
to show the light's apparent path.

102 | VII. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                      FIG. 1.35. Student's addition to Table 1.1. about refraction phenomena.

Note that in Fig. 1.35, the bend is shown occurring at the top of the cup rather than at the
top of the water line. Figure 1.36 presents a diagram of a dot in a cup without and with
water where the bend is drawn at the water line.

   FIG. 1.36. Diagram of the dot in a cup without and with water as seen by an observer.

A student stated a central idea about refraction phenomena and used it to explain this
phenomenon as follows:

        Light rays refract (bend, change direction) at the surface when light moves from one
     medium into another such as from air to water or from water to air. In this experiment
     students had two cups. One cup was filled with water, the second cup was empty and
     had a dot drawn on one inside wall. Students were asked to crouch in front of the cup to
     where they could just see the dot; then they were told to go just lower than that. A second
     student poured the water from cup 1 into cup 2 and asked the students what they saw.
     As the student watched the cup being filled, water rose to the top. When the water rose

                                                                                                 VII. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 103
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

     above the dot on the wall of the cup, the crouching student could see the dot once more,
     even though the student had not moved.

        The dot gave the appearance of moving up the wall of the cup. Light was traveling
     to the dot the entire time it was in the cup. That is why the students could see the
     dot when they were standing up and looking in the cup and when they first crouched
     down...However when the student crouched down farther the light leaving the dot was
     not able to reach the student's eyes. As water rose over the dot, the light that was
     leaving the dot was refracted, meaning that the light ray traveled in a straight line
     under the water, but when it reached the surface of the water and moved into another
     medium ( from water to air) the light rays bent traveling in many directions, one of which
     happened to be to the student's eyes.

                                                                                          Physics student, Fall 2015

What the student seemed to mean in the last sentence is that light rays traveling from the
dot to the surface of the water bend as they move from the water into the air; each ray
bends in a particular direction, depending upon the direction and angle at which the ray
had been traveling in the water when it moved through the surface of the water to the air;
some of these rays happen to bend in just the right way that they travel from the dot to
the surface of the water and then, as they enter the air, bend in the direction toward the
student's eyes.

2. Nuances about exploring refraction phenomena

   A good place to start in thinking about why the dot seems to be moving up when
covered with water in the cup is with the conceptual model of light developed so far: the
central ideas that light can be envisioned as rays moving in straight lines and that for
someone to see something, light has to get to the person's eyes. Also relevant is the central
idea that light rays bounce off a rough surface in many directions.

   It is important to remember that thinking about light rays is simply a way
to envision how light could be moving through the water and the air to get to the
observer's eye when the dot appears to be moving up as water is covering the dot in the
cup.

   Because the dot can be seen from many different positions when looking down at the
dot in the water, the dot can be considered a rough surface. Note that the source of the
light somewhere up in the air above the cup of water has not been included here. Thinking

104 | VII. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

about what happens has been limited to envisioning what happens after incoming light
rays bounce off the dot in many directions as shown in Fig. 1.37.

                                      FIG. 1.37 Light rays bouncing in many
                                      directions off the real dot in the water.

   Envision many light rays, after bouncing off the dot, traveling at many different angles
to the surface of the water. Choose to focus only on those light rays that happen to be
traveling at an angle in the water such that when they bend at the surface of the water
they are headed in the direction of the observer's eye.

   The phrase bend at the surface of the water does not refer to a curving path for the rays
of light from the dot to the eye; this phrase refers instead to a path represented by one
straight line, from the dot to a point on the surface, that changes direction at that point,
and continues as another straight line, representing light rays traveling from that point on
the surface of the water to the eye.

   A ruler can provide a physical model of how light rays appear to be moving in a straight
line from the apparent dot to the eye as shown in Fig. 1.38.

                                                                                                 VII. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 105
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                     FIG. 1.38. Dashed line representing a ruler modeling the apparent
                     straight path that light rays are traveling from the apparent dot to the
                     eye.

This ruler represents, however, both the actual path of light rays that get to the eye and
an apparent path from the apparent dot.

   Where does the apparent path of light rays from the apparent dot turn into the actual
path of light rays to the eye?

   Consider the point that represents envisioning where light from the apparent dot
crosses the surface of the water. A solid line from the real dot to this point represents
some light rays bouncing off the real dot and traveling straight to this point in the water
as shown in Fig. 1.39 where the point is labeled as the location that "Refraction" occurs.
Making the dashed line into a solid line from this point on the surface of the water to the
eye represents envisioning light rays bending at this point and traveling to the eye. The
dotted dot at the end of the dotted line represents the illusion of where the dot is.

106 | VII. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                        FIG. 1.39 Dashed and solid lines represent envisioning apparent
                        and actual paths for light rays traveling from the apparent and
                        real dots to the eye.

The dotted line on this ray diagram represents envisioning the apparent path of light rays
from the apparent dot to the point where the actual light rays bend at the surface.

   The solid line with arrows on this ray diagram represents envisioning the actual path of
light rays from the dot to the surface of the water, the sharp bend at the surface, and the
solid line from that point at the surface to the eye.

   It is helpful to think about examples of refraction in a variety of contexts. In some
positions, for example, a pencil or a stick looks like it is bending at the surface of the water
as in Fig. 1.40. Why does it look bent?

   As shown in Fig 1.40, light is envisioned as shining on a pencil in the water and bouncing
off in many directions. Some of the rays are envisioned as bouncing off the pencil and
traveling in straight lines toward the surface of the water. At the surface, these rays are
envisioned as bending as they move into air. Some of the rays are envisioned to be bending
in such a way that they travel straight to the observer's eye. The observer perceives the
rays as if they had traveled in a straight line from a location different from where the
actual pencil is located so the person perceives the pencil to be bent.

                                                                                                 VII. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 107
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                   FIG. 1.40 Ray of light envisioned as bouncing off
                                   the tip of a pencil and bending at the surface of the
                                   water on way to the eye.

Another example of refraction occurs in a different context, spear fishing, as shown in Fig.
1.41. Where should you aim when spear fishing? (See: http://www.schoolphysics.co.uk/
age14-16/Light/text/Refraction_and_fishermen/index.html)

108 | VII. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                      FIG. 1.41 Spear fishing depicted in a wall painting from the tomb of
                      Usheret in Thebes, 18 Dynasty around 1430 BC
                      https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tomb_of_Usheret_01.jpg

Question 1.22 What happens when exploring refraction with friends and/or family
members?

3. Exploring refraction phenomena with a friend or family member

   After class, our students have explored refraction phenomena with friends and/or
family members and reflected upon this experience by describing details about what their
learners ask, say, do, and find. They also have commented upon what they learn about
learning and teaching science through this experience. A student, for example, wrote:

        When I originally showed the phenomena to my roommate L, she said "whoa, when
     did you start doing magic tricks!" I laughed and told her that I was not doing magic but
     merely working with the phenomena of refractions.

        She asked "what is refraction?" I told her it was what allowed her to see the dot. I then
     showed her the experiment again. Afterwards I had her stand and asked if she could see
     the dot, she said "yes." I asked why, and she said because she was standing high enough.
     So, I turned off the lights and asked if she could see it. She said "No!" I turned back on the

                                                                                                 VII. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 109
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

     lights and asked what she must have to see the dot and she said "I need light to see the
     dot." So I kept the lights on and covered the dot so only I could look into the cup and see
     it. I asked if she could see the dot, the light was there so she should be able to. L then told
     me that the "light needs to hit the dot and then come to my eyes, I can't see it if you block
     the light from getting to my eyes."

        So I asked L what must have happened for the light to travel from the dot, which was
     below her line of sight and go to her eyes. "Well," said L "the dot didn't move, cause that
     is impossible. So the light must have moved in the water to get to my eyes. Cause I only
     saw the dot look like it moved up after the water covered it."

        At this point L was so close that it was very hard for me to not just tell her the answer.
     I refrained, but only barely. I asked L how she thought the light was moving; she said she
     didn't know.

        So I drew out the flat ray diagram with the image of the dot on the side of the cup and
     her eye where it could not see the dot, but I did not draw the rays of light. I asked L to
     draw what she thought was happening. L drew a curved line from the dot to her eye.

        Once again L was so close that it was hard not to give the answer away. So I asked
     L how light travels, she said "in rays, like the rays of the sun". I was surprised that she
     knew this but I was glad. So I asked her to show me a ray, a straight line leaving the dot
     and going to the surface of the water. She did so.

        I asked if she thought this was how the light might have moved; she said, "well maybe,
     because the water going over the dot was what bent the light, so maybe the light only
     bends when it leaves the surface of the water." I was thrilled! She had figured it out! I
     then showed L the ray diagram of how light refracts and bends towards our eyes when
     leaving the surface of the water and going into the air.

        The experience was hard for me. It was difficult for me to try and explain a concept to
     someone that was a new concept for me as well. However, it was rewarding to see that if
     I was patient, and continued to ask questions and only give small supplementary bits of
     information that L was able to understand the phenomena.

        It was hard to try and think in a way that would foster L's own thinking about how
     the light rays traveled and to try and form questions that would help L to think in a
     certain way about light. I believe this will be much of what I feel as a teacher later. I
     will need to think of many different approaches for my students. Not all of them will
     understand instantly why a phenomena works; they will need more guidance or more
     questions, they may even need to experiment on their own to see if they can understand.
     I as a teacher must learn not to rush this process and to allow them to learn about the

110 | VII. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

     subjects themselves. This is in the hopes that the students will remember more about the
     information as well as be more interested in the learning process.

                                                                                          Physics student, Fall 2015

4. Thoughts about the nature of science exemplified by these explorations

   The explorations of light phenomena so far exemplify the nature of science in that
students developed central ideas based on evidence and modified those ideas as necessary
after observing new phenomena. Initially, for example, explorations of light and shadow
phenomena provided the basis for development of a conceptual model of light that
included the central ideas that (a) light leaves a source in all directions, which, after
discussion and additional exploration, was modified to light leaves a point on most sources
in many directions. Additional explorations provided evidence for the central ideas that
(b) light can be envisioned as rays traveling in straight lines, and (c) for someone to
see something, light has to get to the person's eye. A ray diagram representing how rays
seemed to travel in straight lines was useful in developing an explanation of an intriguing
observation, that the projection of an object in a pinhole camera was upside down. A
straight meter or yard stick provided a physical model for thinking about light as behaving
like rays traveling in straight lines.

   Additional explorations of reflection and refraction phenomena, however, provided
evidence that this conceptual model needed further revision. Observations of these
phenomena provided evidence for development of three additional central ideas that refer
to what happens when light shines on surfaces: c) that light rays can be envisioned as being
reflected from smooth surfaces with the angle of reflection equaling the angle of incidence,
d) that light rays can be envisioned as bouncing off of rough surfaces in many directions,
and e) that light rays can be envisioned as refracting (bending, changing direction) at the
surface when traveling through a surface from one medium to another. These are examples
of the on-going nature of scientific knowledge, which is open to revision in light of new
evidence and can change when new information is found (NGSS, Lead States, 2013, Appendix
H).https://www.nextgenscience.org/resources/ngss-appendices

   A bouncing ball also provided an elaborated physical model for light as rays composed
of particles (photons) traveling in straight lines until interacting with a surface. More
complex ray diagrams were useful in explaining another intriguing phenomenon, the
apparent upward movement of a dot on the inside of a cup as water is poured into the

                                                                                                  VII. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 111
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

cup. Additional modifications of this conceptual model for light may become necessary
after exploring more phenomena. Meanwhile we turn next to elaborating experience with
refraction phenomena in a new context.

C. Exploring dispersion phenomena

   In this section, we explore light phenomena known as dispersion.

Question 1.23 What happens when light from the Sun passes from air into a prism or water
droplet?

          Equipment: To explore dispersion phenomena on a sunny day, use a piece of white paper and a prism, a
       glass or quartz crystal, or a hose and sprinkles of water; inside use a prism or crystal with a bright lamp.

  · What have you seen when light from the Sun passes through a glass or quartz
      crystal? Old-fashioned window panes? A prism? Water droplets when sprinkling with
      a hose?

     Note some of these experiences in the Before section of the physics notebook page
     documenting your exploration of dispersion phenomena.

  · On a sunny day, take a prism or crystal outside and enjoy displaying what you see
      against a white wall or a piece of white paper on the ground. (Do not look directly at
      the Sun!)

  · Or spray water with a hose and stand in such a way that you can admire making your
      own rainbow.

  · Or play with a prism or crystal near a very bright light inside. What do you see? (Do
      not look directly at the bright light.)

  · In the During section of your physics notebook page, record your findings. Draw a
      picture of what you did and saw. Note any vocabulary that is new to you.

  · Discuss your findings and formulate a relevant central idea. In the After section of

112 | VII. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                  This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   the physics notebook page, report this idea and the evidence on which is based.
· Write a rationale that explains how the evidence supports the central idea and why

   this is important.
· Also reflect upon what you have learned during this exploration
· What are you still wondering?
· Add this central idea about dispersion to Table I.1:

TABLE I.1 (continued) Explorations of Light Phenomena: Dispersion

TABLE I.1 (continued) Explorations of light phenomena: Dispersion

Sketch of set up  Evidence  Central Idea                                                   Vocabulary
  Ray diagram

                            White light disperses into                                     Dispersion
                            its component colors
                            when moving from one
                            medium to another such
                            as from air into a glass
                            prism or water

Complete your entries on your physics notebook page and Table I.1. Summarize what you
have learned about dispersion phenomena before reading an example of student work and
nuances about exploring dispersion phenomena.

1. Example of student work about exploring dispersion phenomena

   As shown in Fig. 1.42, a student added to Table 1.1 about explorations of light phenomena
and stated as evidence, "White light from the Sun hit the prism and was broken up into its
different colors."

FIG. 1.42 Student's addition to Table 1.1 about exploring
dispersion phenomena:

                                                            VII. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 113
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

The student summarized this new central idea about dispersion phenomena as follows:
        White light disperses into its component colors when moving from one medium into

     another such as from air into a prism or water. For this experiment, students were given
     triangular prisms made of a clear material that may have been glass. We were then taken
     outside into the sunshine and told to move our prisms around and see what happened.

             It took a moment before someone exclaimed, "Hey I see a rainbow!" Soon many
     students began to really watch what happened when they tilted the prisms one way or
     another. Some students placed a piece of white paper on the ground and tried to project
     the "rainbows" onto the paper. When students set the prisms onto the paper facing the
     sun we were able to see two figures that looked like shadows but much lighter. It was
     light being dispersed through the prism onto the paper.

             When we moved the prism slightly we were able to see the light on the paper
     change from a slight white color to the rainbow of colors Red Orange Yellow Green Blue
     and Violet (ROYGBIV).

             The students then talked about what must be happening and our TA's told us that
     the sun sends out a kind of light called white light that holds all of the colors of the
     rainbow in it. The students decided that what must happen is that as the light passes
     through the prism it is broken up into the different colors when it is sent back out of the
     prism. This experiment is represented in a picture on (Fig. 1.41) as well as a ray diagram.
     In the ray diagram light goes into one side of the prism, where it is broken up into the
     many colors, and then dispersed on the other side into the different colors that were seen
     by the students.

                                                                                          Physics student, Fall 2015

2. Nuances about exploring dispersion phenomena

   Figure 1.43 shows red and violet rays bending as they move from air into a prism and
bending again as they move from the prism back into air. The violet rays bend more than
the red rays and this difference separates the white light into its component colors. The
colors between red and violet bend intermediate amounts.

   Note that the orientation of the two surfaces of the prism differ, one side slants toward
the left, the other side slants toward the right. If one draws a line perpendicular to the
surface of the prism (a normal line) at the point where the white light enters the prism,
the rays bend toward this normal as they move from air into the prism.

114 | VII. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   If one draws a line perpendicular to the surface of the prism at the point where each
ray leaves the prism, the rays are bending away from the normal as they move from the
prism back out to the air. The result of the different orientations of these surfaces is that
the rays keep bending "down" as they enter and then leave the prism.

   The drawing shows rays of light as they are inferred to be traveling. One can not actually
"see" these colored rays as represented in the drawing. What one sees is the spectrum of
colors when the rays land on some kind of screen such as a wall or piece of paper, or in the
case of a rainbow, on the retina of an eye. This is a model of what seems to be happening.
The next section uses this model to develop an explanation for an amazing natural event,
the formation of a rainbow.

                                                                                                  VII. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 115
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

FIG. 1.43 Dispersion of white light into its spectrum of colors. The spectrum ranges from red to violet as
shown here. Modified from https://wikivisually.com/wiki/File:Prism_rainbow_schema.png CC 3.0

116 | VII. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

VIII. Using Additional Central Ideas
about Light to Explain an Intriguing
Phenomenon

   We can use these additional central ideas about reflection, refraction, and dispersion to
explain a beautiful phenomenon: a rainbow.

                           Question 1.24 How are rainbows formed?

  · When you see a rainbow, where are you standing with respect to where the sun and
      rain are?
          Is the sun behind you, high above you, or in front of you?
          Is the rain behind you, raining straight down on you, or some distance away in
            front of you?
          Make a sketch that shows where you are with respect to the sun and rain.

  · What happens when light from the sun enters a water drop?
          What happens when light rays move from one medium into another such as
            from air into water?
          Make a ray diagram showing white rays from the sun entering a water drop.
            Show only one color as rays of that color move from air into the drop.

  · What happens when light rays reflect off a smooth surface?
          Continue your ray diagram showing rays of one color reflecting off of the inner
            surface of the drop, back into the drop.

  · What happens when light rays move from one medium into another, such as from
      water into air?
          Continue your ray diagram showing rays of one color leaving the water drop and
            traveling through the air.

  · Will colors from the same drop reach the observer's eye?
          Continue your ray diagram showing rays of one color traveling to the observer's

                                                             VIII. Using Additional Central Ideas about Light to Explain an Intriguing Phenomenon | 117
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

            eye.
          Consider whether rays of another color would exit this drop in a direction

            toward the observer's eye.
          Add another drop at a different height from which a different color reaches the

            observer's eye.
  · Summarize how light from the sun sometimes forms a rainbow in the sky.
Complete your ray diagram and summary before looking at an example of student work
and nuances about explaining rainbows.

1. Example of student work explaining rainbows

   A student began explaining rainbows with a sketch of where someone is who is seeing
a rainbow, with respect to the sun and the rain, and a ray diagram showing how one can
envision what happens when light rays enter water drops in just the right way to form a
rainbow as shown in Fig. 1.44.

        (Figure 1.44) is a sketch of someone seeing a rainbow. The Sun is behind the person and
     the cloud with raindrops is in front of the person.

                 FIG. 1.44 Sun, person, cloud, and rain when a person is seeing a rainbow.

      (Figure 1.45) is a ray diagram with the Sun, two rain drops, and a person's eye.

118 | VIII. Using Additional Central Ideas about Light to Explain an Intriguing Phenomenon
                  This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                              FIG. 1.45 Student ray diagram for two
                              raindrops and person seeing a rainbow.

The ideas above can be used in tracing the two continuous rays in (Fig. 1.45), in order
to explain how someone can see a rainbow.

   First of all, white light disperses into its component colors when moving from one
medium into another such as from air into a prism or water.

   In Figure (1.45), the two light rays that are shown leaving the sun in the direction
of the raindrops are white light. Once those white light rays hit the raindrops, which
is a change in medium from air to water, it can be seen that the white light disperses
into its component colors, which is represented by the red and violet rays seen inside
of the raindrops. Next, light rays refract (bend, change direction) at the surface
when light moves from one medium into another such as from air to water or from
water to air. This refraction is first seen in Figure (1.45) in each of the raindrops
directly when the light rays first hit the raindrops, since the rays are moving from
the medium of air to the medium of water.

   Next, light rays reflect from smooth surfaces in a regular way, where the angle of
reflection equals the angle of incidence. This is seen in Figure (1.45) when both the
red and the violet rays hit the back of the raindrops, which are smooth surfaces, and
they reflect off in the same angles as which they came in, which are the angles of
incidence.

   Finally, refraction is seen again in Figure (1.45). The second time that refraction is
seen is when the light rays are leaving the raindrops, since the rays are moving from

                                            VIII. Using Additional Central Ideas about Light to Explain an Intriguing Phenomenon | 119
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           the medium of water to the medium of air. When the light rays leave the raindrops,
           the red rays bend less than the violet rays. So, in the raindrop on the top, only the
           red light rays exit at the correct angle to travel to the observer's eye. In the raindrop
           on the bottom, only the violet light rays exit at the correct angle to travel to the
           observer's eye. Since we only see one color from each raindrop, that is how a rainbow
           is seen.

                                                                                     Physics student, Spring, 2016

2. Nuances in using central ideas about reflection, refraction, and dispersion to
explain rainbows

      A step by step view of the processes involved in forming rainbows can be helpful:
   First the white light rays from the Sun are envisioned as being refracted on entering a
water drop with different colors bending at different angles. Violet bends the most, red
the least. The other colors bend in between. Figure 1.46 shows this first step of white
light entering a raindrop and one of its component colors bending toward the normal at a
particular angle at the surface of the drop.

             FIG. 1.46 White light ray from the Sun refracts as it enters a raindrop.

   Next the colored light ray is envisioned as moving through the rain drop and
encountering the inner surface of the other side of the raindrop. What happens there?

120 | VIII. Using Additional Central Ideas about Light to Explain an Intriguing Phenomenon
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

         FIG. 1.47 Light ray of a particular color is reflected at the smooth inner surface of the rain
         drop.

   As shown in Fig. 1.47, when rays of a particular color enter a drop, they are envisioned
as bending and continuing to move in a straight line in a direction away from the observer
until they reach the smooth inner surface of the raindrop. As shown in Fig. 1.47, some are
envisioned as being reflected internally at the inside surface, where angle of reflection
equals the angle of incidence for each color. These rays are envisioned as now heading
back in a direction toward the observer.

   Then the rays of all colors are envisioned as moving back through the raindrop to the
original side they entered, but now traveling in the opposite direction. What happens
there?

                                                             VIII. Using Additional Central Ideas about Light to Explain an Intriguing Phenomenon | 121
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   FIG. 1.48 Light ray of a particular color is refracted again as it moves from water into air.

   As shown in Figure 1.48, rays of this color are envisioned as being refracted again as
they leave the raindrop in the direction of the observer, bending again, but away from the
normal at a particular angle for that color. The red rays leave the surface below the green
rays, which are below the blue rays. This is the inverse order to colors seen in a rainbow.

   As shown in Fig. 1.48, the entire trip through a rain drop is envisioned as involving a)
refraction as white light enters the raindrop and separates into its component colors as
each color bends at its own angle, b) reflection of each color at the opposite inner surface
with color's angle of reflection equal to its angle of incidence, and then c) refraction again
but in a direction toward the observer as the rays of each color leave the raindrop.

   Note that if you see a rainbow you are seeing light from DIFFERENT raindrops. The
red light is coming from drops high in the sky, the violet light from drops lower in
the sky (See: http://science.howstuffworks.com/nature/climate-weather/atmospheric/
question41.htm).

   Figure 1.49 shows a ray diagram drawn by Rebecca McDowell when she was a second
year Bachelor of Teaching student at the University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. She
included many colors of the spectrum and represented someone seeing different colors
from raindrops at different heights.

122 | VIII. Using Additional Central Ideas about Light to Explain an Intriguing Phenomenon
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

       FIG. 1.49. Seeing different colors from different raindrops at different heights. Rebecca
       McDowell, How Rainbows Form, University of Melbourne (1999)
       http://www.rebeccapaton.net/rainbows/formatn.htm accessed May 28, 2019.

Next time you see a rainbow, enjoy!

                                                             VIII. Using Additional Central Ideas about Light to Explain an Intriguing Phenomenon | 123
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Fig. 1.50 Rainbows!
Images by Katrina van Zee from a sailboat in Loch Nevis, Scotland.

As shown on the right in Fig. 1.50, the order of the colors in the faint secondary bow

of a double rainbow is reversed with red light forming the inner arc. The explanation

involves a similar model of envisioning light rays from the Sun refracting, reflecting, and

refracting as they enter and leave raindrops. In a secondary bow of a double rainbow,

however, the incoming refracted light rays are envisioned as reflecting twice within a

raindrop rather than once, with violet light coming from higher drops and red light from

lower ones. (See https://www.metoffice.gov.uk/weather/learn-about/weather/optical-

effects/rainbows/double-rainbows and http://hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/hbase/

atmos/rbowpri.html#c2.)

The process of using models to develop explanations of complex phenomena is an

example of an aspect of the nature of science articulated in the US Next Generation

Science Standards that science models, laws, mechanisms, and theories explain natural

phenomena (NGSS,  Lead   States,  2013,                                                     Appendix  H)  (See:

https://www.nextgenscience.org/resources/ngss-appendices.)

124 | VIII. Using Additional Central Ideas about Light to Explain an Intriguing Phenomenon
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

IX. Historical and Current Perspectives
on the Nature of Light

Historical interpretations of the spectrum of colors dispersed by a prism

   Archeologists have found glass prisms in ancient Roman ruins as well as natural prisms
such as rock crystals in Pompeii (Rossi & Russo, 2017, p. 335). These findings suggest that
people have been seeing a spectrum of colors displayed when white light shines through
a prism since ancient times. Greek and Roman writers also discussed optical phenomena.
Euclid (325 BC-265 BC), for example, envisioned light as rays moving in straight lines,
formulated a law of reflection, and knew about refraction effects (Mach, 1926/2003, p.
3-4).

   People also have pondered the nature of light and colors for a long time. The Greek
philosopher Aristotle (384 BC-322 BC), for example, wrote that colors were mixtures of
light (white) and darkness (black). This became widely accepted and led to the view that
light from the Sun was a single form of light, white, and that a prism modified pure white
light into the different colors as the white light moved through the prism.

   This view of white light persisted until the publication of a letter to the Royal Society of
London in 1671/72 by Isaac Newton. He stated and supported a different view, that white
light was already a mixture of colors, with each color bending as it entered a prism at its
own angle of refraction.

     Newton (1671/72) referred to refraction as "refrangibility" and stated that:

           As the Rays of light differ in degrees of Refrangibility, so they also differ in their
           disposition to exhibit this or that particular colour...The least Refrangible Rays are
           all disposed to exhibit red colour, and contrarily those Rays, which are disposed to
           exhibit a Red colour, are all the least refrangible: So, the most refrangible Rays are all
           disposed to exhibit a deep Violet Colour, and contrarily those which are apt to exhibit
           such a violet colour, are all the most Refrangible. And so to all the intermediate
           colours in a continued series belong intermediate degrees of refrangibility. (p. 3081,
           #1 and #2) https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/abs/10.1098/rstl.1671.0072

                                                                                             IX. Historical and Current Perspectives on the Nature of Light | 125
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

In addition, Newton noted that when we perceive an object to have a particular color, that
effect is due to the object primarily reflecting light of that color to our eyes:

           ...the Colours of all natural Bodies have no other origin than this, that they are
           variously qualified to reflect one sort of light in greater plenty than another. And
           this I have experimented in a dark Room by illuminating those bodies with
           uncompounded light of divers colours...and consequently when illuminated with
           day-light, that is, with all sorts of Rays of any colour promiseuously blended, those
           qualified with red shall abound most in the reflect light, and by their prevalence
           cause it to appear of that colour (ibid, p. 3084-3085, #13)

Newton claimed that the colored rays already existed within the white light and that these
rays separate as they bend at different angles within the prism (p. 3083, #7). To support
this claim, Newton showed that not only did a prism disperse white light into separate
colors but also that a lens could converge these colored rays back into white light like
that that comes from the Sun. He presented evidence for this claim by describing his
experimental setup and findings:

           In a darkened room make a hole in the shut of a window, whose diameter may
           conveniently be about third part of an inch, to admit a convenient quantity of the
           Suns light: And there place a clear and colourless Prisme, to refract the entering light
           towards the further part of the Room, which, as I said, will thereby be diffused into
           an oblong coloured Image. Then place a Lens of about three-foot radius (suppose a
           broad Object-glass of a three foot Telescope,) at the distance of about four or five foot
           from thence, through which all those colours may at once be transmitted, and made
           by its Refraction to convene at a further distance of about ten or twelve feet. If at that
           distance you intercept this light with a sheet of white paper, you will see the colours
           converted into whiteness again by being mingled.

He provided some details of how to do this and suggestions of what to observe:

           But it is requisite, that the Prisme and Lens be placed steddy, and that the paper, on
           which the colours are cast, be moved to and fro; for, by such motion, you will not only
           find, at what distance the whiteness is most perfect, but also see, how the colours
           gradually convene, and vanish into whiteness, and afterwards having crossed one
           another in that place where they compound Whiteness, are again dissipated, and

126 | IX. Historical and Current Perspectives on the Nature of Light
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           severed, and in an inverted order retain the same colours, which they had before
           they entered the composition...(ibid., p. 3086)
Newton also provided the ray diagram reproduced in Figure 1.51 to illustrate this
experiment. In Figure 1.51, rays of white light from the sun (SF) enter a hole in a window
(EG), pass through an equilateral prism (ABC), and are dispersed, with example rays FP
bent more than FR. Lens (mn) converges these rays so that they meet at point Q on paper
HI as white light, although they are seen as colored spots before and after Q if the paper
HI is moved back and forth. (This excerpt from the letter also includes some of the text, in
which the font for s looks like an f.)

                 FIG. 1.51. Excerpt from Newton (1671/72) showing white light (SF) dispersed by
                 prism (ABC) into rays that are converged by lens (mn) back into white light on
                 a piece of paper (HI) at Q. (p. 3086)
                 https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/abs/10.1098/rstl.1671.0072

Newton also applied this understanding to explain the colors in the rainbow (#10 on
pages 3083-3084). We too can use what we now know about reflection, refraction, and
dispersion to make sense of why we sometimes can see beautiful rainbows in the sky.

   References in this section:

            Newton, I. (1671/72). A letter of Mr. Isaac Newton, Professor of the Mathematics in the University

                                                                                              IX. Historical and Current Perspectives on the Nature of Light | 127
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

         of Cambrdige; Containing his new theory about light and colors: Sent by the author to the publisher
         from Cambridge, Febr. 1671/72; in order to be communicated to the R. Society. Philosophical
         transactions of the Royal Society of London, 6, (60-80) 3075-3087. https://royalsocietypublishing.org/
         doi/abs/10.1098/rstl.1671.0072

   For information about this letter and its problematic reception at the time, see Patricia
Fara's article celebrating the 350th anniversary of the journal Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society:

            Fara, P. (2015). Newton shows the light: a commentary on Newton (1672) `A letter...containing
         his new theory about light and colors...' Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society,
         http://rsta.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/373/2039/20140213.

   Other references mentioned in this section:

            Ernst Mach, The principles of physical optics: an historical and philosophical treatment. Trans. J. S.
         Anderson and A.F.A. Young. (Methuen & Co, London; Dover, Mineola, NY, 1926/2003).

            Cesare Rossi and Flavio Russo, Ancient Engineers' Inventions: Precursors of the Present. (2nd ed.)
         Cham, Switzerland: Springer International, p. 335. (2017). ISBN 978-3-319-44476-5

            Library of Universal Knowledge, A Reprint of the Last (1880) Edinburgh and London Edition of
         Chambers's Encyclopaedia, p. 731
         https://play.google.com/store/books/details?id=ichZAAAAYAAJ&rdid=book-ichZAAAAYAAJ&rdot=1
         https://play.google.com/books/
         reader?id=ichZAAAAYAAJ&printsec=frontcover&output=reader&hl=en&pg=GBS.PA731 p. 731

   In addition to referring to light as rays, Newton envisioned rays as composed of "small
particles". In a later major document summarizing his exploration of light phenomena, the
book Opticks, he wrote:

                  Are not the Rays of Light very small Bodies emitted from shining Substances?
               (p. 371, Question 29)

         Newton, I. (1730). Opticks: Treatise of the Reflections, Refractions, Inflections and Colours of Light. (4th
         ed.) London: William Innys at the Westend of St. Paul's . http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/33504

   Christiaan Huygens (1690), a Dutch contemporary of Newton, however, proposed an
alternative way of envisioning light, as analogous to sound, traveling outward in all
directions from a source like a wave formed when a pebble drops into a puddle of water:

             It (light) spreads, as Sound does, by spherical surfaces and waves: for I call them
             waves from their resemblance to those which are seen to be formed in water when a
             stone is thrown into it, and which present a successive spreading as circles, though
             these arise from another cause, and are only in a flat surface.(p. 4)

128 | IX. Historical and Current Perspectives on the Nature of Light
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.
         Christiaan Huygens, Treatise on Light. (Translated from French by Silvanus P Thompson). Macmillan,
         London, 1690/1912). http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/14725

Figure 1.52 shows examples of successive spreading of circles from raindrops falling on
water.

                                  FIG. 1.52. Example of circular waves formed by rain
                                  falling on water. Image by Ruth Hartnup CC by 2.0
                                  https://www.flickr.com/photos/ruthanddave/
                                  5713878850

   Envisioning light as such successive spreading of circular waves also occurs today. Light
waves can be represented as shown in Figure 1.53, which presents the primary colors
of the spectrum of light from the sun. Red light has the largest wavelength, violet the
smallest.

                                                                                             IX. Historical and Current Perspectives on the Nature of Light | 129
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                      FIG. 1.53 Primary colors of the spectrum of
                                      light from the Sun as represented by waves
                                      with different wavelengths.
                                      National Aeronautics and Space
                                      Administration, Science Mission Directorate.
                                      (2010). Visible Light. http://science.nasa.gov/
                                      ems/09_visiblelight , accessed May 28, 2019.

As shown in Fig. 1.54, a wave length, often represented by the Greek letter lambda can
be measured from crest to crest, midpoint to midpoint, or trough to trough. The wave's
amplitude is the distance from the midpoint to the crest or trough.

                 FIG. 1.54 Wave diagram showing wave length and amplitude. Modified from
                 Phil Stoffer http://geologycafe.com/images/wavelength.jpg

The light's frequency, often represented by f or the Greek letter nu is the number of waves

130 | IX. Historical and Current Perspectives on the Nature of Light
                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

that pass a point each second. The speed of a wave depends on both the wavelength and

the frequency:  .

These two perspectives on what light IS, whether particles or waves, were evident in the

writings of Newton and Huygens in the 17th century. They continue today in the "wave-

particle duality'' to which physicists refer. Sometimes it is helpful to think of light as a

stream of particles, sometimes as a spreading wave. Each perspective is useful, depending

upon the context within which one is asking questions about light.

                IX. Historical and Current Perspectives on the Nature of Light | 131
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

X. Making Connections to Educational
Policies

   What does it mean to do science? What should every person know about science? How
should science be taught? These are questions that every community decides by what and
how children learn science, or not, in its schools.

   This section completes this unit. As an informed citizen, you should become aware
of your community's standards for teaching science, particularly if you are a teacher,
preparing to become a teacher, or a parent advocating for more science to be taught in
elementary schools.

Question 1.25 What are the current standards for teaching science at various grade levels in
                                        your community?

  · Contact the department of education in your community to find out about the
      current standards for teaching science at various grade levels. The Oregon
      Department of Education's announcement, for example, is at
      https://www.oregon.gov/ode/educator-resources/standards/science/Pages/
      Science-Standards.aspx . This state adopted the US Next Generation Science
      Standards (NGSS Lead States, 2013) in 2014.

   A. Learning about the US Next Generation Science Standards:
                     Science and engineering practices

The Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) website is at
https://www.nextgenscience.org . This website describes three dimensions of what it
means to be proficient in science and engineering. These dimensions are science and
engineering practices, crosscutting concepts, and disciplinary core ideas that NGSS
recommends for students to learn at various grade levels.

   This unit began, for example, with the scientific practice of asking questions about the

132 | X. Making Connections to Educational Policies
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

nature of light such as How does light seem to travel from a source to a screen? By exploring
light and shadows, students developed a model for thinking about light, that light can be
envisioned as rays traveling in straight lines. Students next used that model to explain
the cause of a surprising effect, that the projection on the screen of a pinhole camera is
upside down. Searching for the cause of an effect is a crosscutting concept characteristic of
the many domains of science and engineering. During explorations in this unit, students
inferred and used a disciplinary core idea that objects can be seen when light reflected from
their surfaces enters our eyes.

   Development of the Next Generation Science Standards was based on an earlier
document, A Framework for K-12 Education: Practices, Crosscutting Concepts, and Core
Ideas (https://www.nap.edu/read/13165/chapter/1). The NGSS website includes a series
of appendices that discuss various aspects of the Framework's recommendations.

  · NGSS Appendix F describes eight scientific and engineering practices at
      https://www.nextgenscience.org/resources/ngss-appendices . Scan these to see
      what they are and read about any that you find particularly interesting.

  · Complete Table I.4 by indicating with a check mark your perception of participating
      in some way in some of the eight NGSS science and engineering practices during
      your exploration of light phenomena.

                                                                                                                   X. Making Connections to Educational Policies | 133
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Table I.4. Science and engineering practices (NGSS Lead States, 2013)

Table I.4. Science and engineering practices (NGSS Lead States, 2013)

Practices                       Exploring light        Exploring pinhole        Exploring
                                 and shadows            phenomena and           reflection,
                                                     estimating the size of    refraction,
                                                                             dispersion and
                                                             an object          explaining
                                                                                rainbows

1. Asking questions (for
science) and defining problems
(for engineering

2. Developing and using
models

3. Planning and carrying out
investigations

4. Analyzing and interpreting
data

5. Using mathematics and
computational thinking

6. Constructing explanations
(for science) and designing
solutions (for engineering)

7. Engaging in argument from
evidence

8. Obtaining, evaluating, and
communicating information

  · Provide an example by choosing one of the practices and describe how you did this.

Complete your entries into Table I.4 and description of participating in one of the
practices before reading an example of student work.

134 | X. Making Connections to Educational Policies
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

1. Example of student work about relevant educational policies

As shown in Fig. 1.55, a student indicated that many of the NGSS science and engineering
practices had been used during this unit.

                            FIG. 1.55 Student's response indicating use of science and
                            engineering practices in this unit.

        (The table) indicates with a check mark my perception of participating in some way in
     some of the eight practices specified during my exploration of light phenomena...One of
     the practices that we have participated in during class is developing and using models
     and we did this when we developed the idea that light can be envisioned as rays traveling
     in straight lines. In order to do this, we used a lamp, a barrier, a white piece of paper, and
     a meter stick. The light shined directly on the barrier, so the barrier made a shadow on
     the white paper. The meter stick was placed at the edge of the lamp and it went straight
     past the edge of the barrier. The meter stick represents a ray of light traveling from the
     lamp. The shadow of the meter stick was lined up with the edge of the barrier's shadow

                                                                                                                   X. Making Connections to Educational Policies | 135
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

     on the paper, which we inferred means that the light travels in a straight line because the
     shadows lined up perfectly in relation to the actual objects, so we assume that light can
     always be envisioned as rays traveling in straight lines. Developing and using a model
     allowed us to develop a very important idea.

                                                                                     Physics student, Spring 2016

      B. Reflecting upon this exploration of light phenomena

   This unit began with exploring light and shadows in order to develop ways to think and
talk about the nature of light. The first demonstration involved turning on a lamp in a dark
room and observing light shining all around on the ceiling, the floor, and people's faces.
The first central idea to emerge from discussing this demonstration likely seemed obvious,
that light leaves a source in all directions. This central idea needed refinement, however,
to acknowledge that directional sources like lasers exist and that not all directions might
occur. The refined central idea became light leaves most sources in many directions. Small
group explorations with a light source, barrier, and screen included using a meter stick
(or ruler) to serve as a physical model representing the central idea that light can be
envisioned as rays traveling in straight lines.

   These two central ideas formed a conceptual model useful in explaining an intriguing
phenomenon: if one looks at a light bulb through a pinhole camera, the projection of the
light bulb is upside down! A good way to start thinking about such puzzling phenomena
is to make a sketch of the situation, in this case, to draw a picture of the light bulb and a
picture of its upside-down projection. The next step is to think about what one knows that
is relevant to the situation shown in the sketch. For example, how can envisioning light as
rays leaving a source in straight lines help here? In particular, how can the physical model,
the meter stick (or ruler), help to think about how light from the top of the light bulb can
travel through the pinhole toward the bottom of the screen?

   Laying one end of the meter stick (or ruler) near the sketch of the top of the bulb and
the other end of the meter stick (or ruler) near the sketch of the bottom of the projection
suggests a useful insight: that if light rays from any point on the bulb can be envisioned as
leaving the source in many directions, some rays from the top of the bulb can be thought
of as traveling straight through the pinhole toward the bottom of the screen; some rays
from the middle of the bulb can be thought of as traveling straight through the pinhole

136 | X. Making Connections to Educational Policies
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

to the middle of the screen; and some rays from the bottom of the bulb can be thought
of as traveling straight through the pinhole toward the top of the screen. This insight
implies that an alternative explanation is not needed, that something happens to the rays
to "flip" the projection. The physical model of the meter stick (or ruler) suggests that
nothing happens to the rays forming the projection; they just keep traveling in the same
direction they happen to be going, straight through the pinhole. The aluminum foil around
the pinhole blocks other rays from the source from shining on the screen.

   Simplifying a sketch can help make important aspects of a situation more prominent.
Drawing a vertical line representing the bulb and a parallel vertical line representing
an upside-down projection, for example, provides a useful visual model for pinhole
phenomena, the ray diagram. Tracing the rays with one's finger while telling the story
represented by a ray diagram can be a compelling way to communicate to others what one
is envisioning to be happening.

   The ray diagram for pinhole phenomena consists of two similar triangles. Interpreting
these geometrically leads to a mathematical model for pinhole phenomena, an algebraic
equation that expresses the direct relationship between ratios of the corresponding
lengths of the similar triangles. This mathematical model made possible estimating a
quantity that could not be directly measured. Students held a pinhole in a sheet of
aluminum foil one meter away from a screen, traced the Sun's projection on the screen,
measured the diameter of the projection, and used the equal ratios of corresponding
lengths of similar triangles as well as information about the distance from the Earth to the
Sun to estimate the Sun's diameter.

   Exploring reflection phenomena with a mirror and two meter sticks or rulers in a dark
room prompted a refinement of this ray model for light. Light rays can be envisioned
as traveling in straight lines until they hit a mirror and bounce away, with the angle of
reflection equaling the angle of incidence. Balls also bounce off walls and floors in this way,
which suggests an elaboration of this model for light, that rays can be envisioned as an on-
going flow of particles, called photons, in straight lines. An alternative model, representing
light as waves, also can be helpful in explaining complex phenomena, as discussed in Unit
4.

   Exploring refraction and dispersion phenomena prompted an additional refinement of
this conceptual ray model for light. When light rays move from one medium into another,
such as from air into water or from water into air, the rays can be envisioned as traveling
in straight lines that bend at the point of entering or leaving a medium. White light from
the Sun can be envisioned as composed of many colors, with the degree of bending related

                                                                                                                   X. Making Connections to Educational Policies | 137
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

to the color of the ray. This refined conceptual model of light was powerful in explaining a
complex phenomenon: rainbows!

    C. Making connections to NGSS understandings about the
                             nature of science

This unit has provided many examples of the nature of science as articulated in Appendix
H of the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS, Lead States,
2013) https://www.nextgenscience.org/resources/ngss-appendices . Appendix H
includes tables that provide insights about the development of these understandings
about the nature of science across grade spans of K-2, 3-5 (elementary), 6-8 (middle
school), and 9-12 (high school). Four NGSS understandings about the nature of science are
related to the science and engineering practices.

   One NGSS understanding about the nature of science, for example, is that scientific
investigations use a variety of methods. Children in grades K-2, for example, should
understand that scientists use different ways to study the world. In this unit, for example,
students have made observations using lamps, barriers, pinhole cameras, mirrors, cups of
water, and prisms to explore what happens when light moves from one place to another.

   Another NGSS understanding is that scientific knowledge is based on empirical
evidence. Students in grades 3-5, for example, should learn that science findings are based
on recognizing patterns. In this unit, for example, students have explored patterns in what
happens to shadows when someone moves a barrier closer or farther away from a light
source.

   Students experience in several ways the NGSS understanding that scientific knowledge
is open to revision in light of new evidence. Students in grades 6-8 (middle school), for
example, should learn that science explanations are subject to revision and improvement
in light of new evidence. In this unit, the central idea that light can be envisioned as rays
traveling in straight lines, for example,was modified as the students explored what
happens when light reflects from a mirror, refracts when entering and leaving a new
material, and disperses if the light is composed of more than one color

   K-8 development of the NGSS understanding that science models, laws, mechanisms,
and theories explain natural phenomena ranges, for example, from scientists use drawings,
sketches, and models as a way to communicate ideas (K-2) to science theories are based on
a body of evidence developed over time (middle school). In this unit, for example, students

138 | X. Making Connections to Educational Policies
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

have learned how to use ray diagrams and central ideas based on evidence to explain a
variety of phenomena. They also have had access to original descriptions of investigations
of light conducted over several centuries.

                                                                                                                   X. Making Connections to Educational Policies | 139
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

XI. Exploring Physical Phenomena:
Summary of Equipment and Supplies
for Unit 1

140 | XI. Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 1
                  This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 1

Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 1

When used         For instructors and         For each group of 3                          For each student
                     demonstration

Often             4 large whiteboards         1 large whiteboard,                          Small whiteboard,

                  Set of white board          1 meter stick,                               Whiteboard
                  markers and erasers           1 plastic bin with set                     marker;
                                                                                           Whiteboard
                    2 meter sticks            of magic markers;                            eraser
                    Chart paper                 Example NSTA
                    Masking tape                                                             Half of an old
                    Large whiteboard for      journal, NSTA                                manila folder
                  class moon observations     newsletter,                                  with which to
                                                                                           make paper
                                                Children's books                           "tent' name plate
                                              about light, thermal
                                              phenomena, weather,                          ________
                                              climate change
                                                                                           /______/\
                                                (Need second meter
                                              stick for each group for
                                              exploring reflection in
                                              Unit 1)

                                              Bin with above materials                     U1H1 Welcome
                                                                                           Handout
       Unit 1
       Week 1       2 sheets chart paper        1 sheet of chart paper                     U1H2 Student
         Day 1    on which volunteers         on which group                               information
  Q1.1            alternately record          members draw                                 Form
Exploring ways    findings reported by        pictures and record
to foster         small groups about ways     ways that fostered
science           to foster science           their own science
learning          learning                    learning

                                                                                           Before field trip
                                                                                                outside:

If weather          Sky journal (see Unit 5,                                               U1H8 Diagnostic
permits, go on    Question 5.6)                                                            Questions about
field trip                                                                                 the Sun, Moon,
outside to start                                                                           and stars
sky journals
                                                                                             Sky Journal
                                                                                           (See Unit 5,
                                                                                           Question 5.6)

Q1.2 Diagnostic   Bright lamp, no shade;                                                   U1H7 Diagnostic
Question about                                                                             Questions about
Light             Basketball with "stand"                                                  Light Handout
                  (masking tape roll)

                  XI. Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 1 | 141
                 This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 1

Q1.3 - Q1.7      Large whiteboard          Large whiteboard                               U1H4 Physics
Exploring light                                                                           Notebook Page
and shadows      Sheet of chart paper to   Sheet of chart paper to                        with Explanations
                 cover whiteboard to       cover whiteboard to
                 serve as opaque screen    serve as an opaque                             2 U1H5 Physics
                                           `screen'                                       Notebook Pages
                   Lamp with clear bulb
                 so can see filament if      Shaded table lamp                              U1H9 Table1.1,
                 available; otherwise      with bendable stem                             Light and
                 frosted LCD bulb                                                         Shadows (use
                                             Barrier (board, book,                        near end of
                                           or hand)                                       class)

                                             U1H3 Exit ticket                               Near end of
                                                                                          class: cardboard
                                                                                          cutout to take
                                                                                          home and use in
                                                                                          exploring light
                                                                                          and shadows
                                                                                          with friend or
                                                                                          family member

        Day 2                              Pinhole Exploration                            U1H5 Physics
   Q1.9 - Q1.2                             Envelope:                                      notebook page
Exploring
pinhole          Bright lamp with bulb     (2 paper cups, 1 paper                         If remote
phenomena:       that is not a sphere, no  towel roll; 1 Al foil                          learning: paper
                 shade                     square, 3 wax paper                            cup, empty
                                           squares, 6 rubber                              paper towel roll,
                                           bands, 1 pin)                                  cereal or snack
                                                                                          box;
                                             (paper cups replace
                                           previous use of empty                            translucent
                                           toilet paper rolls - they                      cover such as
                                           are clean, only need                           cereal box liner
                                           one rather than 2 ends                         or plastic bag;
                                           added, and provide a
                                           larger projection)                               Al foil square
                                                                                          or Al from candy
                                             U1H3 Exit ticket                             bar wrapper
                                                                                          unless using a
                                                                                          paper cup;

                                                                                            1 or 2 rubber
                                                                                          bands,

                                                                                            pin or needle
                                                                                            U1H10
                                                                                          Table1.1cont;
                                                                                          Table 1.2, Pinhole
                                                                                          Phenomena (use
                                                                                          near end of
                                                                                          class)

142 | XI. Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 1
                    This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 1

       Week 2       Sunny day                      Pinhole Math Envelope                     U1H11 Sun Pinhole
          Day 3                                                                              problem stated;for
                    If not a sunny day:            (White paper on                           use if rainy day)
   Q1.16 Using      Bright lamp with bulb          cardboard screen,
pinhole             that is not a sphere, no       cardboard holder with                     U1H13 Solving
phenomena to        shade                          Al foil with pinhole;                     Pinhole Math
estimate                                           cardboard holder with                     Problems
diameter of Sun:      Extra physics                wax paper screen if not
                    notebook pages if              a sunny day)                                U1H12
                    students have not                                                        Diameter of the
                    brought their own                U1H3 Exit Ticket                        Sun Handout;
                                                                                             Table 1.3 (Use
                                                                                             near end of
                                                                                             class)

        Day 4       (If there is a holiday during  Flashlight
   Q1.18 - Q1.20    the term, combine
Exploring           reflection and refraction      2 meter sticks, yard
reflection          explorations)                  sticks, rulers, or
phenomena:                                         pencils

                                                     Mirror                                    U1H14
                                                     Computer (provided;                     Reflection
                                                   or laptop brought in by                   Phenomena (use
                                                   group member)                             near end of
                                                     Logger lite software                    class)
                                                     TI Light Probe or
                                                   other light sensor*
                                                   ($16) or cell phone APP:
                                                   LUX meter
                                                     Interface** ($61)
                                                     Reflectivity Envelope
                                                   (samples of Al foil,
                                                   cardboard, wax paper,
                                                   colored paper
                                                   including black, paper
                                                   towel, dark cloth)
                                                     U1H3 Exit Ticket

       Week 3                                      2 paper cups, one with                      U1H15
          Day 5                                    dot                                       Refraction
                                                                                             Phenomena
   Q1.21 Exploring                                 Tray, straw or wooden                     (use near end of
refraction                                         stirrer                                   class)
phenomena
                                                     U1H3 Exit Ticket

                    XI. Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 1 | 143
               This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 1

               Sunny day or bright lamp  Prism                                          If remote learning:

        Day 6                            (note: CDs can make                            prism or some
   Q1.23-1.24                            rainbows but this                              drinking glasses,
Exploring                                involves a different                           glass plates or
dispersion                               mechanism than                                 jewelry crystals,
phenomena and                            dispersion)                                    or access to
explaining                                                                              hose and spray
rainbows                                   (sunny day or bright                         of water on a
                                         light)                                         sunny day

                                           Red, blue, and black                           U1H16
                                         whiteboard markers                             Dispersion
                                                                                        Phenomena (use
                                           U1H3 Exit Ticket                             near end of
                                                                                        class)

                                                                                          U1H17 NGSS
                                                                                        Practices

* https://www.vernier.com/products/sensors/tilt-bta/50/
**For example: Go!Link https://www.vernier.com/products/interfaces/go-link/

144 | XI. Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 1
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

UNIT 2: EXPLORING THE NATURE
OF THERMAL PHENOMENA

Exploring Physical Phenomena: What happens when light from the Sun shines on the
Earth?

                        Unit 2 Table of Contents

     I. Introduction ............................................................................................................................. 151
        II. Identifying Student Resources ...................................................................................... 153
              A. Connecting to what one already knows about thermal phenomena ........... 153
                     Question 2.1 What are some everyday experiences you have had with
                 thermal phenomena? ................................................................................................... 153
                    1. Examples of student work identifying everyday connections to thermal
                 phenomena .................................................................................................................... 154
              B. Documenting initial ideas with diagnostic questions about thermal
           phenomena .......................................................................................................................... 155
        III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence .......................................................... 156
              A. Developing central ideas about thermal phenomena ...................................... 156
                     Question 2.2 How would you rank different materials in order of
                 temperature? ................................................................................................................. 156
                    1. Example of student work about how different materials feel to the
                 touch ............................................................................................................................... 159
                     Question 2.3 Why do some materials feel warmer or cooler than others? 160
                    2. Example of student work about developing central ideas based on evidence
                 about thermal phenomena ..........................................................................................161
                    3. Nuances in exploring how hot and cold different materials feel to the
                 touch ............................................................................................................................... 162
                    4. Some thoughts about the nature of science in this context ....................... 163
              B. Clarifying distinctions between closely related ideas ..................................... 164

                                                                                                           Unit 2: Exploring the Nature of Thermal Phenomena | 145
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                     Question 2.4 What is the difference between the concepts of heat and
                 temperature? ................................................................................................................. 164

                    1. Example of student work clarifying the meaning of the words heat and
                 temperature? ................................................................................................................. 166
        IV. Using Central Ideas about Thermal Phenomena to Explain an Intriguing
     Phenomenon .................................................................................................................................172
              A. Applying the property of thermal conductivity in an everyday context .....172

                     Question 2.5 Why do the metal legs of a chair feel cooler than its plastic
                 seat? .................................................................................................................................172

                    1. Example of student work explaining an intriguing thermal
                 phenomenon ...................................................................................................................172
        V. Developing Additional Central Ideas about Thermal Phenomena ........................174
              A. Exploring thermal phenomena with technology ...............................................174

                     Question 2.6 What can you find out about thermal phenomena with a
                 temperature probe connected to a computer? ........................................................175
              B. Exploring thermal phenomena with everyday materials .................................. 177

                     Question 2.7 What happens when you mix various amounts of hot and cold
                 water? ............................................................................................................................. 178

                    1. Example of student work about mixing hot and cold water .....................180
                    2. Nuances about exploring thermal phenomena by mixing hot and cold
                 water ............................................................................................................................... 184
                    3. Some thoughts about the nature of science in this context ....................... 189
        VI. Developing an Additional Central Idea about Thermal Phenomena and Its
     Mathematical Representations ...............................................................................................190
              A. Interpreting features of line graphs ....................................................................190
                     Question 2.8 How can you tell what is happening by interpreting the shape
                 of a line graph? ............................................................................................................190
              B. Identifying patterns in the data ............................................................................. 192
                    1. Designing a series of experiments to identify patterns in the data ......... 192
                     Question 2.9 When mixing hot and cold water, how are the amounts of hot
                 and cold water related to how much their temperatures change? ................... 192
                    2. Recording and analyzing data ........................................................................ 195
                    3. Interpreting findings ........................................................................................ 201
        VII. Developing a Mathematical Representation of Thermal Phenomena Based on
     Theoretical Considerations ..................................................................................................... 206

146 | Unit 2: Exploring the Nature of Thermal Phenomena
                         This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

        A. Considering what happens when energy flows from hot water to cold
     water ..................................................................................................................................... 206

               Question 2.11 What theoretical considerations can provide insights into
           what is happening when energy flows from the hot water into the cold water?

             ......................................................................................................................................... 206
              1. Example of student work developing a mathematical expression for a
           change in energy ........................................................................................................ 208
              2. An analogy to specific heat and the mathematical expression for change in
           energy ............................................................................................................................ 210
        B. Considering the Law of Conservation of Energy .............................................. 211
               Question 2.12 How does the energy gained by the cold water compare to the
           energy lost by the hot water, assuming no energy is gained by the surrounding
           environment? ................................................................................................................ 211
               Question 2.13 How are these experimental and theoretical approaches
           related? .......................................................................................................................... 212
   VIII. Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate a Quantity of Interest ..... 214
        A. Solving a thermal math problem .......................................................................... 214
               Question 2.14 How can one use mathematical representations of thermal
           phenomena to estimate a quantity of interest? .................................................... 214
              1. Example of student work generating and solving a thermal math problem
             .......................................................................................................................................... 216
   IX. Engaging Friends or Family Members in Exploring Thermal Phenomena ....... 219
               Question 2.15 What can you learn about science learning and teaching
           by engaging a friend or family member in learning about thermal
           phenomena? .................................................................................................................. 219
              1. Examples of student work about designing and solving thermal math
           problems with friends and/or family members ................................................... 220
   X. Making Connections to Educational Policies ............................................................223
        A. Learning about crosscutting concepts articulated in the Next Generation
     Science Standards ................................................................................................................ 132
               Question 2.16 What relevant cross-cutting concepts have you used in
           exploring light and thermal phenomena? ..............................................................223
        B. Reflecting upon this exploration of thermal phenomena ...................................0
         C. Making connections to NGSS understandings about the nature of science .0
   XI. Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit
2 ...................................................................................................................................................... 229

                                                                                                  Unit 2: Exploring the Nature of Thermal Phenomena | 147
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                  Figures

          FIG. 2.1 Examples of aluminum, steel, Styrofoam, and wooden materials. ............ 156
          FIG. 2.2 Styrofoam, wood, and two kinds of metal blocks with a thermometer... 158
          FIG. 2.3 Student's entries describing the initial exploration of thermal
         phenomena. ............................................................................................................................. 167
          FIG. 2.4 Click on green box near top of computer screen to start exploration........0
          FIG. 2.5 Using a temperature probe to make an m on the computer screen. ...........0
          FIG. 2.6 Making a design with two temperature probes and hot and cold water. ...0
          FIG. 2.7 Student entries describing the mixing of hot and cold water
         exploration................................................................................................................................ 181
          FIG. 2.8 Mixing equal and unequal amounts at the same temperature. ................. 182
          FIG. 2.9 Mixing equal amounts of hot and cold water. ................................................ 183
          FIG. 2.10 Mixing more hot than cold ................................................................................ 183
          FIG. 2.11 Mixing more cold than hot ................................................................................. 184
          FIG. 2.12 Mixing intended equal amounts of water at unequal temperatures...........0
          FIG. 2.13 Mixing unequal amounts of water at unequal temperatures........................0
          FIG. 2.14 Mixing unequal amounts of water at unequal temperatures........................0
          Repeated on p. ...........................................................................................................................0
          FIG. 2.15 Graph representing the mixing of hot and cold water. More hot water or
         more cold water? ....................................................................................................................191
          FIG. 2.16 Graph representing the mixing of hot and cold water. More hot water or
         more cold water? ....................................................................................................................191
          FIG. 2.17 Template for graphs of temperature versus time for mixing hot and cold
         water .............................................................................................................................................0
          FIG. 2.18 Form of graph of temperature versus time for mixing 1 part hot and 2
         parts cold water..........................................................................................................................0
          FIG. 2.19 Student's entries describing exploration of changes in energy.............. 209
          FIG. 2.20 Student sketch of the situation for this problem........................................ 216
          FIG. 2.21 Student representation of the problem graphically.....................................217

148 | Unit 2: Exploring the Nature of Thermal Phenomena
                     This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                             Tables

Table II.1 Developing central ideas about thermal phenomena................................ 165
Table II.1 Developing central ideas about thermal phenomena (continued) .........180
Table II.2 Reporting data and analyzing experiments mixing hot and cold
water ..........................................................................................................................................197
Table II.2 Reporting data and analyzing experiments mixing hot and cold water
(continued) .............................................................................................................................. 200
Table II.3 Comparing ratios of amount of hot and cold water and ratios of changes
in temperature............................................................................................................................0
Table II.4 Developing a mathematical expression for change in energy ............... 208
Table II.5 Crosscutting concepts (NGSS, 2013) in the context of light and thermal
phenomena ..............................................................................................................................225

                                                                                             Unit 2: Exploring the Nature of Thermal Phenomena | 149
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

150 | Unit 2: Exploring the Nature of Thermal Phenomena
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

I. Introduction

   When light from the Sun shines on the Earth, things often get hot. This unit explores the
nature of such thermal phenomena. Why, for example, do some things feel hot or cold?
What is the difference between heat and temperature? How is energy conserved when
mixing hot and cold water? While exploring the nature of thermal phenomena, you will be:

  · identifying resources such as relevant language you use and experiences you have
      had

  · developing central ideas based on evidence that you record in exploring how energy
      flows from hot to cold objects

  · explaining an intriguing phenomenon such as why you might prefer sitting on
      wooden rather than metal risers in watching a soccer game late in the fall

  · developing mathematical representations of the transfer of energy in various
      contexts

  · using mathematical representations to estimate a quantity of interest such as how
      much cold water to add to a cup of tea too hot to drink and

  · making connections to educational policy, such as the Next Generation Science
      Standards (NGSS Lead States, 2013), the science standards adopted by many US
      departments of education.

   During this unit, you will be learning about learning processes as well as about physics
as you summarize and reflect upon your explorations. Also important will be integrating
science and literacy learning such as speaking clearly, listening closely, writing coherently,
reading with comprehension, and creating and critiquing media.

   The main sections of the text present questions with suggestions for exploring topics
and for writing reflections about your findings. Text in gray font indicates that these are
suggestions; you may think of other ways to explore the topic. You are encouraged to ask
and explore your own questions about thermal phenomena as well as those posed here.
Check with your instructor if you choose to devise an alternative approach.

   Much of the learning will occur within small groups as you and your group members
talk with one another about what you are thinking and why. Keeping track of what one is
doing and thinking is important. This course uses a template for a physics notebook page
on which to record notes during class. The physics notebook page can help you remember

                                                                                                                                                                I. Introduction | 151
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

your thoughts before, during, and after an exploration. An experienced elementary
teacher, Adam Devittt, designed this notebook page to mirror the structure of before,
during, and after reading strategies.

   Before starting an exploration, think about and discuss with your group members what
you know already about the topic, what questions you are asking, how you plan to conduct
the exploration, and what you think you might find out.

   During your exploration, record what is happening, what you are observing, and what
you are thinking about what you are observing. Include sketches of equipment and
observations. Note any words that are new and their definitions.

   After your exploration, record any central ideas that have emerged from your
observations and discussions. Also note the evidence on which you have based these ideas.
In addition, provide a rationale that states explicitly how the evidence is relevant and
supports the claims you are making in stating the central ideas. Also explain why this
result is important. Then write a reflection about whatever you want to remember about
this experience. In addition, briefly state what you are still wondering in this context.

   After class, use your physics notebook pages and any handouts to write a summary of
your exploration and findings. Writing such a summary after every class is a good way to
prepare for the midterm and final examinations.

   Next, to be sure you have understood the physics involved, read this text and some
examples of student work. The student authors first wrote drafts, received feedback for
ways to enhance content and clarity, and submitted these final versions. Also read about
some nuances to consider when explaining the phenomena explored.

   You also may find helpful student reflections about teaching a friend or family member
about what they had just learned in class, historical information about ways knowledge
about the topic developed, and some relevant aspects of the nature of science in the
context of the topic explored. These sections of the text may broaden your understanding
of science and of science learning and teaching.

152 | I. Introduction
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

II. Identifying Student Resources

   Young children learn to stay away from hot stoves, to get mittens when going outside
to play in the snow, and to sip carefully before drinking from a cup of hot cocoa when
they come back inside. Such experiences can serve as resources on which to build when
studying about thermal phenomena.

A. Connecting to what one already knows about thermal
phenomena

   One way to begin learning about a topic is to consider relevant everyday experiences
and the language used to describe them:

Question 2.1 What are some everyday experiences you have had with thermal phenomena?

   How do you keep things hot or cold for a picnic?
   Adjust the temperature of water for a bath?
   Cook dinner?

   Like many English words, the adjective thermal derives from a Greek root, in this case:
thérme, which refers to heat.

  · What words with the root thérme do you know?
          What do you use to measure temperatures?
          How do you keep a liquid hot or cold?
          What controls how much heat a furnace delivers to a room?
          What is the medical condition in which a person loses heat faster than the body
            can produce heat?

   Everyday experiences with thermal phenomena may include using thermometers to
measure temperatures, storing hot or cold liquids in a thermos, adjusting a thermostat to

                                                                                                                                      II. Identifying Student Resources | 153
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

increase or decrease the amount of heat delivered to a room, and taking care to avoid
hypothermia while hiking in cold and/or wet weather.

   The formal name for the focus of this unit is thermodynamics. This is the study of energy
in the form of heat (thermo) and ways such energy flows within a system (its dynamics).
Thermodynamics is the study of what happens when things warm up or cool down.

  · Record some of your experiences with thermal phenomena before reading examples
      of student work.

1. Examples of student work identifying everyday connections to thermal
phenomena

A student reflected on relevant resources as follows:
                The elementary students in my classroom will experience thermal phenomena

           in their everyday lives. They will experience the warmth of the sun on their faces,
           the coldness of metal handrails in the winter, and hot pavement in the summer.
           Students who take baths may also be aware of what happens when you combine a lot
           of hot water with some cold water - the water temperature lowers, but is still on the
           warmer side.

                                                                                     Physics Student, Spring 2015
   Another student wrote about an early experience that she had had:

           I can remember being a young child and running to be the first in my classroom so
           that I could get a good seat. The good seat was not only close to the front, but it was
           a wooden chair, so it did not feel as cold as some of the metal and plastic chairs in
           the room.

                                                                                          Physics student, Fall 2015
   Such memories provide useful examples of thermal phenomena to be explained.

154 | II. Identifying Student Resources
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

B. Documenting initial ideas with diagnostic questions about
thermal phenomena

   One way we make sense of the world is through observations, what we see, hear, smell,
taste, and feel. These observations provide evidence that we can think about and interpret
in different ways. The diagnostic questions below document some of your initial ideas
about thermal phenomena and will not be graded.

   Name______________________________ Date_____________
                             Diagnostic Questions about Thermal Phenomena

  1. Consider (without touching) materials you may have at home such as an aluminum
      pie pan, steel can opener, Styrofoam or paper cup, and wooden salad fork - or four
      blocks made of such materials: an aluminum block, a steel block, a Styrofoam block
      or pad of paper, and a wooden block.
     Rank these in order of temperature. Explain the reasoning for your predicted
     ranking.

 2. Touch the four materials. Rank these in order of temperature.
     Explain the reasoning for your ranking.

                                                                                                                                      II. Identifying Student Resources | 155
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

III. Developing Central Ideas Based on
Evidence

   What does it mean to develop an idea based on evidence? This is a practice central to
doing science, to observe phenomena closely, record findings, and make sense of these
results in ways that explain what is happening. Why, for example, would a child seek as a
"good seat" a chair made out of wood rather than metal?

A. Developing central ideas about thermal phenomena

   Some things feel cool when you touch them; other things not so much. How do their
temperatures compare when measured with a thermometer?

       Question 2.2 How would you rank different materials in order of temperature?

  · Without touching, consider different kinds of materials often found in kitchens:

                                 FIG. 2.1 Examples of aluminum, steel, Styrofoam or
                                 paper, and wooden materials

156 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

 Equipment: Kitchen items such as aluminum pie pans, steel can openers, Styrofoam or
 paper cups, and wooden salad forks are often accessible but all have difference sizes
 and shapes. To simplify thinking about these materials, also consider using four blocks
 of about the same size and shape made out of aluminum, steel, Styrofoam or paper, and
 wood. Also obtain a bulb and tube thermometer, digital temperature probe, or cell
 phone APP that measures everyday temperatures (rather than just human body
 temperatures) to measure the items' temperatures after you have ranked them.

  · Rank these materials in order of temperature.
  · Explain the reasoning for your predicted ranking.

     When all of your group members are ready:

  · Touch the materials. Rank them in order of temperature.
  · Explain the reasoning for your ranking.
  · Talk with your group members about your rankings and reasoning.

     If you want to record some of their ideas or change yours, leave your initial responses
     unchanged on the front of your paper and write instead on the back

  · Try to come to consensus for ranking these materials in order of their temperatures.
      How do you as a group explain these observations based on touching the blocks?

  · Measure the temperature of all of the items with a thermometer.

   There are several ways to measure the temperature of objects. One simple way is to
place a thermometer on each object in turn. One also can use a set of objects made out of
different materials with a hole drilled in each to hold a thermometer as shown in Fig. 2.2

   In using a regular glass bulb and tube thermometer, it is important to hold on to the
thermometer near the top so one's hand does not affect the reading. Also keep holding the
thermometer while waiting for the reading to stabilize so that the thermometer does not
fall over and break.

                                                                                                                 III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 157
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                  Fig. 2.2 Styrofoam, wood, and two kinds of metal
                                  blocks and a thermometer.

  · What is your ranking in order of temperature reading?
  · Explain the reasoning for your ranking.
  · Talk with your group members about your rankings and reasonings.

     If you want to record some of their ideas or change yours, leave your initial responses
     unchanged on the front of your paper and continue writing instead on the back.
  · Try to come to consensus for ranking these materials in the order of their
      temperatures.
      How do you as a group explain these observations based on measurement with a
      thermometer?
  · Write a summary of your findings and explanation.

158 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

After completing your own summary, look at an example of student work

1. Example of student work about how different materials feel to the touch

Many students report feeling confident that the Styrofoam feels warmest and the metal
feels coolest, based on prior experience with these materials as well with actually
touching them now. There usually are some differences of opinion about how to rank the
Styrofoam and wooden blocks and in what order to rank the steel and aluminum metal
blocks.

   One student described her experience in ranking the temperature of the four blocks
after she touched them as follows:

              Four blocks were laid out in front of me. I touched all four of the blocks and I
           noticed that they all felt like they were different temperatures. The two metal blocks
           felt the coldest, the wood block felt warmer than the metal blocks, and the Styrofoam
           block felt the warmest. Since these different materials all felt like they were different
           temperatures when I touched them, this is evidence that materials differ in how hot
           or cold they feel to the touch.

                                                                                     Physics Student, Spring 2016
   Another student described what happened when her group used a thermometer to
measure the temperatures of the four blocks. The scale of the thermometer was marked
in degrees Celsius. This temperature scale is named after Anders Celsius (1701-1744), a
Swedish scientist who defined a scale of a hundred degrees between the freezing and
boiling points of water. On the current Celsius scale used world-wide, the freezing point of
water is 0ºC, room temperature is in the neighborhood of 20ºC, human body temperature
is about 37ºC, and the boiling point of water is at 100ºC at standard atmospheric pressure.
For a summary of the history of measuring temperatures, see
https://www.britannica.com/technology/thermometer#ref227799.
   The student reported the following experience:

              Students were then asked to flip over the plates and found that each one had
           a small hole drilled into it. Each table was then given a thermometer and asked
           to measure the temperature of the plates. Our table measured first the wood and
           Styrofoam and found both to be 24 oC. I thought that potentially there was something
           wrong with my thermometer, so I warmed it up to 30 oC and then placed it into a

                                                                                                                 III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 159
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           hole on one of the metal plates. The temperature went down and read 24 oC. I could
           not believe it. So I tried again with the thicker plate of metal and once again the
           temperature was measured to be 24 oC.

                                                                                          Physics Student, Fall 2015
   Most groups are surprised to find that all the materials are at about the same
temperature. The metal feels cool and the Styrofoam feels warm but the thermometer
readings for the temperature of the metals, wood and Styrofoam are nearly or exactly the
same! How can this be!
   One possibility is that the thermometer is broken. That is readily tested by holding
the thermometer's bulb in one's hand. The liquid in the thermometer's tube usually rises
quickly with a warm hand on the bulb. Another possibility is that the thermometer is
working properly and that the blocks are actually at or nearly at the same temperature.

          Question 2.3 Why do some materials feel warmer or cooler than others?

  · Talk with your group members about some possibilities for why the materials are all
      at the same temperature even though some feel warmer or cooler than others.

  · Share your ideas with other groups. Listen closely to ideas that other groups are
      proposing.

  · Talk with your group members about any suggestions from the other groups that
      seem helpful. Refine your group's ideas or pursue some new possibilities for
      explaining what was happening when you touched the different materials.

  · Share your current ideas with the other groups. Listen closely to ideas that other
      groups are proposing now.

  · Keep talking and refining ideas until your group and the other groups reach a
      consensus on some central ideas about what must be happening in order for the
      materials to have the same temperature but to feel so different when touched.

  · Write a summary of the central ideas based on evidence that emerged from the small
      group conversations and whole group discussions.

After completing your own summary, look at an example of student work about thermal
phenomena, nuances in exploring how hot or cold different materials feel to the touch,
and some thoughts about the nature of science in this context.

160 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

1. Example of student work about developing central ideas based on evidence about
thermal phenomena

   A student interpreted the surprising finding that materials can feel different even if at
the same temperature as follows:

           ...the thermometer did not read a different temperature for any of the four plates.
           This made students realize that since each of the plates was found to have the same
           temperature, that they were all at room temperature. Essentially each of the plates
           had been left for a long time untouched in the room and had not had a heat source
           or sink that would have affected them. This means that they all were the same
           temperature.

                                                                                          Physics Student, Fall 2015
   Usually while discussing why the blocks are all at the same temperature, someone
eventually utters the phrase room temperature. Occasionally someone will use the phrase
ambient temperature. This has a more general meaning referring to the temperature
of surroundings, sometimes used to refer to the temperature of the air surrounding a
big computer. Once uttered, the phrase room temperature shifts most students from
puzzlement to acceptance of the finding that the four blocks are all at the same
temperature.
   What remains is puzzlement about why the blocks feel so different even though they
are all at room temperature.
   The small group reports of current thinking may range from "I have no idea" to thoughts
that hint at the next step. Someone, for example, may say something about hands being
warmer than all of the blocks and someone else may struggle to express an idea about
the materials of the different blocks being different in some way, hinting at the idea of a
particular property of the materials that is making a difference.
   Having heard these still-emerging ideas hesitatingly expressed, the small groups may
make some progress if given another opportunity to talk with one another. Another round
of reporting out may yield a well-articulated explanation that the class as a whole then
adopts. This student, for example, continued with such an explanation:

              Students were surprised to find that all of the plates were the same temperature,
           because when they placed their hands upon them, they could feel that the plates
           were colder or warmer than one another. What students came to realize is that what
           they were feeling was energy transfer by conduction. Essentially the metal objects
           are conductors of heat, which means that the energy from the students' hands was

                                                                                                                  III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 161
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           flowing from their palm into the metal...which left our hand feeling colder as the
           energy was leaving.

              In this experiment, the students found that metal was a conductor, meaning
           that the metal transfers energy more quickly and has a high thermal conductivity.
           However, the Styrofoam, a substance often used for coolers, is an insulator, meaning
           that it has a low thermal conductivity, meaning that it transfers energy more slowly
           so it can keep hot things hot and cold things cold.

                                                                                          Physics Student, Fall 2015
   The rounds of conversations that result in such a clear statement of what is happening
take time, but they seem to help students make sense of what may have been a very
puzzling experience. A goal of this course is to raise issues but to have students resolve
these issues through small group conversations and whole group discussions. The intent
is to create opportunities for students to experience science in ways similar to the ways
that scientists experience science, as both interesting and comprehensible.

2. Nuances in exploring how hot or cold different materials feel to the touch

   Students who held the bulb of their thermometer in their hands noted that the
temperature indicated by the thermometer was higher than the temperature that the
thermometer indicated for the four materials. They observed that there was a temperature
difference between their hands and the blocks and inferred that energy flowed from their
hotter hands into the metal blocks, which lowered the temperature of their hands.

   The inference that energy flows only from hot to cold can be hard to accept because
prior experiences may suggest a different direction. When one is sitting on a metal
bleacher at a late fall soccer game, for example, the perception likely is that cold is seeping
into one's body. However, the inference here is that what is actually happening is that one's
body heat is flowing out into that entire metal bleacher!

   The metal blocks felt cold; the Styrofoam felt warm. The inference is that the metal
blocks differed from the Styrofoam in the property of how easily the metal blocks conducted
energy away from the students' hands, the property of thermal conductivity.

   The inference is that more energy flowed out of the students' hands into the metal
blocks than into the Styrofoam block. The energy flowing into the metal blocks spread
rapidly throughout the blocks; the metal blocks had a higher thermal conductivity. The

162 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

students' hands lost more energy to the metal blocks and therefore felt cold when
touching the metal blocks.

   Another inference is that the energy flowing into the Styrofoam blocks did not spread
throughout the Styrofoam blocks but stayed near where the hands were touching the
blocks. The students' hands lost very little energy to the Styrofoam blocks and therefore
their hands continued to feel warm

   This introduces central ideas about the transfer of energy from hot to cold objects and
the ease with which such energy transfer occurs. The inference is that energy flows
quickly through materials that are conductors, which have a high thermal conductivity;
energy flows slowly through materials that are insulators, which have low thermal
conductivities.

   Note that both judgments about the four blocks were based on evidence. Students
produced rankings that differed based on observations made by touching the blocks.
Students produced rankings that were the same based on observations made with a
thermometer.

   The usefulness of the rankings would depend upon the purpose. If one is choosing a
material on which to sit on a cold day, rankings in terms of thermal conductivities would be
helpful. If one is interested in the temperature of a room (without a heat source or sink),
one could choose to use a thermometer to measure the temperature of an object made
with any of these materials, the number obtained would be the same, or close to the same,
for all. (Holding the object for a long time while making the measurement might change
its temperature if the object has a high thermal conductivity.)

3. Some thoughts about the nature of science in this context

   Science involves making judgments based on evidence. One needs to be aware, however,
both of the nature of the evidence and its appropriateness for answering a question. When
puzzlements occur, one may need to clarify ambiguities in formulating the question as
well as in designing an exploration. Asking How would you rank different materials in order
of temperature? turns out not be answerable by ranking materials by how they feel to
the touch. Underlying the mismatch of that question with the suggested procedure is a
conceptual distinction between heat and temperature.

                                                                                                                 III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 163
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

B. Clarifying distinctions between closely related ideas

If something seems puzzling, one way to seek a better understanding is to ponder ideas
that seem closely related, are they the same or different?

     Question 2.4 What is the difference between the concepts of heat and temperature?

A useful way to organize outcomes is to review the set up, evidence, and relevant
vocabulary for central ideas that emerge from explorations and discussions, as in Table II.1

  · Clarify for yourself the difference in the meaning of the words heat and temperature
      in the context of physics by completing the following table:
          Make a sketch of the set up with the four different materials
          Note the evidence of how the materials felt when touched and what their
            temperatures were as measured by a thermometer
          Define any relevant vocabulary.
          Then write a summary of the central ideas about thermal phenomena developed
            so far in this unit.

164 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
    This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

TABLE II.1 Developing central ideas about thermal phenomena.

TABLE II.1 Explorations of Thermal phenomena

Sketch of set up Evidence  Central Ideas                        Relevant
                                                                Vocabulary

                           Materials differ in how hot or cold
                           they feel to the touch

                           Temperature is measured by a
                           thermometer

                                                                Room temperature

                           Materials left for a long time
                           without a heat source or sink in
                           the room come to the same
                           temperature, room temperature

                                          III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 165
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                                       A temperature difference implies a  Conduction
                                                       flow of energy from hotter objects
                                                       to colder objects. When the
                                                       objects are touching, this process
                                                       is called energy transfer by
                                                       conduction.

                                                       Materials differ in their thermal   Thermal
                                                       properties such as how well they    Conductivity
                                                       conduct energy throughout the
                                                       material, their thermal             Conductors
                                                       conductivity. Conductors have          Insulators
                                                       high thermal conductivities.
                                                       Insulators have low thermal
                                                       conductivities.

                                                       Heat and temperature are
                                                       different ideas

After completing the table above and summarizing your understanding of each central
idea, look at an example of student work.

1. Example of student work clarifying the meaning of the words heat and
temperature

Figure 2.3 shows one student's notes for the table above. Also presented is this student's
summary of the central ideas about thermal phenomena developed so far in this unit.

166 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                            FIG. 2.3 Student's entries describing the initial exploration of
                            thermal phenomena.

   For "sketch of the set up" in the first row, this student drew the four blocks in order
from "feels coolest" on the left to "feels warmest" on the right and labeled the blocks "light
metal, dark metal, wood, Styrofoam." For evidence, the student wrote "I touched the four
plates and they physically felt different."

   In the second row, the student drew four blocks with four thermometers and wrote "We
put the thermometer in a hole in each plate and found their temperatures."

   In the third row, the student drew the four blocks and two wall clocks showing the times
of 1 and 2 o'clock. The student wrote, "The materials have been sitting out for an hour and
they are the same temperature."

                                                                                                                 III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 167
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   In the fourth row, the student drew a picture of a block and hand, with a representation
of energy flowing out of three of the fingers of the hand into the block. The student wrote,
"The plate felt cold because the energy left my hand and went into the plate."

   In the fifth row, the student drew a picture of two blocks, each with a hand touching
the block. The hand touching the metal block has a representation of energy flowing out
of four fingers; the hand touching the Styrofoam block has a representation of energy
flowing out of only one finger. The student wrote, "The metal felt colder than the Styrofoam
because it conducts energy better."

   In the sixth row, the student drew a picture of a thermometer and labeled it
"temperature" and a picture of a block with a hand on it and labeled "heat". The student
wrote : "The temperature is a number measured by a thermometer and heat is the energy
that is flowing or not flowing from us into the metal."

   The student wrote the following rationales for the central ideas claimed in the third
column of the table:

              Materials differ in how hot or cold they feel to the touch. Four blocks were laid out
           in front of me. I touched all four of the blocks and I noticed that they all felt like they
           were different temperatures. The two metal blocks felt the coldest, the wood block
           felt warmer than the metal blocks, and the Styrofoam block felt the warmest. Since
           these different materials all felt like they were different temperatures when I touched
           them, this is evidence that materials differ in how hot or cold they feel to the touch.

              Temperature is measured by a thermometer. The thermometer that we used to
           measure the temperatures of the four blocks was long and narrow and had rounded
           edges. The thermometer was made out of glass and it measured the temperatures in
           degrees Celsius.

              Materials left for a long time without a heat source or sink in the room come
           to the same temperature, room temperature. The four blocks of different materials
           were laid out for a long time without being touched at all. There were no heat sources
           or sinks in the room. This allowed the blocks time to sit in room temperature.

              Each of the four blocks had a small hole in it that allowed the thermometer to sit
           inside of the material. To measure the temperature of each of the blocks, I held the
           thermometer in the hole for a minute by holding it at the top so that my hand did
           not affect the temperature. After waiting for a minute for the thermometer to finish
           reading the temperature of the material, I recorded the temperature of each of the
           blocks.

              The light-colored metal block was 18°C, the dark-colored metal block was

168 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                  This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

18.25-18.5°C, the wood block was 18.5-18.75°C, and the Styrofoam was 19°C. Even
though the blocks differed in how hot or cold they felt to the touch, the readings
are all within 1°C of each other. Because the readings on a thermometer for the
four blocks of different materials were all relatively the same temperature, room
temperature, this is evidence that materials left for a long time without a heat source
or sink in the room come to the same temperature, room temperature.

   A temperature difference implies energy is flowing from hot objects to colder
objects. Four blocks that are room temperature were laid out in front of me. We know
that the blocks are room temperature because they were left for a long time without
any heat source or sink in the room.

   When students touched the blocks, they noticed that some felt colder or warmer
than others. Human body temperature is warmer than room temperature, so my
hand is warmer than the blocks. When I touched the metal block it felt cold. There
is a difference in temperature between my hand and the metal block, which is what
allowed energy to flow from the warmer object, my hand, to the colder object, the
metal block. Energy leaving from my hand to the metal block made my hand feel cold.
Metal has high thermal conductivity, so energy is quickly transferred from my hand
and I feel the temperature difference right away.

   The wood and the Styrofoam are insulators, so they have lower thermal
conductivity. Because the transfer of energy takes longer for these materials, there is
less energy flowing, and as a result my hand does not feel as much of a temperature
difference.

   Energy transfer by conduction, in this context, refers to the rate that energy is
transferred by touch between two objects, such as a hand and a metal block. Energy
is transferring from my hand to the blocks, because they are different temperatures.
My body temperature is warmer than the metal block and when I touch the metal
block my hand feels cold, which is evidence that a temperature difference implies
energy is flowing from hot objects to colder objects.

   Materials differ in their thermal properties such as how well they conduct
energy throughout the material. Thermal conductivity is referring to the rate or
speed that energy is transferring between two objects when they touch. First of all,
metal is a conductor. When I felt the metal, it felt the coldest out of the four blocks.
Since the metal has high thermal conductivity, it rapidly transfers energy. So, when
I touch the metal, energy leaves my hand quickly, so there is a lot of energy flowing,
therefore leaving me to feel a big temperature difference between the object and my
hand.

                                                                                                III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 169
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

              Next, the wood and the Styrofoam are insulators. The wood and the Styrofoam
           have low thermal conductivity, so they slowly transfer energy. Styrofoam transfers
           energy slowly so that it can keep hot things hot and cold things cold, which is why
           it is often used for coolers. Since it takes a while for all of the energy to transfer
           from my hand to those materials, there is less energy flowing and I feel less of a
           temperature difference between the object and my hand.

              So, because metal which is a conductor and wood and Styrofoam which are
           insulators feel like they are different temperatures to the touch, this tells us that
           they conduct energy at different rates. This difference in rates for conducting energy
           is evidence that materials differ in their thermal properties such as how well they
           conduct energy throughout the material.

              Heat and temperature are different ideas. ...Temperature is a number measured
           in degrees. In class we used a thermometer to measure the temperature of the
           different blocks. According to the thermometer, the temperature of the light- colored
           metal block was 18°C, the dark colored metal block was 18.25-18.5°C, the wood block
           was 18.5-18.75°C, and the Styrofoam was 19°C. So, the numbers measured by the
           thermometer were the temperatures of the blocks.

              Heat can be thought of as a feeling, for instance the metal blocks felt colder than
           the other blocks, however what the students are feeling is the transfer of energy. Heat
           is the energy that is flowing or not flowing from us into the metal. So, when I touched
           the metal with my hand, the energy from my hand rapidly transferred to the metal
           because it is a conductor. The heat is what one feels because of the transfer of energy
           from one thing to another. Less energy was flowing from my hand to the wood, and
           even less to the Styrofoam, because they are insulators and are slower at conducting
           energy.

              Because the different materials felt like they were different temperatures, the rate
           of the energy flow of each of the materials is different. Even though the rate of the
           energy flow of each material is different, the temperatures on the thermometer are
           all within 1°C of each other. So, since the thermal conductivity of the materials are
           different while the temperatures of the materials are about the same; this is evidence
           that heat and temperature are different ideas.

                                                                                     Physics student, Spring 2016
   This student recognized that even though the measured temperatures were in the
expected direction, with the Styrofoam block's temperature slightly higher than the light-
colored metal block's temperature, a measured difference within 1°C could not explain
the very large difference felt when touching these materials. The inference is that the

170 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

large difference in how these materials felt to the touch was due to a large difference in
a property of the materials, in how well they conducted energy from warm hands, their
thermal conductivities.

   Styrofoam is an insulator; it has a low thermal conductivity. Energy flowing from a warm
hand to the Styrofoam stayed where the hand was touching the Styrofoam; therefore,
energy stopped flowing from the hand to the Styrofoam when the hand and the small
place where the hand was touching the Styrofoam became the same warm temperature.
The rest of the Styrofoam remained near room temperature.

   The metals, however, are conductors; they have high thermal conductivities. Energy
flowing from a hand to the metal continued flowing and spreading throughout the metal
block. Energy continued to flow from the hand, noticeably cooling the hand so the metal
felt cool.

                                                                                                                  III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 171
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

IV. Using Central Ideas about Thermal
Phenomena to Explain an Intriguing
Phenomenon

   One aspect of the nature of science is its use of central ideas based on evidence in developing
explanations of intriguing phenomena. The central idea that materials differ in the property of
thermal conductivity can explain why some materials feel cooler than others even though they
are the same temperature.

A. Applying the property of thermal conductivity in an everyday
context

       Question 2.5 Why do the metal legs of a chair feel cooler than its plastic seat?

  · Use the central idea about thermal conductivity to explain this observation.
  · Also engage a friend or family member in learning about such thermal phenomena.
Complete your responses before reading an example of student work.

1. Example of student work explaining an intriguing thermal phenomenon

After discussing the difference between heat and temperature, a student wrote:
              The ideas above can help explain why metal parts of a chair feel colder than the

           plastic seat even though both parts of the chair have been in the same room for the
           same amount of time. One important idea to remember is that the metal part and
           the plastic part are the same temperature, regardless of how they feel. The metal part
           of the chair is a conductor so the heat from our bodies transfers quickly to the metal,

172 | IV. Using Central Ideas about Thermal Phenomena to Explain an Intriguing Phenomenon
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           leaving our hand feeling cold. However, plastic is not as conductive; the heat from
           our bodies takes longer to transfer to the plastic so our hand feels warmer.

              I invited my friend to explore thermal phenomena with me. I engaged my friend in
           thinking about the difference between heat and temperature by adapting the activity
           we did in class with materials that I had in my house. I provided her with a metal
           spatula, a wooden spoon, and a Styrofoam coffee cup. I asked her to feel each of the
           objects and rank these materials by temperature and to roughly estimate what the
           temperature of each object was. She, like many of us in class, gave a clear ranking
           and suggested that the temperatures of each object were dramatically different.

              I then explained, because I did not have a thermometer to prove it, that each of
           the materials was the same temperature. She looked at me puzzled and bluntly asked
           why they felt so obviously different. I explained to her, like it is stated above, that the
           materials act as conductors, some better than others, and that the rate the heat is
           transferred determines how it feels to us.

              She then told me that she had learned about this before, but it had not stuck with
           her. So hopefully this will.

                                                                                     Physics student, Spring 2016
   This is a typical report, that the friend or family member ranks the items by how hot
or cold the items feel, expresses surprise when shown or told that the items are at the
same temperature, recognizes the explanation that all are at room temperature but differ
in how well they conduct energy throughout the material, and notes a lack of retaining
learning that had occurred earlier.

                                                        IV. Using Central Ideas about Thermal Phenomena to Explain an Intriguing Phenomenon | 173
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

V. Developing Additional Central Ideas
about Thermal Phenomena

   There are many ways to explore thermal phenomena. Thermometers are useful tools
and come in many forms, based upon many different physical processes that depend
upon how some change occurs with a change in temperature. This course uses digital
temperature probes. Students can use regular bulb and tube thermometers that measure
everyday temperatures (rather than only warm body temperatures), however, such as
those that are typically available in schools.

A. Exploring thermal phenomena with technology

   Students can see visually what is happening moment-by-moment on a graph of
temperature versus time when using digital temperature probes connected to a
computer. Students also can use regular bulb and tube thermometers in the explorations
that begin with Question 2.7 below. Students using regular thermometers can become
aware of what is happening moment-by-moment by viewing the figures below.

    Equipment for each group:
 · Provide two digital temperature probes that can be connected to a computer loaded
 with the relevant software, two regular bulb and tube thermometers and a stop watch,
 or a cell phone temperature app. Several technology companies such as pasco.com and
 vernier.com provide digital temperature probes. For example, we use Go!Temp probes
 (see https://www.vernier.com/products/sensors/temperature-sensors/go-temp/ )
 that connect to a computer or other electronic device through free software, such as
 Logger Lite (http://www.vernier.com/products/software/logger-lite/#download).
 ·Provide a computer to use with the digital temperature probes. In our course, usually
 at least one student in a group can bring a laptop on days a computer is needed. We
 also have two netbooks that students can use or two groups can work together with one
 computer if necessary.
 · To begin explorations, provide each group with a cup of cold water to cool the probe

174 | V. Developing Additional Central Ideas about Thermal Phenomena
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

 quickly. The students can use their hands to warm up the probe or a cup of hot water.
 Place the cup(s) of water on a tray well away from the computer.
 · Also provide a towel in case of spills.

   The first exploration is very open-ended, in order to help students become familiar with
using the temperature probes.

 Question 2.6 What can you find out about thermal phenomena with a temperature probe
                                    connected to a computer?

   This initial open-ended exploration provides time to learn how to set up the computer,
download the software, plug in the temperature probe, and play. You and your group
members have access to yourselves as heat sources and whatever is around you as
materials.

  · What questions can you ask and answer by playing in various ways with a
      temperature probe connected to a computer? Use a physics notebook page to keep
      track of what you are asking, doing, and thinking.
     As shown in Fig. 2.4, the computer will be plotting a graph of temperature in degrees
     Celsius versus time in seconds. To start the computer program using Go Temp!
     probes, click on the little green box near the middle of the top of the screen.

                              Fig. 2.4 Computer screen for displaying thermal
                              explorations. ©Vernier Software & Technology-used with
                              permission.

                                                                                        V. Developing Additional Central Ideas about Thermal Phenomena | 175
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

  · How can you make letters on the screen as in Fig. 2.5: A letter m? A broad curvy m?
      A narrow sharp peaked m? A letter w? Any other letters? Use your hand to warm
      the probe and a cup of tap water to cool the probe quickly.

                              Fig. 2.5 Using a temperature probe to make a letter m on
                              the computer screen. ©Vernier Software &
                              Technology-used with permission.

     After a while, add a second probe and a cup of hot water as well as cold.
  · What questions can you ask and answer by varying the temperatures of the two

      temperature probes?
         Artists may enjoy creating colorful designs with one probe drawing a red line and

the other probe drawing a blue one to represent temperatures changing in different ways.

176 | V. Developing Additional Central Ideas about Thermal Phenomena
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                 FIG. 2.6 Making a design with two temperature probes
                                 and hot and cold water. ©Vernier Software &
                                 Technology-used with permission.

  · Discuss with your group members how to interpret the graph that you are seeing.
      How, for example, might students have made the graph shown in Fig. 2.6?

  · When interpreting such line graphs, a helpful way to proceed is to consider:
          What does the vertical axis represent?
          What does the horizontal axis represent?
          What do the lines represent?
          What does the shape of the lines imply about the phenomena represented by the
            graph?

B. Exploring thermal phenomena with everyday materials

   One activity most children enjoy at home, at school, and at the beach is playing with
water. Explorations that involve mixing hot and cold water can be a logistic challenge but
provide an engaging context for additional explorations of thermal phenomena.

 For a series of explorations in mixing hot and cold water, use for each group of students:

                                                                                        V. Developing Additional Central Ideas about Thermal Phenomena | 177
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

    · two temperature probes (or regular thermometers)
    · clear plastic cup with lines indicating 1, 2, 3, or 4 parts for measuring (or a set of

       measuring cups),
    · large Styrofoam cup or ceramic coffee mug for hot water,
    · clear plastic cup for cold water,
    · quart Styrofoam or plastic containers for storing hot and cold water,
    · large container for storing water when finished with a trial
    · tray large enough for holding the cups involved in mixing hot and cold water,
    · towels in case things spill.

    Place the tray and containers of water on a separate area or table from the computer
 to protect the computer in case of spills.

    Question 2.7 What happens when you mix various amounts of hot and cold water?

  · Explore thermal phenomena more systematically by mixing hot and cold water. In
      the Before section of a new physics notebook page sketch predictions for graphs that
      will appear on the computer screen when you mix hot and cold water in the
      following ways:

           a: Equal amounts at same temperature
           b: Equal amounts at unequal temperatures
           c: Unequal amounts at same temperature
           d: Unequal amounts at unequal temperatures: more hot than cold
           e: more cold than hot

  · Discuss and agree on the details of how you will be doing the mixing:
          What type of cup will you use for the hot water. Why?

          Will you pour the cold water into the hot water or pour the hot water into the
            cold? Why?

178 | V. Developing Additional Central Ideas about Thermal Phenomena
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

          How will you measure how much hot and cold water you are using?

  · Place one temperature probe in the hot water; the other in the cold water.
      Click on the green box at the top of the computer screen to start the program.

     As you pour the cold water into the hot water, also transfer its temperature probe so
     that both temperature probes are now in the mixture of hot and cold water.
     If you are using bulb and tube thermometers, place one in the hot water and one in
     the cold water. Record both temperatures. Also record the temperature of the mixture
     of hot and cold water.

  · In the During section of your physics notebook page, record the graphs obtained by
      mixing the various amounts of hot and cold water specified above.

  · Also record and define any new vocabulary relevant to this exploration.

  · Discuss with your group members how to describe these graphs in words.
      What central ideas about mixing hot and cold water can you generate from this
      exploration?

  · In the After section of your physics notebook page, state central ideas that have
      emerged from this exploration and the evidence on which they are based.

  · State a rationale that explains how the evidence supports these ideas and why these
      are important.

  · Add a reflection about what you want to remember about this exploration, how you
      might use this in your own classroom, what you learned about science learning and
      teaching...

  · What are you still wondering?

   A useful way to organize outcomes is to record the set up, evidence, and relevant
vocabulary for central ideas that emerge from explorations and discussions, as in the
continuation of Table II.1.

                                                                                        V. Developing Additional Central Ideas about Thermal Phenomena | 179
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

TABLE II.1 Developing central ideas about thermal phenomena (continued)

TABLE II.1 Explorations of thermal phenomena (continued)

Sketch of set up/ graph Evidence  Central Ideas                          Vocabulary

                                  When liquids are mixed,
                                  they reach an equilibrium
                                  temperature.

Report findings for:

· equal amounts, same T           The equilibrium
· equal amounts at different      temperature depends on
                                  the initial temperatures
   temperatures                   and amounts of the liquids.
· unequal amounts, same T;
· unequal amounts at

   different temperatures:
· more hot than cold
· more cold than hot

  · Complete the continuation of Table II.1 and write a summary of what you learned
      from this exploration.

   After completing Table II.1 and your summary, look at an example of student work,
nuances about exploring thermal phenomena by mixing hot and cold water, and some
thoughts about the nature of science in this context.

1. Example of student work about mixing hot and cold water

   A student summarized the exploration involving mixing hot and cold water as follows:
   (The table) shows the experiments that we conducted in order to answer our questions and
it also displays the ideas that were developed based upon these experiments.

180 | V. Developing Additional Central Ideas about Thermal Phenomena
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                            FIG. 2.7 Student's entries describing the mixing of hot and cold
                            water exploration.

   For the sketch of the set up in the first row, this student drew two containers
representing cups of water and labeled them "2 hot" and "2 hot ." The student wrote, "I
mixed 2 parts hot water with 2 parts hot water and the temperature didn't change."

   In the second row, the student drew two containers and labeled them "2 hot" and "1 hot."
The student wrote, "I mixed 2 parts hot water with 1 part hot water and the temperature
didn't change."

   In the third row, the student drew two containers and labeled them "2 hot" and "2 cold."
The student wrote, "I mixed 2 parts hot water with 2 parts cold water and the temperature
was in the middle of their initial temperatures."

   In the fourth row, the student drew two containers and labeled them "2 cold" and "1 hot."
The student wrote, "I mixed 2 parts cold water with 1 part hot water and the temperature
was closer to the initial temperature of the cold water."

   The student wrote the following rationales for the ideas claimed in the third column of
the table:

              When mixing two amounts of water at the same temperature, the equilibrium
           temperature of the mixture is the same as the initial temperature, whether the
           amounts are equal or unequal. (Figure 2.8) shows the graphs for mixing equal and
           unequal amounts of water at the same temperature. The first graph shows mixing

                                                                                        V. Developing Additional Central Ideas about Thermal Phenomena | 181
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           equal amounts of water at the same temperature. I mixed 2 parts hot water with 2
           parts hot water and the temperature of the water did not change from the initial
           temperature of the hot water. The second graph shows mixing unequal amounts of
           water at the same temperature. I mixed 2 parts hot water with 1part hot water and
           the temperature of the water did not change from the initial temperature of the
           hot water. The graphs in (Figure 2.8) are evidence for the idea that when mixing
           two amounts of water at the same temperature, the equilibrium temperature of the
           mixture is the same as the initial temperature, whether the amounts are equal or
           unequal.

                 FIG. 2.8 Mixing equal and unequal amounts at the same temperature.

              When mixing equal amounts of hot and cold water, the equilibrium temperature
           of the mixture is the average of the initial temperatures. (Figure 2.9) shows the
           graph for mixing equal amounts of hot and cold water. I mixed 2 parts hot water
           with 2 parts cold water and the temperature of the water was right in the middle
           of their initial temperatures. The graph in (Figure 2.9) is evidence for the idea that
           when mixing equal amounts of hot and cold water, the equilibrium temperature of
           the mixture is the average of the initial temperatures.

182 | V. Developing Additional Central Ideas about Thermal Phenomena
                  This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

               FIG. 2.9 Mixing equal amounts of hot and cold water.

   When mixing unequal amounts of hot and cold water, the equilibrium
temperature of the mixture is closer to the initial temperature of the larger amount
of water. (Figure 2.10) shows the graph for mixing more hot water than cold water.
I mixed 2 parts hot water with 1part cold water and the temperature of the water
was closer to the initial temperature of the hot water. (Figure 2.11) shows the graph
for mixing more cold water than hot water. I mixed 2 parts cold water with 1part
hot water and the temperature of the water was closer to the initial temperature of
the cold water. The graphs in (Figs. 2.10 and 2.11) are evidence for the idea that when
mixing unequal amounts of hot and cold water, the equilibrium temperature of the
mixture is closer to the initial temperature of larger amount of water.

    FIG. 2.10 Mixing more hot than cold.

                                                                      V. Developing Additional Central Ideas about Thermal Phenomena | 183
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                 FIG. 2.11 Mixing more cold than hot.

                                                                                     Physics Student, Spring 2016
   This was the first experience for these students in drawing and interpreting
temperature graphs in this course. This student was careful to label the vertical axis
with equal-distant marks representing a temperature scale and to color code the lines
representing the changing temperatures for the two temperature probes. The student
also indicated on the horizontal axis the time in seconds that the mixing took place.

2. Nuances about exploring thermal phenomena by mixing hot and cold water

   Adults are unlikely to have difficulty understanding that mixing equal or unequal
amounts of water at the same temperature will result in a mixture at that same
temperature. These scenarios are included here because this does not necessarily seem
obvious to children. They may be so accustomed to adding numbers that they may predict
that they need to add the two temperatures if they are adding the two amounts of water
together. The flat line on the resulting graph also is helpful even for adult students in that
it makes clear that such a flat line represents something that is not changing, in this case
the temperature of the water.

   Mixing equal amounts of hot and cold water can be problematic. One needs to take care
in measuring the equal amounts. With small amounts, such as a half of cup each, small
errors in measuring can bias the result. The expectation is that the final temperature,

184 | V. Developing Additional Central Ideas about Thermal Phenomena
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

called the equilibrium temperature, will be half way between the two initial temperatures
when mixing equal amounts at unequal temperatures.

   In Fig. 2.12, does it look like the hot water changed temperature a little more than the
cold? Why might that have happened?

                       FIG. 2.12 Mixing intended equal amounts of water at unequal
                       temperatures. ©Vernier Software & Technology-used with
                       permission.

It may be that there were not exactly equal amounts of hot and cold water. Another
possibility is that the amounts were equal but the hot water was poured into the cold
water so some of the energy in the hot water flowed into the air and container as well as
into the cold water. This would reduce the energy transferred to the cold water and look
like a slightly smaller amount of hot water was used.

   Figure 2.13 and Fig. 2.14 show the result of mixing different amounts of hot and cold
water at different temperatures.

  · In each of these experiments, which had the bigger temperature change? Which the
      smaller temperature change?

  · In each of these experiments, which do you think was the bigger amount of water?
      The hot or the cold water?

                                                                                       V. Developing Additional Central Ideas about Thermal Phenomena | 185
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                        FIG. 2.13 Mixing unequal amounts of water at unequal
                        temperatures. ©Vernier Software & Technology-used with
                        permission.

In Fig. 2.13, it looks like the change in temperature of the hot water was smaller than the
change in temperature of the cold water. Consider a bathtub with very hot water, much
too hot for a bath. What to do? Add some cold water to cool things down, but not too
much! If you mix a little cold water with a lot of hot water, which will change temperature
the most?

   The temperature of this small amount of cold water will change a lot as it mixes in with
a large mass of hot water. The change in temperature is smaller for the larger mass of hot
water. The change in temperature is larger for the smaller mass of cold water. Therefore,
there must have been more hot water than cold in this scenario.

   Figure 2.14 also shows the result of mixing different amounts of hot and cold water.
Which had the bigger temperature change here? Which had the smaller temperature
change? Which do you think was the bigger amount of water? The hot or the cold water?

186 | V. Developing Additional Central Ideas about Thermal Phenomena
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                        FIG. 2.14 Mixing unequal amounts of water at unequal
                        temperatures. ©Vernier Software & Technology-used with
                        permission.

In Fig. 2.14 the hot water had the bigger temperature change and the cold water had the
smaller change in temperature. In this scenario, there must have been more cold than hot
because the equilibrium temperature was nearer to the initial cold temperature.

   A goal of this course is to build skills in interpreting line graphs in this way, to be able
to "tell the story" of what happened by looking at the shapes of the lines and interpreting
what must have happened in order for the lines to have formed in that way.

   In Figs. 2.12 - 2.14, for example, the horizontal axis is representing the increase in time
from left to right. The vertical axis is representing the temperature of the temperature
probes.

   What does the red line at the beginning of the experiment indicate was happening to
      the temperature probe for the hot water?

   What does the blue line at the beginning of the experiment indicate was happening
      to the temperature probe for the cold water?

   What does the overlapping of the red and blue lines near the end of the mixing
      process indicate about what happened when these cups of hot and cold water were
      mixed together?

   The almost flat red line at the beginning of the experiment suggests that the

                                                                                        V. Developing Additional Central Ideas about Thermal Phenomena | 187
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

temperature of the hot water was not changing much as the temperature probe was
sitting in the cup of hot water. There is a slight slant downward of the red line indicating
that the hot water was cooling slightly in its cup. Then there is a very sharp change in the
hot temperature recorded by this probe; the red line plunges almost instantly to a much
lower temperature, suggesting that the sharp bend occurred the moment that the cold
water was poured into the cup of hot water.

   The straight blue line near the beginning of the experiment suggests that the
temperature probe for the cold water was initially not in the cup of cold water but
was outside of the cup, perhaps at room temperature when the computer program was
started. The curved blue line represents the drop in temperature when the probe was then
placed in the cup of cold water.

   In Fig. 2.12 and Fig. 2.13, the temperature probe for the cold water was in the cold water
long enough that the blue line has almost flattened out, indicating that the probe was near
to reading the temperature of the cold water before mixing began. In Fig. 2.14, the blue
line becomes almost flat. It is important to stir both cups of water and to wait until both
lines are flat before pouring the cold water into the hot water. Record both temperatures
just before mixing, in order to be sure that the initial readings of the temperatures of the
hot and cold water are accurate.

   The overlapping lines for both temperature probes at the end of the mixing process
indicate that the two temperature probes were reading the same temperature, the
equilibrium temperature reached after the mixing was complete. This assumes that the
probes had been calibrated, that they had indicated the same temperature when placed
in the same cup of water at the beginning of the experiment. If the two probes did not
indicate the same temperature when placed in the same cup of water at the beginning of
the experiment, the computer program needed to be instructed to change the calibration
so that the readings of the two probes would agree when reading the same temperature.

   Note how quickly the temperatures change as the mixing begins. Also note the shape
of the curves as the temperatures change more gradually as the mixture comes to
equilibrium. When drawing graphs, also take care to match the time when the lines start
changing drastically, as temperature readings by both the hot and cold probes will start
changing at the same instant, at the moment that the cold water is poured into the hot.

   Figuring out how best to measure and mix the hot and cold water in order to maximize
the accuracy of results is an example of an engineering design problem. The possible
effects of pouring hot water into cold versus pouring cold water into hot, of stirring
or not stirring before and after mixing, of calibrating the thermometers, and of timing
the recording of initial conditions are all issues that need to be identified with solutions

188 | V. Developing Additional Central Ideas about Thermal Phenomena
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

developed and optimized. (See Appendix I, Engineering Design in the Next Generation
Science Standards, https://www.nextgenscience.org/resources/ngss-appendices .)

3. Some thoughts about the nature of science in this context

   An important aspect of doing science is being able to represent and interpret changes
that are occurring. Visual displays such as graphs can make aspects visible that might
otherwise go unnoticed. Figures 2.13 and 2.14, for example, show dramatic differences in
the stability of the initial temperatures of the hot and cold temperature probes. The initial
almost flat line for the hot probe indicates a stable initial condition but the initial curved
line for the cold probe indicates a dramatically changing initial condition. Such differences
could affect the results. It is important in doing careful experiments that both the hot and
cold temperature probes show a flat line, indicating a stable initial temperature, before
mixing occurs.

   These graphs show how the hot and cold water temperatures changed with time; such
line graphs show how one quantity, represented by the vertical axis, changes with another
quantity, represented by the horizontal axis. Learning to "tell the story" of such line graphs
is an important skill in many fields. Being able to interpret such visual displays of data can
enhance one's ability to influence and/or evaluate claims being made, whether in science,
business, or personal contexts.

   The use of digital temperature probes in this unit illustrate the affordances provided by
technologies in collecting and interpreting data. As indicated in the US Next Generation
Science Standards, scientific knowledge is based on empirical evidence. Third to fifth grade
students, for example, should understand that scientists use tools and technologies to make
accurate measurements and observations (NGSS, Lead States, 2013, Appendix H). (See:
https://www.nextgenscience.org/resources/ngss-appendices.)

                                                                                       V. Developing Additional Central Ideas about Thermal Phenomena | 189
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

VI. Developing an Additional Central
Idea about Thermal Phenomena and Its
Mathematical Representations

   Being able to tell a story about what is happening by looking at a graph is a useful
skill whenever one is monitoring a numerical quantity. Graphs can show at a glance how
something is changing, whether that involves finances, populations, sales, or some other
quantity of interest. Being able to relate quantities algebraically also is helpful if one wants
to make numerical predictions based on evidence rather than intuition. This section builds
on skills in interpreting qualitative line graphs, such as those shown in Figs. 2.12-2.14. You
also will develop quantitative skills for generating and justifying relevant equations, solving
for an unknown, and calculating a quantity of interest.

A. Interpreting features of line graphs

   "Telling the story" represented by a line graph involves looking at the shape of the graph
and interpreting its features.

Question 2.8 How can you tell what is happening by interpreting the shape of a line graph?

   Look at the shapes of the lines in the graphs shown in Figs. 2.15 and 2.16. What was
happening if these graphs are representing the mixing of hot and cold water? Which
of these graphs is intended to represent mixing more hot water than cold? Which is
intended to represent mixing more cold water than hot?

   For these graphs, an important feature is the length of the line representing the
changing temperature of the hot water as compared to the length of the line representing
the changing temperature of the cold water.

190 | VI. Developing an Additional Central Idea about Thermal Phenomena and Its Mathematical Representations
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                                 FIG. 2.15 Graph representing
                                                 the mixing of hot and cold
                                                 water. More hot water or more
                                                 cold water?

                                                  FIG. 2.16 Graph representing
                                                  the mixing of hot and cold
                                                  water. More hot water or
                                                  more cold water?

   Note that in Fig. 2.15, the student drew a long vertical dashed line to represent the time
when the mixing of hot and cold water started, shown by the pink line bending down and
the green line bending up. The initial bends are not as steep as shown in Fig. 2.13 but the
lines start bending roughly at the same time, represented by the vertical line. The long
vertical dashed line matches where both of the lines representing the hot- and cold-water
temperatures started changing direction, representing that the temperatures of both the
hot and cold water started changing at the same moment. The short vertical dashed line
indicates roughly the time when the temperatures of the hot and cold water stopped
changing as well, shown by the pink and green lines leveling off at about the same height
above the horizontal axis, with that height representing the equilibrium temperature. The
student wrote "reach equilibrium" to label what was happening there. The equilibrium is

                              VI. Developing an Additional Central Idea about Thermal Phenomena and Its Mathematical Representations | 191
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

closer to the initial hot temperature, indicating that this was a case of more hot water
mixing with cold.

   In Fig. 2.16, however, the student did not match the lines representing times when
the hot and cold water started changing direction. This graph suggests a story in which
the cold water started warming up first and almost reached the equilibrium temperature
before the hot water started cooling off. This is different from the story told by the lines
in Fig. 2.14. It is important when drawing line graphs to check the story that your lines are
telling. Are the details of your lines accurately telling the story of what is happening? The
equilibrium temperature is closer to the initial cold temperature, indicating that this was
a case of more cold water mixing with hot.

B. Identifying patterns in data

   General thinking about a situation can help you decide how to set up a series of
experiments to collect enough data to be able to perceive a pattern in the data. Once
you have identified a pattern, try to represent that pattern mathematically. If the pattern
can be expressed by an algebraic equation, you can use that the relationship to make
predictions or to estimate a quantity of interest. That process is the focus of this section.

1. Designing a series of experiments to identify patterns in data

Question 2.9 When mixing hot and cold water, how are the amounts of hot and cold water
                       related to how much their temperatures change?

  · To explore what happens quantitatively when you mix various amounts of hot and
      cold water, first decide what data to record and how you want to keep track of these
      data.
          If you want to double, triple, and quadruple an amount of water for a series of
            experiments, how might you do that?

                 One way would be to use mass. If you have a balance, you could measure 100
                 grams, 200 grams, 300 grams, or 400 grams of water.

192 | VI. Developing an Additional Central Idea about Thermal Phenomena and Its Mathematical Representations
                            This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                 Another way would be to use volume. If you have a 500-milliliter measuring
              cup, you could measure 100ml, 200ml, 300ml, or 400 ml of water

                 Equivalently, use any container that you can mark with 1, 2, 3, 4 levels to
              measure multiples of the initial amount.

       How will you measure the initial and final temperatures?

              Two regular bulb and tube thermometers will work fine. Using two digital
              temperature probes connected to a computer, however, will allow you to build
              skill in interpreting the graphs that appear as you mix the various amounts.

       What combinations of hot and cold water will you try and how will you record
         your findings?

· Another issue is how best to carry out your experiments: What might affect how
   much the temperatures of the hot and cold water change?
       How can you be sure that you are measuring the amounts of water consistently
         with your measuring devise?

       How can you guard against some of the energy from the hot water flowing out
         into the cup and air instead of into the cold water?

       How can you be sure that the temperatures you record for the hot and cold
         water are their actual temperatures at the moment just before you mix them?

       How can you be sure the hot and cold water are well mixed before you record
         the equilibrium temperature?

· In the Before section of your physics notebook page, describe your experimental
   design - how you plan to conduct these experiments. This also is a place to record
   your initial thoughts about what to do with your data once obtained and to make
   predictions for the results.
       What data do you plan to record and how do you plan to keep track of these
         data?

       How might you use these data to predict the changes in temperature for each

                         VI. Developing an Additional Central Idea about Thermal Phenomena and Its Mathematical Representations | 193
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

            experiment?

          How might you use the amounts of hot and cold water and their initial
            temperatures to predict whether the equilibrium temperature is likely to be
            closer to the initial hot temperature, closer to the initial cold temperature, or
            half way in-between their temperatures?

          How do you think the equilibrium temperature relates to the initial
            temperatures of the hot and cold water?

          How might you use the amounts of hot and cold water to be mixed, their initial
            temperatures, and the likely equilibrium temperature in order to predict likely
            changes in temperatures of the hot and of the cold water?

  · Explain your reasoning for the process you will use to make these predictions.

   This process of designing your exploration by deciding on what to do, what data to
record, how to use these data, and predicting what you expect to occur is an important
aspect of learning to do science. This open-ended process contrasts with one in which a
laboratory manual or teacher already has made most of those decisions for you. The intent
here is to model the experimental process as well as the conceptual process of developing
central ideas and the mathematical process of representing what is happening through
graphs and algebraic equations.

  · In the During section of your notebook page, create a table to record the findings for
      each experiment in a clear way.

  · Also note any new words or familiar vocabulary that you have noticed as having
      special meanings in this context.

  · Discuss your findings and formulate a relevant central idea.
  · Sometimes one feels overwhelmed in the midst of an exploration, particularly if one

      is trying to figure out relationships among variables rather than simply following a
      lab manual's verification recipe. If that happens, it can be helpful to ask:

          What are we doing?
          Why are we doing this?
          How is that helping us?

194 | VI. Developing an Additional Central Idea about Thermal Phenomena and Its Mathematical Representations
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

  · In the After section of the physics notebook page, report this central idea and the
      evidence on which it is based.

  · Write a rationale that explains how the evidence supports the central idea and why
      this is important.

  · Also reflect upon this exploration such as what connections can you make to other
      experiences? How might you use what you learned in your own classroom?

  · What are you still wondering?
After class, write a summary based on your physics notebook pages and handouts before
reviewing the following discussion of comparing ratios of hot and cold water and their
changes in temperature. To maximize learning, it is important to work through issues in
conversation with your group members and with guidance as needed from your instructor
in class before reading this text. The purpose of the sections below is to help clarify any
details that may be puzzling.

2. Recording and analyzing data

   There are many ways to record and analyze data. As an example, consider Fig. 2.14,
repeated from above, for an experiment in which two parts of cold water were mixed with
one part of hot water.

                             VI. Developing an Additional Central Idea about Thermal Phenomena and Its Mathematical Representations | 195
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                        FIG. 2.14 (repeated). Mixing unequal amounts of water at unequal
                        temperatures. ©Vernier Software & Technology-used with
                        permission.

   The vertical axis represents temperature in degrees Celsius; the horizontal axis
represents time in seconds. The computer display indicates that the mixture of the hot
and cold water reached an equilibrium temperature of 19.0 ºC. The precision of the digital
thermometers is nice but not necessary. If we had been using regular thermometers
rather than digital thermometers, probably both regular thermometers would have
indicated an equilibrium temperature of about 19ºC. That level of precision would be
enough for the purposes of this experiment. The graph on the computer is useful,
however, in providing an informative visual display of what is happening.

   Looking at the initial red line, which is just below the 40ºC grid line, what is an estimate
of the initial temperature of the hot water?

   Looking at the lowest point of the initial blue line, which is just below the 10ºC grid line,
what is an estimate of the initial temperature of the cold water?

   The ratio of parts of cold water to hot water is 2/1. The final temperature of the hot
water was about 19ºC; the initial temperature of the hot water was about 39ºC. The
final temperature of the cold water was about 19ºC; the initial temperature of the cold
water was about 9ºC. Although the digital temperature probes provide more precise
readings, we are choosing to record readings at ± 1ºC here to ease visual inspection of the
calculations in Table II.2.

196 | VI. Developing an Additional Central Idea about Thermal Phenomena and Its Mathematical Representations
          This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

A table would be helpful in recording and analyzing such data.

Table II.2 Reporting data and analyzing experiments mixing hot and cold water

TABLE II.2 Reporting data and analyzing experiments mixing hot and cold water

Ratio Part Part parts Final T Initial T Change in T hot Final T Initial T Change in
Exp. hot  cold hot to hot in hot in water:  cold in cold in T cold

          cold  °C: Thf °C: Thi Th          °C: Tcf °C: Tci water: Tc

Fig. 2.14 1 2 1/2 19°C 39°C                 19°C                                   9°C

A similar table can be made for other combinations, such as mixing 1 part hot water with
4 parts cold, 2 parts hot water with 1 part cold, or 4 parts hot water with 1 part cold.
Assembling such data for multiple experiments makes possible looking for patterns in the
data across multiple contexts.

   For the experiment represented in Fig. 2.14, what are the changes in temperature for the
hot and cold water? When describing changes in temperature in everyday life, we usually
indicate whether the temperature increases or decreases: "it will be 5 degrees warmer
today than yesterday," "the cake cooled to room temperature," or "her temperature is back
down to normal." Mathematically, we describe whether a temperature change is hotter or
colder with a positive or negative sign. Therefore, we mathematically define a change in
temperature as the final temperature Tf minus the initial temperature Ti and use T, delta
T, to represent a change in temperature:

                                     change in temperature = T = Tf - Ti
   When the temperature increases, the change in temperature is positive. When the
temperature decreases, the change in temperature is negative. When mixing hot and
cold water, the final temperature for both the hot and the cold water is the equilibrium
temperature Te so for both changes in temperature, subtract the initial temperature from
the equilibrium temperature:

                                     change in temperature = T = Te - Ti
   Figure 2.17 provides a visual way to think about the relationships among the initial, final,
and equilibrium temperatures when mixing hot and cold water.

          VI. Developing an Additional Central Idea about Thermal Phenomena and Its Mathematical Representations | 197
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   Fig. 2.17a. Graph of temperature versus time for mixing more hot- than cold- water

198 | VI. Developing an Additional Central Idea about Thermal Phenomena and Its Mathematical Representations
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

         Fig. 2.17b. Graph of temperature versus time for mixing more cold- than hot- water

For the hot water:
   Th = Thf - Thi = Te - Thi = 19°C - 39°C = - 20°C
   The minus sign indicates that Th, the change in the hot water temperature, was a

decrease in temperature. All Th in these mixing hot and cold water experiments will
have a negative value as the hot water will always be at a higher initial temperature than
the equilibrium temperature. Subtracting the higher initial temperature from this lower
equilibrium temperature will always yield a negative value.

   For the cold water:
   Tc = Tcf - Tci = Te - Tci = 19°C - 9°C = + 10°C
   The plus sign indicates that Tc, the change in the cold water temperature, was an
increase in temperature. All Tc in these mixing hot and cold water experiments will
have a positive value as the cold water will always be at a lower initial temperature than
the equilibrium temperature. Subtracting the lower initial temperature from this higher
equilibrium temperature will always yield a positive value
   It can be helpful, when working with problems involving mixing hot and cold water, to
sketch a graph that illustrates what is happening as in Fig. 2.18.

                             VI. Developing an Additional Central Idea about Thermal Phenomena and Its Mathematical Representations | 199
          This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

FIG. 2.18 Form of graph of temperature versus time for mixing 1 part hot and
2 parts cold water.

   Entering these findings in the table and highlighting these changes in temperature and
the parts of hot and cold water creates a visual display that can help identify patterns in
these data. The magnitude of the change in temperature of the hot water would be twice
as much as magnitude of the change in temperature of the cold water.

   Calculating the change in temperatures of the hot water and the cold water completes
Table II.2:

Table II.2 (continued) Reporting data and analyzing experiments mixing hot and cold water

Table II.2 (continued) Reporting data and analyzing experiments mixing hot and cold water

Ratio Part Part parts Final T Initial T Change in T hot Final T Initial T Change in T cold
Exp. hot  cold hot to hot in hot in  Th = Te - cold in cold in Tc = Te
                °C: Te °C: Thi Thi   °C: Te °C: Tci
          cold                                                                                                - Tci

Fig. 2.14 1 2 1/2 19°C 39 °C - 20 °C 19 °C 9 °C +10 °C

200 | VI. Developing an Additional Central Idea about Thermal Phenomena and Its Mathematical Representations
       This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

3. Interpreting findings

   How are the highlighted quantities in Table II.2 related mathematically?
   Given that we have been comparing what happens when mixing various ratios of the
amounts of hot and cold water, it seems reasonable to compare the changes in
temperatures as ratios as well:

       equals:                                                                  or

                             ?

For the experiment represented in Fig. 2.14, what does the ratio                equal ?

    =                     ?

or

    =                     ?

   The results of this experiment indicate that the ratio of the amount of hot water to the
amount of cold water (1 to 2) seems to be related to the inverse ratio of the change in cold
temperature to the change in hot temperature.

   There is a problem, however, in that the ratio of the temperatures is negative but the
magnitudes match; they are both of magnitude 1/2. The magnitude of a quantity is its
numerical value without reference to whether the value is positive or negative.

   Sometimes students also are puzzled by what their results seem to be saying. Most
ratios that students have worked with in other contexts seem to have been direct
proportions, as in the pinhole camera, where the entities are in the same order: H/D =
h/d or expressed another way: h/H = d/D, the ratio of corresponding heights in similar
triangles is equal to the ratio of corresponding distances.

   This new relationship between ratios is representing an inverse proportion:

                                               is related to

   If a result seems wrong, consider whether something has gone wrong or whether this
experimental result is what is really happening. Based on the data presented above, the
ratio of a small amount of hot water to a large amount of cold water is related to the
magnitude of the ratio of a small change in temperature of the large amount of cold water
to the magnitude of a large change in temperature of the small amount of hot water. This

    VI. Developing an Additional Central Idea about Thermal Phenomena and Its Mathematical Representations | 201
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

is a description of what the graph showed in Fig. 2.14. In this case, the temperature of
a large amount of cold water changed a little; the temperature of a small amount of hot
water changed a lot.

   In addition to considering whether a puzzling result seems logical and in agreement
with other ways to represent the data obtained in an experiment, it is helpful to test
whether the same result occurs in other contexts. This result was based on an experiment
mixing one part hot water and two parts cold water. Would the same pattern occur with
other combinations such as two parts hot water and one part cold? What about 4 parts
hot water and 1 part cold? Or 1 part hot and 4 parts cold water. Such multiple trials
make possible looking for patterns in data and testing whether the relationships one
infers are valid. Looking for patterns in data is an example of a crosscutting concept that
occurs across many different science domains as discussed in Appendix G of the Next
Generation Science Standards (NGSS Lead States, 2013) https://www.nextgenscience.org/
resources/ngss-appendices .

 4. Developing an algebraic representation of the findings

There are several steps needed to express this relationship appropriately in symbols. We
have chosen to express the amounts of water in terms of their masses. For the experiment
shown in Fig. 2.14, the ratio of the mass of hot water to the mass of cold water was 1 to 2:

   which is a positive number.
   The ratio of the changes in temperatures can be written as:

   which is a negative number.
   Because Th is always negative and Tc is always positive, the ratio of changes in
temperature will always be a negative number. In order to set it equal to a positive
number, a minus sign needs to be added to the expression. Therefore, the results of this
experiment can be expressed algebraically as:

   The results also can be expressed as

202 | VI. Developing an Additional Central Idea about Thermal Phenomena and Its Mathematical Representations
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   The magnitudes of the ratios in the experiment represented by the graph in Fig. 2.14
turned out to be exactly equal at the level of precision we used. That is unusual in these
experiments. Typically these experimental results are only approximately equal. Therefore
we choose to represent these experimental results with the symbol  that represents
"approximately equal":

   and

   The ratio of the mass of the hot water to the mass of the cold water is approximately
equal to minus the ratio of the change in temperature of the cold water to the change in
temperature of the hot water where change in temperature equals the final temperature
minus the initial temperature (T = Tf -Ti).

   One also can refer to the magnitude of the changes in temperature, the numerical
values of the changes, without reference to whether they are an increase or decrease in
temperature. The magnitude of a quantity is represented by vertical bars on both sides
of its symbol: |Th| represents the magnitude of the change in temperature of the hot
water, 20ºC in this case. The ratio of the mass of hot water to the mass of cold water is
approximately equal to the ratio of the magnitude of the change in temperature of the
cold water to the magnitude of the change in temperature of the hot water. If stated in
terms of magnitudes, the minus sign is not needed but vertical bars should be placed of
both sides of the expressions with T symbols:

   and

   If you choose to use "magnitudes" be sure to indicate that with both the verbal and
symbolic statements of this relationship.

                             VI. Developing an Additional Central Idea about Thermal Phenomena and Its Mathematical Representations | 203
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

C. Recognizing the importance of systems thinking

Comparing the results for several experiments mixing various amounts of hot and cold
water can increase confidence in the interpretation developed above, that the amounts
of hot and cold water are inversely proportional to the magnitudes of their changes
in temperature. Any differences in findings from multiple experiments would need
consideration: what are the components of the system, how might they be interacting,
how might the processes involved be affecting what is happening?

Question 2.10 What is the role of systems thinking in interpreting experimental results?

A student reported four experiments in which one set of ratios were equal but three of
the four had slightly lower changes in temperature by the cold water than expected. The
student reflected upon the role of systems thinking in explaining these findings.

 1. Example of student work reflecting upon the role of systems thinking

           In class, we mixed varying unequal amounts of hot and cold water. Our goal was
           to find a pattern in order to develop a mathematical representation of thermal
           phenomena...First, I mixed 2 parts hot water with 1 part cold water...Next, I mixed
           1 part hot water with 2 parts cold water...Next, I mixed 4 parts hot water with
           1 part cold water...Finally, I mixed 1 part hot water with 4 parts cold water...The
           experimental evidence that I found is evident in all four of the different unequal
           amounts of hot water and cold water that I experimented with. These four different
           trials all produced approximately equal ratios, which is experimental evidence that
           when mixing unequal amounts of hot and cold water, the ratio of the amount of
           hot water to the amount of cold water is approximately equal to the ratio of the
           (magnitude of the) change in temperature of the cold water to the (magnitude of the)
           change in temperature of the hot water..

              Various aspects of the situation may affect how close the mathematical model
           matches what actually happened. The cups of hot and cold water form a system with

204 | VI. Developing an Additional Central Idea about Thermal Phenomena and Its Mathematical Representations
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           energy flowing from the hot water to the cold water. If it is a closed system, all of the
           energy lost by the hot water will be gained by the cold water. If it is an open system,
           some of the energy may flow out and into the environment, such as into the air or
           the material of the containers. Also, if there is an energy source nearby, some energy
           may flow into this system. Because we are trying to understand what is happening
           within our system of the cups of hot and cold water, it is important for us to keep the
           system as closed as possible.

              Because we were trying to find a pattern revolving around how the masses of the
           hot and cold water related to their changes in temperature when they were mixed,
           the most accurate results were found when as little energy as possible flowed out of
           the hot water and into the environment. So, the importance of system thinking in
           this exploration is that in order to move from the general claim that we developed to
           the precise mathematical statements, we needed to isolate the system of hot and cold
           water as much as possible.

                                                                                     Physics student, Spring 2016
   In three of the four experiments discussed, the cold water did not change temperature
quite as much as expected. This was a consistent effect, suggesting that the system was
not a closed system consisting only of the hot and cold water. Some of the energy from
the hot water likely flowed into the surrounding air and material forming the containers
rather than into warming the cold water. This flow of energy into the surroundings, rather
than into the cold water, would reduce the change in temperature for the cold water.
   This is an example of the development of systems thinking, that one needs to consider
all elements of a system and to observe carefully what is occurring. According to the Next
Generation Science Standards (NGSS Lead States, 2013), thinking about systems and systems
models is common across many science disciplines as described in Appendix G -
Crosscutting Concepts (https://www.nextgenscience.org/resources/ngss-appendices ).
   What seems remarkable is that the ratios found in these experiments can be so close,
given how simple the equipment and procedures are. We have not asked students to
take the next step of doing multiple trials of each experiment in order to estimate
uncertainties. The emphasis in this course has been on fostering conceptual
understanding of the shapes of qualitative graphs while briefly modeling here a
quantitative approach to looking for patterns in the data. With limited time available,
our choice has been to balance this experimentally obtained insight about the inverse
relationship between the amounts of hot and cold water and their changes in temperature
with one based on theoretical considerations.

                             VI. Developing an Additional Central Idea about Thermal Phenomena and Its Mathematical Representations | 205
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

VII. Developing a Mathematical
Representation of Thermal Phenomena
Based on Theoretical Considerations

   The experimental approach discussed above focused only upon the relative masses of
the hot and cold water and their relative changes in temperature. No mention was made
of the energy flowing from the hot to the cold water. An earlier section in this unit (II.B,
Table II.1, page 197) had developed the following central idea:

   A temperature difference implies a flow of energy from hotter objects to colder
objects.

   In this section, we consider how to express theoretical ways of thinking about that
transfer of energy from the hot water into the cold water. This involves use of the Law
of Conservation of Energy, that the total energy in a closed system does not change, that
energy lost by the hot water is gained by the cold water and its surroundings.

A. Considering what happens when energy flows from hot water
into cold

Question 2.11 What theoretical considerations can provide insights into what is happening
when energy flows from the hot water into the cold water?

   Energy is measured in different units in different contexts. (see https://www.aps.org/
policy/reports/popa-reports/energy/units.cfm . In this course, we use the energy unit
of a calorie.

   A calorie is the amount of energy needed to change the temperature of one gram of
water by one degree Celsius at standard atmosphere pressure and 20°C. This amount of
energy is very small; the calories typically discussed in the context of food are kilocalories,
1000 of the calories discussed here. A kilocalorie is the energy needed to change the
temperature of one kilogram of water by one degree Celsius at standard atmospheric
pressure and 20°C.

206 | VII. Developing a Mathematical Representation of Thermal Phenomena Based on Theoretical Considerations
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   There are many different materials one could use in exploring thermal phenomena. The
amount of energy needed to raise the temperature of one gram of a material by one
degree Celsius is called the material's specific heat.

   Water is the standard. One calorie of energy is needed to raise a mass of one gram of
water by one degree Celsius at standard atmospheric pressure and 20°C. The symbol for
specific heat is c. In this course, water's specific heat is written cw = 1.0 cal/(g°C).

   Note that the units for mass and temperature both are in the denominator of this
expression for specific heat. This is a mathematical way of stating that the change in
energy for water is one calorie to change each gram by one Celsius degree. The
dimensions of specific heat, c, are:

   Dimensions of specific heat:
   The units are:
   To express mathematically how much energy is gained or lost when something is
warmed or cooled:
  · What might be the effect of how much "stuff" is involved?
  · What might be the effect of the kind of "stuff" one has?
  · What might be the effect of how much the temperature changes?
  · How can you combine measures of these effects mathematically to estimate the

      energy lost by the hot water?
Complete Table II.3 and write a summary about expressing these theoretical
considerations mathematically.

                            VII. Developing a Mathematical Representation of Thermal Phenomena Based on Theoretical Considerations | 207
        This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

        Table II.3 Developing a mathematical expression for change in energy

        Table II.3 Developing a mathematical expression for change in energy

Sketch  Mathematical    Theoretical consideration                                Vocabulary
        representation

        m The bigger the mass of material, the more energy is lost or gained Mass

            c           The energy lost or gained also depends                   Specific heat
          T             upon a property of the material, how
        m c T           much energy is needed to change the
                        temperature of a mass of one gram by
                        one degree Celsius, its specific heat.

                        The bigger the temperature change, the                   T, delta T,
                        more energy is lost or gained.                           represents
                                                                                 "change in
                                                                                 temperature"

                                                                                       T =
                                                                                      Tf - Ti

                        The change in energy equals the                          Change in
                        product of mass, specific heat, and                      energy
                        change in temperature.

   After completing Table II.3, look at an example of student work and consider nuances
about mathematical representations of thermal phenomena based upon theoretical
considerations.

1. Example of student work about developing a mathematical expression for a
change in energy

              This section is an example of using mathematics to express some theoretical
           insights. The ratios above do not directly address what is happening conceptually in
           terms of energy transfers when mixing hot and cold water. The considerations that
           one must make, including how much material one has, what kind of material this

208 | VII. Developing a Mathematical Representation of Thermal Phenomena Based on Theoretical Considerations
                  This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

is, and how much the temperature changes, are indicated in (the table shown in Fig.
2.19 below.)

               Fig. 2.19 Student's entries describing exploration of changes in
               energy.

   The bigger the mass of material, the more energy is lost or gained. The first row
in (the table) presents this idea. For this experiment, the more water that there was,
the more energy was lost or gained. This is because the more mass that a material
has, the more energy it will take to change things about the material, such as its
temperature. Since it takes 1 calorie to change 1 gram of water 1°C, the greater the
mass of the material, the more calories were needed, which means that more energy
was lost or gained.

   The energy lost or gained also depends upon a property of the material, its
specific heat. The second row in (the table) shows this idea. Specific heat is defined
as, c = the amount of energy (lost or gained) to change the temperature of one gram
of material by one degree Celsius. Water is the standard, cw = one calorie of energy
that is lost or gained when the temperature of one gram of water changes by one
degree Celsius (at standard atmospheric pressure and 20ºC).

   The bigger the change in temperature, the more energy is lost or gained. This idea
is displayed in the third row in (the table). Since it takes 1 calorie to change 1 gram
of water 1°C, the greater the temperature change, the more calories were needed,
meaning that more energy was lost or gained.

          VII. Developing a Mathematical Representation of Thermal Phenomena Based on Theoretical Considerations | 209
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

              Energy lost by the hot object equals the product of its mass, specific heat, and
           change in temperature. This idea is presented in the fourth row of (the table). These
           variables are multiplied to express mathematically the energy lost by the hot water
           mhcw Th, because in order to know how much energy is lost, you have to know how
           much material is losing energy, the specific heat of that material, and the change
           in temperature of that material. If you know all of that information, you are able to
           multiply the three values together in order to determine the amount of energy that
           is lost.

                                                                                      Physics student, spring 2016

2. An analogy to specific heat and the mathematical expression for change in
energy

   This progression of mathematical thinking can seem challenging. However, exploring
both experimental and theoretical approaches to relating quantities is an important part
of modeling phenomena in science.

   The process of developing such mathematical expressions can increase comfort with
using subscripts, in interpreting expressions involving multiple symbols, and in deepening
understanding of what multiplication represents in viewing mhcwTh as a meaningful
expression for how much a mass mh of hot water, with specific heat cw , changes in energy
when it cools by Th degrees in temperature when mixed with cold water.

   Sometimes it helps to consider an analogous situation:

  · How would you estimate the budget for a project if the basic cost, c, is the number of
      dollars paid for each hour worked by each person?

What would be the estimated budget for the project, for example, if you hired 5 people at
a cost of $15/hour for each person who worked for 2 hours?

   You would need:
   Note that multiplication is indicated here by parentheses ( ) rather than by x's in order to
avoid confusion with situations in which an x represents an unknown, which often occurs
in algebraic equations.
   In general, if n = the number of people, c = the cost for each person for each hour, and t

210 | VII. Developing a Mathematical Representation of Thermal Phenomena Based on Theoretical Considerations
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

= the estimated duration (final clock reading - initial clock reading), i.e., the time in hours
needed for this number of people to complete the project, the budget would be:

Budget needed for the project = nct
   The mathematical reasoning for energy transfer is exactly the same:

  · How would you calculate the change in energy if the mass of the material was m, the
      specific heat of a material is "c," which is the number of calories needed for an
      energy change of one gram for each degree C change in temperature, and the
      material changed in temperature T?

     If m = mass in the number of grams,
     c = energy in calories needed for each gram for each degree C change in temperature,
     and
     T = change in temperature in number of degrees C,
     the change in energy would be:

                                              change in energy = mcT
   Although it may be hard to view mcT as a meaningful expression for change in energy,
one can focus on dimensions and see this as:

   or focus on units and see this as:
   \text{change in energy} = \frac{\text{(# of grams) (# of calories ) (# of degrees C
change in T ) }}{\text{(gram)(degree C)}} = \text{# of calories}
   It can be helpful in working thermal problems, to step back and evaluate the dimensions
on both sides of an equation to check that one has not made an algebraic mistake in
manipulating an equation to solve for an unknown.

B. Considering the Law of Conservation of Energy

Question 2.12 How does the energy gained by the cold water compare to the energy lost by

                             VII. Developing a Mathematical Representation of Thermal Phenomena Based on Theoretical Considerations | 211
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

       the hot water, assuming no energy is gained by the surrounding environment?

   The total change in energy should equal the change in energy of the hot water plus the
change in energy of the cold water plus any change in energy of the surroundings. This
is a statement based on the Law of Conservation of Energy. The word "conservation" here
means that the total amount of energy does not change when energy flows from one part
of a system to another or from one form into another.

   This means that the total change in energy when hot and cold water mix should equal 0.
Total change in energy = change in energy of hot water + change in energy of cold water +
any energy flowing into the surroundings.

              If no energy flows into the surroundings:
                     mhcwTh + mccwTc = 0 Law of Conservation of Energy

   Note that because Th = Thf - Thi and the final temperature is always less than the
initial temperature for the hot water, Th is always negative, and therefore mhcwTh is
always negative, which can be interpreted as the energy lost by the hot water.

The energy lost by the hot water + energy gained by the cold water = 0, makes sense as
long as none of the energy lost by the hot water flows into the air or the containers. This
also means that the magnitude of the energy lost by the hot water equals the magnitude
of the energy gained by the cold water as long as none of the energy lost by the hot water
flows into the air or the containers.

       Question 2.13 How are these experimental and theoretical approaches related?

   According to the Law of Conservation of Energy, the total energy does not change: Total
change in energy = change of energy for hot water + change in energy for cold water = 0
if no energy flows into the surroundings.

                       mhcwTh + mccwTc = 0 Law of Conservation of Energy
   This algebraic relationship also can be written as: mhcwTh = - mccwTc
   This equation tells us that the change in energy of the hot water is equal and opposite to
the change in energy of the cold water
   This equation can be simplified by dividing both sides by cw, mc and Th in order to
make ratios of m's and T's:

   This is the equation developed experimentally with approximate results! Thus the

212 | VII. Developing a Mathematical Representation of Thermal Phenomena Based on Theoretical Considerations
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

theoretical approach confirms the relationship evident in the patterns of data obtained
by measuring temperature changes when mixing various configurations of hot and cold
water.

   One can work forwards from the experimental result by multiplying both sides by mc
and Th

   and including the specific heat of water on both sides to obtain the theoretical result:
                                               mh cwTh = - mccwTc

   One also can express this relationship in terms of magnitudes:
                                                |mh cwTh| = |mccwTc|

   Any of these approaches can be used in estimating a thermal quantity of interest.

                            VII. Developing a Mathematical Representation of Thermal Phenomena Based on Theoretical Considerations | 213
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

VIII. Using Mathematical
Representations to Estimate a Quantity
of Interest

   Qualitative approaches, such as interpreting the shapes of graphs, were helpful in
gaining a conceptual understanding about what is happening when mixing hot and cold
water. Quantitative approaches make possible the making of predictions and estimation
of quantities that may be of interest.

A. Solving a thermal math problem

   In this section, we demonstrate how to solve thermal math problems in the context of
mixing hot and cold water. We assume that the specific heat of water is the same over
the range of temperatures between freezing at 0ºC and boiling at 100ºC. We also assume
that the specific heat of water is the same as the specific heat of fluids such as tea, milk,
and cocoa when working thermal energy problems involving mixing these substances. The
same mathematical process also applies in more complex situations in which the specific
heat of the hot material differs, however, from the specific heat of the cold material, when,
for example, a piece of hot metal is submerged into a cooling bath.

  Question 2.14 How can one use mathematical representations of thermal phenomena to
                                estimate a quantity of interest?

   After developing both experimental and theoretical ways to describe what happens
when mixing hot and cold water, one can use that knowledge to generate and solve
thermal math problems.

   To make up a thermal math problem, decide on a scenario and specify three of the
four variables involved if only considering changes in temperature: mass of hot water,
mass of cold water, magnitude in change in temperature of hot water, or magnitude of

214 | VIII. Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate a Quantity of Interest
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

change in temperature of cold water. Also include information about one of the initial
temperatures or equilibrium temperatures. Use mass units (grams, kilograms) or parts
rather than volume units. If the scenario involves materials with difference specific heats,
be sure to include that information in stating the problem and in calculating the answer.

   As with solving pinhole math problems, the goal in solving a thermal math problem is
not the "answer." The goal is to build your ability to help someone else understand what
to do and why. Start by helping the learner to understand what is happening by describing
the scenario verbally with words and visually with a sketch. Next review the physics
involved by stating what the relevant central ideas are. Also draw a qualitative graph
and use it and the central ideas to explain what is happening. Then describe the graph
mathematically, being clear about what each symbol represents. Justify the equation that
relates the quantities represented; write the equation in both words and symbols. Finally,
solve for the unknown in symbols before substituting values. After calculating an answer,
be sure to also discuss why that answer seems reasonable.

   In facilitating a conversation with someone about thermal phenomena, ask questions
rather than tell answers throughout this process. In solving a thermal math problem for
homework, follow the format provided here:

                               Format for Solving a Thermal Math Problem

 a. State the problem in words
 b. Make a sketch of the amounts to be mixed
 c. Review what you know about the physics of this phenomenon: summarize the

      conceptual model by stating the relevant central ideas
 d. Draw a graph representing the problem: use a ruler to make straight perpendicular

      axes, draw flat horizontal lines to represent temperatures that are not changing
      before the two substances are mixed, add the shared equilibrium temperature after
      the mixing, check that you have drawn the appropriately shaped graph for mixing
      more hot than cold or more cold than hot or equal amounts. Draw the graph to
      indicate whether the changes in temperature happen very quickly or are gradual
      processes.
 e. Tell the `story' of the graph with the relevant central ideas to explain why the
      equilibrium temperature is likely to be where you have drawn it (nearer the
      temperature of the initial hot water, initial cold water, or in the middle.)
  f. Represent this scenario mathematically: State the equation in words that relates
      the masses of the substances mixed and their changes in temperature. Use the

                                                                          VIII. Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate a Quantity of Interest | 215
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

      experimental form of the equation derived from your exploration, including specific
      heats if the materials differ, or the theoretical form based on the Conservation of
      Energy. Justify the use of the equal sign accordingly.
 g. Define symbols, state equation in symbols, and express how you are envisioning
      this equation.
 h. Solve for the unknown in symbols
  i. Record given values and estimate any needed
  j. Substitute values and calculate answer
 k. Check answer: why does the number you get from the calculation seem reasonable?
  · Complete the process of generating and solving a thermal math problem before
      looking at a slightly modified example of student work.

1. Example of student work generating and solving a thermal math problem

                    The problem stated in words is: If you have 180 grams of hot tea, and you want
           to cool it down by 20 degrees Celsius by adding 60 grams of cold water, how much
           will the temperature of the cold-water change? Assume all of the energy lost by the
           tea is gained by the cold water and that the specific heats of tea and water are the
           same. The initial temperature of the cold water is 15 degrees Celsius. After finding
           the change in temperature of the cold water, find the equilibrium temperature and
           the initial temperature of the hot tea.

                              (As shown in Fig. 2.20), below is a sketch of the situation.

                                      Fig. 2.20 Student sketch of the situation for
                                      this problem.

216 | VIII. Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate a Quantity of Interest
                  This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

(As shown in Fig 2.21), below is a graph that represents the problem. The first
relevant idea is, when mixing unequal amounts of hot and cold water, the ratio of the
amount of hot water to the amount of cold water is approximately equal to minus
the ratio of the change in temperature of the cold water to the change in temperature
of the hot water. Next, the energy lost by the hot object equals the product of its mass,
specific heat, and change in temperature. Finally, energy is conserved: energy lost
= energy gained, so when mixing hot and cold water, the (magnitude of the) energy
lost by the hot water equals (the magnitude of) the energy gained by the cold water.

               Fig. 2.21 Student representation of the problem graphically.

          Symbols that are defined for the relevant quantities are mh= mass of hot
tea, mc= mass of cold water, Tc= change in Temperature of cold water, and Th=
change in Temperature of hot tea. An algebraic equation that relates these quantities
in symbols is

   The same equation in words is

   This equation is justified because it is equivalent to the theoretical statement of
the Law of Conservation of Energy - (mh cw Th ) = ( mc cw Tc), assuming that no
energy is gained by the environment such as the cup and air.

   The unknown and the quantity to be calculated is the change in temperature of
the cold water, Tc. The symbols for the quantities I have provided in the problem

                                                         VIII. Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate a Quantity of Interest | 217
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

statement and their numerical values are mh= 180 grams, mc= 60 grams, and Th=
- 20°C.

The equation solved algebraically for the unknown is                               .

   When I substitute the values above for the known quantities and then calculate
the answer I get

              This answer is reasonable because there was a lot more hot water than cold
           water which means that the temperature of the mixture will be closer to the initial
           temperature of the hot water than the initial temperature of the cold water. This
           means that the cold water should have a greater temperature change than the hot
           water. The hot water had a temperature change of -20°C, so this answer of the cold
           water having a temperature change of 60°C is reasonable.

              The initial temperature of the cold water was 15°C. Since we know the initial
           temperature of the cold water, we are able to use equations to solve for the initial
           temperature of the hot water and for the equilibrium temperature. I can now write
           an algebraic equation for the unknown of the equilibrium temperature, Te. That
           equation is Te = Tc + Tc. When I substitute the values in I get Te = 15°C + 60°C=
           75°C.

              Then, I can write an algebraic equation for the unknown of the initial temperature
           of the hot tea. That equation is Th. = Te - Th so Th = Te - Th When I
           substitute the values in I get Th = 75°C - (-) 20°C= 95°C. This initial hot temperature
           is 95°C which is below boiling point and the initial cold temperature is 15°C which
           is above freezing, which both seem reasonable. Cooling tea down to 75°C also seems
           reasonable because this is below boiling point but above freezing. If a student spills
           the tea, it is not hot enough to burn them.

                                                                                     Physics Student, Spring 2016
   Actually 75°C is hot enough to burn one severely. Recommendations are for `hot' liquids
to be at 60°C or less. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18226454

218 | VIII. Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate a Quantity of Interest
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

IX. Engaging Friends or Family
Members in Exploring Thermal
Phenomena

Question 2.15 What can you learn about science learning and teaching by engaging a friend
                  or family member in learning about thermal phenomena?

  · Invite a friend or family member to explore thermal phenomena with you.
  · What does this person already know about thermal phenomena in the context of

      mixing hot and cold water?
  · Help this learner do some systems thinking about how energy is conserved when

      energy flows from hot to cold water.
  · Make up a conservation of energy problem and invite your learner to think aloud

      with you about how to solve it.
  · Include the wording of your conservation of energy problem and its mathematical

      solution.
  · Create an environment in which your learner feels comfortable enough to ask

      questions. Describe what this learner asked and said.
  · Also describe what this learner did and found.
  · In addition, discuss a NGSS science or engineering practice in which you engaged

      your learner while learning about thermal phenomena.
  · Reflect on what you learn about teaching science through this experience in

      facilitating science learning.
  · Post on the class electronic discussion board. Read your classmates' postings to

      learn from their experiences.

   Complete this experience in learning and teaching physics before reading the examples
of student work about designing and solving thermal math problems.

                                                                           IX. Engaging Friends or Family Members in Exploring Thermal Phenomena | 219
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

1. Examples of student work about designing and solving thermal math problems
with friends and/or family members

   A student engaged her roommate in some qualitative thinking to develop the
relationship between masses of hot and cold water and their changes in temperature:

              I explored thermal phenomena with my roommate M. Before experimenting, I
           asked her what she thought would happen when we mixed the hot and cold water
           and she said that it would become warm water. When I asked why her explanation
           was just that the cold cools down the hot water while the hot warms up the cold
           water.

              I asked her to try mixing different amounts of water and predict what would
           happen. We kept all of the results labeled in different cups to compare their
           temperatures. We did not have a thermometer so we just had to base everything on
           touch. I asked her to line up the cups from hottest to coldest based on feeling.

              M noticed that the hottest had the least amount of cold water in the mixture and
           the coldest had the least amount of hot water. Since we were not able to measure our
           temperatures at home, I showed Morgan the data we had collected in class. I did not
           give her the equation we came up with because I wanted to see where she would go
           with the information.

              She asked me if the temperature changes always need to add up to a specific
           number. I asked her to try it with different numbers than what we got to see if that
           was the case. She realized that was wrong because if there is a smaller gap between
           the temperatures, their temperature differences would be smaller.

              M was stumped so I tried having her look at the whole numbers without the
           decimals. She then realized the big numbers were double the small numbers. After
           looking at all of the data a little longer she realized that if the amount of hot water
           was double the cold water, that the temperature change of the cold water would be
           double that of the hot water.

              I then challenged her to imagine what the temperature change would be like
           if it was 4 parts hot water and 1 part cold water. Immediately M said that the
           temperature change of the cold water would be 4 times greater than that of the hot.

              I asked her if she could come up with an equation and she said it would be hot
           water divided by cold water would be equal to hot water temperature change divided
           by cold water temperature change. I asked her to test it with the data. She then

220 | IX. Engaging Friends or Family Members in Exploring Thermal Phenomena
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           realized the second equation would need to be cold temperature change over hot
           temperature change.

              Once she had figured this out I asked her to figure out the temperature change of
           cold water when 2g of cold water was mixed with 8g of hot water. I also give her
           the temperature change of the hot water being 5C. She then figured out that the
           temperature change of the cold water would be 20C.

              I used the same examples that had been used in class because I thought it was a
           good progression of testing understanding. I learned the importance of teaching in
           steps and building off previous knowledge.

                                                                                          Physics student, Fall 2016
   Another student engaged her boyfriend in some interesting thinking about aspects that
might affect what happens:

              When I asked my boyfriend what happens when you add 4 parts cold water to 2
           parts hot water, he said "the temperature increases and the mixture gets warmer,
           because it's closer to the cold water. The heat goes into the cold water". I said, "Right!
           Because energy transfers from hot water to cold water."

              When I asked him what other factors might affect the transfer of hot water to cold,
           specifically when you pour the water in, he responded that the container, the air,
           and the surface the cups are sitting on all could affect the heat transfer.

              Then we started talking about how these things may be affected. The amount both
           containers would take in heat, would matter on what the material it was made out
           of. M said, "If it was a thermos, it wouldn't take in much heat, because the heat would
           be insulated in the cup."

              We also talked about the temperature of the air where you were pouring. Like if
           it was in Alaska, or Mexico the air surroundings would take in either more or less
           depending on which.

              Next I gave him a word problem on solving for the change in heat of hot water.
           "What is the change of the hot water, when you have 30 g of hot tea and add 20g of
           cold water to make it drinkable and the change in temperature of the cold water is
           15 degrees.

              He was very confused by this complicated problem and thought that we should
           match the A temperature with A change in temperature and B temp with B change,
           to get a new temperature of C. But he did not know where to take it from there.

              I asked him if he remembered anything about specific heat and showed him the
           equation to solve for the change in temp of hot water. He solved the algebra easily,

                                                                            IX. Engaging Friends or Family Members in Exploring Thermal Phenomena | 221
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           but said he probably couldn't come up with the equation on his own and I agreed that
           I wasn't able to come up with it on my own either.

              He was on the same page as me about this problem, that the algebra made sense
           and was easy, but it was the comprehending the bigger picture that was hard to
           grasp, and thinking up the equation on your own.

              I learned that sometimes teachers and learners have the same questions, and that
           makes it easier to discuss and engage in thorough investigations. Also I learned both
           having questions lessens the "authoritarian" all knower- teacher type that teachers
           sometimes possess. We engaged in discussion, using math to solve problems, and
           analyzed and constructing explanations and designing solutions for the science and
           engineering practice standards.

                                                                                          Physics student, Fall 2015

222 | IX. Engaging Friends or Family Members in Exploring Thermal Phenomena
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

X. Making Connections to Educational
Policies

   What does doing science and engineering involve? Unit 1 introduced common practices
such as collecting, analyzing and interpreting data as well as engaging in argument from
such evidence. Doing science and engineering also involves ways of thinking that bridge
across different science domains. What concepts, for example, do biologists, physicists,
and chemical engineers all use in their studies?

   A. Learning about the US Next Generation Science Standards:
                           Crosscutting Concepts

   Many US states have adopted the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS Lead States,
2013) for guiding science instruction in their schools. In addition to the science and
engineering practices introduced in Unit 1, these standards articulate a group of concepts
that are common across many science disciplines. Both the science and engineering
practices and these crosscutting concepts are intended to help students learn about and
participate in the nature of science.

  Question 2.16 What relevant crosscutting concepts have you used in exploring light and
                                      thermal phenomena?

  · Go to https://www.nextgenscience.org/get-to-know
  · Click on Appendix G, scroll down the first page to the list of seven crosscutting

      concepts that scientists and engineers use across many different contexts:
          Patterns. Observed patterns of forms and events guide organization and
            classification, and they prompt questions about relationships and the factors
            that influence them.
          Cause and effect: Mechanism and explanation. Events have causes, sometimes
            simple, sometimes multifaceted. A major activity of science is investigating and

                                                                                                                  X. Making Connections to Educational Policies | 223
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

            explaining causal relationships and the mechanisms by which they are mediated.
            Such mechanisms can then be tested across given contexts and used to predict
            and explain events in new contexts.
          Scale, proportion, and quantity. In considering phenomena, it is critical to
            recognize what is relevant at different measures of size, time, and energy and to
            recognize how changes in scale, proportion, or quantity affect a system's
            structure or performance.
          Systems and system models. Defining the system under study--specifying its
            boundaries and making explicit a model of that system--provides tools for
            understanding and testing ideas that are applicable throughout science and
            engineering.
          Energy and matter: Flows, cycles, and conservation. Tracking fluxes of energy
            and matter into, out of, and within systems helps one understand the systems'
            possibilities and limitations.
          Structure and function. The way in which an object or living thing is shaped and
            its substructure determine many of its properties and functions.
          Stability and change. For natural and built systems alike, conditions of stability
            and determinants of rates of change or evolution of a system are critical
            elements of study
  · Scan the discussion of these crosscutting concepts to see what they are and read
      about any that you find particularly interesting.
  · Put a check in Table II.4 to indicate if you have used a crosscutting concept while
      exploring light and thermal phenomena in this course.
  · For each context, choose one or more crosscutting concepts and describe an
      example of what you did and learned.

224 | X. Making Connections to Educational Policies
              This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

             TABLE II.4 Crosscutting concepts (NGSS Lead States, 2013)

             TABLE II.4 Crosscutting concepts (NGSS Lead States, 2013)

                     Unit 1             Unit 1          Unit 2                         Unit 2

                     Explaining         Exploring       Distinguishing                 Exploring
                     pinhole            reflection,     between heat and               transfer of
                     phenomena and      refraction,     temperature                    energy when
                     estimating the     dispersion and                                 mixing hot
                     size of an object  explaining                                     and cold
                                        rainbows                                       water

1. Patterns

2. Cause and Effect

3. Scale,
proportion, and
quantity

4. Systems and
system models

5. Energy and
matter: Flows,
cycles, and
conservation

6. Structure and
function

7. Stability and
Change

                                                        X. Making Connections to Educational Policies | 225
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

    B. Reflecting upon this exploration of thermal phenomena

   This unit began by considering what students already knew about thermal phenomena.
Children and adults have many experiences in which high temperatures describe hot days
and low temperatures describe cold days. They also have many experiences touching
objects of many kinds in which some feel colder than others. These prior experiences
often lead students to rank paper or Styrofoam, wood, aluminum and steel in order
from higher to lower temperatures because these materials feel so different to touch.
Most students are surprised to find that items made of these materials all are at the
same temperature when measured by a thermometer, rather than by their hands, if the
materials have been in the same room for a long time.

   Understanding often emerges when someone mentions the idea of room temperature,
that objects that have been in the same room for a long time are at the same temperature.
A helpful nudge usually occurs when someone comments that maybe the materials differ
in what happens when one touches them, that metal differs from paper or Styrofoam in
some way.

   Eventually someone articulates the idea that energy is flowing from one's hand into the
metals, that metal is a conductor, and one's hand is losing energy quickly so one's hand
feels cold. Paper and Styrofoam, however, are insulators; very little energy is flowing from
one's hand into the paper or Styrofoam, so one's hand stays warm. The materials feel
different because of their differences in the property of thermal conductivity, in how well
energy flows into and throughout the material, but their temperatures are the same if left
for a long time in the same room.

   This process is an example of what scientists and engineers do when they observe
something that seems puzzling. They try to figure out what might be happening in order
to explain that puzzle; they ponder how to reconcile different ideas that seem applicable
but do not agree. This process of refining one's ideas often involves separating and
clarifying the differences between some closely related concepts that seem initially to be
the same such as heat and temperature.

   After developing relevant central ideas, this unit also modeled the next step, of figuring
out how to represent mathematically the relationships one has been exploring with both
experimental and theoretical approaches. A series of experiments led to the inference of

226 | X. Making Connections to Educational Policies
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

an inverse relationship between the amounts of hot and cold water and their changes
in temperature when mixed. Many students express surprise at this inverse relationship
as their prior experiences with mathematical ratios typically have been with direct
relationships, such as the equal ratios of heights and distances involved in pinhole
phenomena. A theoretical approach based on the Law of Conservation of Energy, however,
confirms this inverse relationship between the masses of hot and cold water and their
respective changes in temperature when mixed together. A refinement involves
recognizing that the property of specific heat also affects how much energy is absorbed
or released when the temperature of a material changes. Development of an algebraic
equation representing these relationships makes possible numerical predictions and
estimates of quantities of interest.

   Students may experience some of the frustration that scientists and engineers often
face as they struggle to perceive the patterns in their data, particularly when our simple
equipment does not yield precise relationships but only trends when the data are
compared in various ways. Students also may experience, however, the pleasures that
scientists and engineers experience when finally recognizing and confirming both the
conceptual and mathematical models developed.

C. Making connections to NGSS understandings about the
nature of science

The Next Generation Science Standards recommends that students engage in three
dimensions of learning science by using science and engineering practices and cross
cutting concepts while learning disciplinary core ideas. In this unit, for example, students
used the science and engineering practice of analyzing and interpreting data when they
tracked and interpreted initial and final temperatures while mixing various amounts of
hot and cold water. They became aware of the importance of the crosscutting concepts
of systems and system models while attempting to minimize energy flowing into the cups
and air by pouring the cold water into the hot water rather than the hot water into the
cold. During these explorations of thermal phenomena, students learned disciplinary core
ideas about conservation of energy and energy transfer.

   This unit also has provided additional examples of understandings about the nature
of science as articulated in Appendix H of the Next Generation Science Standards
https://www.nextgenscience.org/resources/ngss-appendices . The learning progression

                                                                                                                   X. Making Connections to Educational Policies | 227
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

for the NGSS understanding that science is a way of knowing, for example, includes that
middle school students should learn that science is both a body of knowledge and the
processes and practices used to add to that body of knowledge. In this unit, for example,
students observed that materials left for a long time in the same room have the same
temperature even though the materials may feel warmer or colder when touched. From
this, the students gained new knowledge about the role of an object's property, its thermal
conductivity, in the rate at which such energy transfers occur. By mixing various amounts
of hot and cold water, the students developed mathematical ways of tracking the flow of
energy in a relatively simple system. This unit thus initiated explorations of such energy
transfer processes. This focus continues in considering more complex energy transfer
phenomena during local weather in Unit 3 and during global climate change in Unit 4.

228 | X. Making Connections to Educational Policies
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

XI. Exploring Physical Phenomena:
Summary of Equipment and Supplies
for Unit 2

                                                                XI. Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 2 | 229
           This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 2

Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 2

When used            For instructor and      For each group of 3                      For each student
                      demonstrations

           Unit 2                            4 blocks (aluminum,                      U2H2. Diagnostic
           Week 4                            steel, wood, paper                       Question about
             Day 7                           pad or Styrofoam),                       Temperature
   Q2.1 - Q2.5                               or kitchen items
Exploring the                                made of these
difference between                           materials;
heat and                                     Regular bulb and
temperature                                  tube liquid
                                             thermometer that
                                             reads between 0
                                             and 100 degrees C

                     If in a room without a Qualitative

       Begin Day 7,  sink:                   exploration:
   Q2.6 - Q2.18
Exploring energy     Big pot with cold       2 digital temperature
transfer in the      water from tap          probes and related
context of mixing                            software (We use
hot and cold water   Big pot with hot water  vernier.com probes
                     from tap or on hot      and Logger lite
                     plate                   software) or 2 bulb
                                             and tube
                     Dippers,                thermometers);

                     hot pot holder          cup for hot water
                                             (ceramic or
                     Big bucket for waste    Styrofoam),
                     water
                                             Plastic cup for cold
                                             water,

                                             1 clear plastic cup
                                             marked with 1,2,3,4
                                             equal divisions,

                                             2 quart containers for
                                             hot and cold water,

                                             2 trays.

                                             (laptop computer,
                                             perhaps brought to
                                             class by group
                                             member if using
                                             digital temperature
                                             probes)

                                               U2H1 Exit Ticket

230 | XI. Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 2
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 2

           Day 8     Same equipment as        Quantitative
                              Day 7            Exploration:
  Continue
exploration of                          Same equipment as
thermal                                 Day 7
phenomena
                                          (Group creates
  (Additional time                      Table II.2)
would be helpful
for students                            U2H1 Exit ticket
needing to build
skill with algebra)

   Question 2.16

NGSS crosscutting

concepts used in

Units 1 & 2

                     XI. Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 2 | 231
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

U2.Solving a Thermal Math Problem

  1. State the problem in words
 2. Make a sketch of the amounts to be mixed
 3. Review what you know about the physics of this phenomenon: the relevant central

      ideas
 4. Draw a graph representing the problem (use a ruler to make straight perpendicular

      axes, draw flat horizontal lines to represent temperatures that are not changing
      before the two substances are mixed and the shared equilibrium temperature after
      the mixing, draw the appropriately shaped graph for mixing more hot than cold or
      more cold than hot or equal amounts. Draw the graph to indicate whether the
      changes in temperature happen very quickly or are gradual processes.)
 5. Tell the `story' of the graph with the relevant central ideas to explain why the
      equilibrium temperature is likely to be where you have drawn it (nearer the
      temperature of the initial hot water, initial cold water, or in the middle.)
 6. Represent this scenario mathematically: State the equation in words that relates
      the masses of the substances mixed and their changes in temperature. Use the
      experimental form of the equation derived from your exploration or the theoretical
      form based on the Conservation of Energy and justify the use of the equal sign
      accordingly.
  7. Define symbols, state equation in symbols, and express how you are envisioning
      this equation.
 8. Solve for the unknown in symbols
 9. Record given values and estimate any needed
10. Substitute values and calculate answer
 11. Check answer: why does the number you get from the calculation seem reasonable?

232 | U2.Solving a Thermal Math Problem
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

UNIT 3: CONSIDERING THE
INFLUENCE OF LIGHT AND
THERMAL PHENOMENA ON LOCAL
WEATHER

Exploring Physical Phenomena: What happens when light from the Sun shines on the
Earth?

                        Unit 3 Table of Contents

     I. Introduction ........................................................................................................................... 239
        II. Identifying Student Resources ...................................................................................... 241
              A. Connecting to relevant knowledge and experiences ....................................... 241
                     Question 3.1 What do you already know about water and weather? ......... 241
                    1. Example of student work about early experiences with water and weather
                   ..........................................................................................................................................242
              B. Documenting initial ideas about states of matter ...........................................243
                    2. Diagnostic Question about States of Matter ................................................243
        III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence ..........................................................244
              A. Exploring the difference between heat and temperature during changes in
           state .......................................................................................................................................244
                     Question 3.2 What happens when ice melts, liquid water warms, and the
                 liquid water eventually boils? ..................................................................................244
                    1. Example of student work about changes in states of matter ....................248
                    2. Nuances about changes in stages of matter ................................................ 249
              B. Exploring phase changes in which water absorbs or releases energy ....... 251
                     Question 3.3 What are some everyday examples of water absorbing energy
                 when it changes state? ............................................................................................... 251
                     Question 3.4 What are some everyday examples of water releasing energy
                 when it changes state? ...............................................................................................257

                                                           Unit 3: Considering the Influence of Light and Thermal Phenomena on Local Weather | 233
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

              C. Exploring convection phenomena ...................................................................... 261
                     Question 3.5 What happens when convection occurs? ................................. 261
                    3. Nuances about convection phenomena ....................................................... 263

              D. Summarizing the water cycle .............................................................................. 264
                     Question 3.6 What is the water cycle? ............................................................ 264
                    4. Example of student work about explorations of the water cycle .............267

        IV. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence ......................................273
              A. Exploring the effects of properties of materials ..............................................273
                     Question 3.7 What happens when light shines on sand and water? .........273
                    1. Example of student work about what happens when light shines on sand
                 and water. .....................................................................................................................278
                    2. Nuances about the exploration of effects of properties of materials ..........0
                               a) Noticing the lack of a relationship between the properties of
                            thermal conductivity and density ........................................................... 283
                               b) Interpreting the difference in initial heights of the lines in Fig.
                            3.6 ................................................................................................................... 283
                               c) Interpreting the slopes of the lines in Figs. 3.4 and 3.6 ............. 284
                               d) Comparing the slopes of the lines .................................................. 284
                               e) Relating the slopes of the lines to specific heats of sand and
                            water .............................................................................................................. 284
                               f) Considering the effect of the property of reflectivity .................. 285
                               g) Considering the relative importance of various properties ..........0

        V. Using Central Ideas to Explain Intriguing Phenomena Involving Local Weather at
     the Beach ..................................................................................................................................... 288

              A. Considering the influence of properties of materials on thermal effects 288
                     Question 3.8 Why is the sand warm and the water cool at the beach if the

                 Sun has been shining on both in the same way for the same time? ............... 288
                    1. Example of student work explaining about sand and water at the

                 beach ............................................................................................................................. 288
              B. Considering the influence of light and thermal phenomena on weather at the
           beach ................................................................................................................................... 289

                     Question 3.9 Why do clouds and sea breezes often form after a sunny day at
                 the beach? .................................................................................................................... 289

                    1. Example of student work explaining about cloudy skies and sea breezes
                 forming in the afternoon after a sunny day at the beach .................................. 290

234 | Unit 3: Considering the Influence of Light and Thermal Phenomena on Local Weather
                         This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

              2. Nuances about explaining changes in weather during a sunny day at the
           beach .............................................................................................................................. 291

              3. Example of learning and teaching about sea breezes with friends and/or
           family members .......................................................................................................... 292

               Question 3.10 What happens when teaching friends or family members
           about the physical phenomena underlying changes in weather at the beach?

             ......................................................................................................................................... 292
   VI. Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate a Quantity of Interest ....... 295

        A. Exploring computer models designed to predict earthquakes and tsunamis
        ................................................................................................................................................ 295

               Question 3.11 How do geologists predict earthquakes and tsunamis? ...... 295
              1. Examples of student reflections upon discussing earthquake and tsunami
           preparedness with a friend or family member ....................................................300
        B. Exploring computer models designed to predict the weather ................... 302
               Question 3.12 How do meteorologists predict the weather? ....................... 303
   VII. Making Connections to Educational Policies ........................................................ 304
               Question 3.13 What NGSS science and engineering practices, cross-cutting
           concepts, and disciplinary core ideas have you used in developing an
           explanation for the occurrence of hot sand, cool water, clouds, and sea breezes
           late in the afternoon after a sunny day at the beach? ....................................... 304
        A. Learning about the US Next Generation Science Standards: Disciplinary Core
     Ideas ............................................................................................................................................0
        B. Reflecting upon this development of a complex explanation ............................0
        C. Making connections to the NGSS understandings about the nature of
     science .......................................................................................................................................0
   VIII. Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit
3 ...................................................................................................................................................... 309

                               Figures

    FIG. 3.1 Cup of water. ...............................................................................................................0
    FIG. 3.2 Pot with thermometer..............................................................................................0
    FIG. 3.3 Example of student's Table III.1 showing change-in-state of water

                                                   Unit 3: Considering the Influence of Light and Thermal Phenomena on Local Weather | 235
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

         graph. ........................................................................................................................................248
          FIG. 3.4 Demonstrate of evaporating puddles...................................................................0
          FIG. 3.5 Illustration of sweat glands that produce perspiration. ..................................0
          FIG. 3.6 Demonstration of transpiration.............................................................................0
          FIG. 3.7 Example of sublimation. ...........................................................................................0
          FIG. 3.8 Melting ice cube.........................................................................................................0
          FIG. 3.9 Melting sea ice during summer in the Artic. ......................................................0
          FIG. 3.10 Demonstration of condensation. .........................................................................0
          FIG. 3.11 Demonstration of precipitation. ...........................................................................0
          FIG. 3.12 Illustration of freezing liquid water to make ice cubes..................................0
          FIG. 3.13 Freezing winter weather. .......................................................................................0
          FIG. 3.14 Demonstration of convection currents..............................................................0
          FIG. 3.15 Example of student's entries into Table III.2 about the water cycle...... 268
          FIG. 3.16 Example of student's diagram of the water cycle. ........................................271
          FIG. 3.17 Set up for comparing the way that energy from a lamp warms up sand
         and water..................................................................................................................................275
          FIG. 3.18 Example of student's entries into Table III.3 about properties of
         materials. .................................................................................................................................. 279
          FIG. 3.19 Student's graph of temperature changes for sand and water. ................ 282
          FIG. 3.20 Dependence of solar reflection upon angle of incidence........................ 285
          FIG. 3.21 Albedo of various surfaces.....................................................................................0
          FIG. 3.22 Student's diagram explaining why clouds and sea breezes often appear in
         the afternoon after a sunny day at the beach................................................................ 290
          FIG. 3.23 Model of Juan de Fuca Plate subsiding under the North American
         Plate. ......................................................................................................................................... 296
          FIG 3.24a p-waves during an earthquake. ..........................................................................0
          FIG 3.24b s-waves during an earthquake............................................................................0
          FIG 3.25 Tsunami danger alert sign..................................................................................297
          FIG 3.26 Tsunami evacuation zone map for Seaside, OR................................................0
          FIG 3.27 Instructions if you feel a tsunami. ................................................................... 299
          FIG. 3.28 Student's entries to Table III.4 about use of NGSS crosscutting
         concepts. ......................................................................................................................................0

236 | Unit 3: Considering the Influence of Light and Thermal Phenomena on Local Weather
                     This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                             Tables

TABLE III.1 Central ideas about changes in states of matter ..................................... 247
TABLE III.2 Central ideas about the water cycle...............................................................0
TABLE III.3 Central ideas about the properties of materials .........................................0
TABLE III.4 Crosscutting concepts (NGSS, 2013) in the context of thermal
phenomena and the influence of light and thermal phenomena on the water cycle
and sea breezes ..........................................................................................................................0

                                              Unit 3: Considering the Influence of Light and Thermal Phenomena on Local Weather | 237
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

238 | Unit 3: Considering the Influence of Light and Thermal Phenomena on Local Weather
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

I. Introduction

   The theme for this course is what happens when light from the Sun shines on the Earth?
In this unit, you will be exploring the effect of light and thermal phenomena on local
weather. While exploring these phenomena, you will be:

  · identifying resources such as everyday knowledge about water and weather
  · developing central ideas based on evidence about the water cycle
  · explaining intriguing phenomena such as why, during a sunny day at the beach, the

      sand is hot, the water cool, and cloudy skies as well as sea breezes often appear in
      the afternoon
  · developing mathematical representations of the transfer of energy in various
      contexts
  · using mathematical representations to estimate a quantity of interest such as
      predictions about "will it rain tomorrow"? and
  · making connections to educational policy, such as the Next Generation Science
      Standards (NGSS Lead States, 2013), the science standards adopted by many US
      departments of education.

   This unit continues exploration of learning processes as well as of physical phenomena.
Summarizing and reflecting upon these explorations will foster integrating science and
literacy learning. This includes learning to speak clearly, listen closely, write coherently,
read with comprehension, and create and critique media.

   The main sections present questions with suggestions for exploring topics and for
writing reflections about your findings. Text in gray font indicates that these are
suggestions; you may think of other ways to explore the topic. Asking your own questions
as well as those posed here will enhance learning both about physics and about
learning. Check with your instructor if you choose to devise an alternative approach.

   Keeping track of what one is doing and thinking is important. In this course, use a
template for a physics notebook page on which to record your notes during class. The
physics notebook page can help you remember your thoughts before, during, and after an
exploration. An experienced elementary teacher, Adam Devittt, designed this notebook
page to mirror the structure of before, during, and after reading strategies:

   Before starting your exploration, think about and discuss with your group members

                                                                                                                                                               I. Introduction | 239
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

what you know already about the topic, how you plan to conduct the exploration, and
what you think you might find out.

   During your exploration, record what is happening, what you are observing, and what
you are thinking about what you are observing. Include sketches of equipment and
observations. Note any words that are new and their definitions.

   After your exploration, record any central ideas that have emerged from your
observations and discussions. Also note the evidence on which you have based these ideas.
State explicitly how the evidence is relevant and supports the claims you are making in
stating the ideas. Also explain why this result is important. Then write a reflection about
whatever you want to remember about this experience. In addition, briefly state what you
are still wondering in this context.

   After class, use your physics notebook pages and any handouts to write a summary of
your exploration and findings. Writing such a summary after every class is a good way to
prepare for the midterm and final examinations.

   Next, to be sure you have understood the physics involved, read this text and some
examples of student work. The student authors first wrote drafts, received feedback for
ways to enhance content and clarity, and submitted these final versions. Also read about
some nuances to be aware of in these contexts.

   You may also find helpful students' reflections about teaching friends and/or family
members about what they had just learned in class, historical information about ways
knowledge about the topic developed, and some relevant aspects of the nature of science
in the context of the topic explored. These sections of the text may broaden your
understanding of science and of science learning and teaching.

240 | I. Introduction
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

II. Identifying Student Resources

   Water is a central player in weather phenomena. The Greek stem hydro for water has
formed the basis of many English words related to water.

  · If a plant wilts, what can you do to revive it?
  · If you forget your water bottle on a long hike, what might happen to you?
  · What chemical element is a component of water?
  · Where is water found on a planet such as the planet Earth?
   To hydrate something, for example, means to supply a liquid, usually water, to someone
or something that needs it; to be dehydrated means to be lacking water. The element
hydrogen is a component of water: two atoms of hydrogen and one of oxygen form one
molecule of water (H2O). The word hydrosphere refers to everywhere that water is found
on Earth.

A. Connecting to relevant knowledge and experiences

   Thinking about how water moves from place to place can provide resources on which
to build in learning about weather phenomena.

             Question 3.1 What do you already know about water and weather?

  · Look at a cup of water. How did the water get there?
     Trace the paths that the water in this cup might have followed to get to where you can
     see it here.

                                                                                                                                      II. Identifying Student Resources | 241
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                                      FIG. 3.1 Cup of water.

Discuss with your group members what you already know about water and how it moves
from place to place. Record some of your ideas before reading an example of student work.

1. Example of student work about early experiences with water and weather

     A student wrote:
              In my early years of elementary school, I was taught about the water cycle.

           When I learned about the water cycle, I learned about the terms that could apply
           to experiences that I have previously had as a child. For example, I learned that
           condensation describes the droplets that form on the outside of my water bottle that
           has ice water in it. Next, I learned that precipitation is what describes that rain that
           I have seen falling from the sky. Finally, I learned that evaporation is what describes
           when a water puddle that I see is gone a few hours later. These are experiences that
           are likely to occur for students, so it is important that they understand what they
           observe.

                                                                                     Physics student, Spring 2016
   Understanding the physical phenomena underlying the water cycle is the focus of this
section.

242 | II. Identifying Student Resources
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

B. Documenting initial ideas about changes in states of matter

   Water exists on Earth in several states of matter: solid, liquid, and gas. These also are
called phases of matter. Ice cubes melting, a puddle of water evaporating, water vapor
condensing into fog, and the surface of a pond freezing over are examples of changes in
state or phase changes.

1. Diagnostic Question about States of Matter

   Responding to the diagnostic question below will document some of your initial
knowledge about the roles of heat and temperature during changes in states of matter.

   Name________________________ Date____________
                         Diagnostic Question about Changes in States of Matter

   Some ice and a little liquid water are placed in a pot on a hot plate.
When the hot plate is turned on, the ice begins to melt.
After the ice melts, the liquid water warms, and eventually begins to boil.
The boiling continues until the pot is removed from the hot plate.

   How does the temperature change during this process?
Illustrate your prediction with a graph of temperature versus time.

                                                                                                                                      II. Identifying Student Resources | 243
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

III. Developing Central Ideas Based on
Evidence

   Unit 2 developed the central idea that heat and temperature are different ideas. The
next exploration extends this development to examine what happens when water changes
state.

A. Exploring the difference between heat and temperature during
changes in states of matter

   Question 3.2 What happens when ice melts, liquid water warms, and the liquid water
                                        eventually boils?

 To explore changes in state, assemble:

    · rice cooker, pot and hot plate, or pot and stove
    · tray of ice cubes
    · thermometer
    · large binder clip.

 We use a digital temperature probe connected to a computer that displays a continuous
 record of the temperature (see https://www.vernier.com/product-
 category/?category=temperature-sensors). We set the duration for 1800 seconds (30
 minutes) and the temperature scale from about -5 °C to about 110°C. A regular bulb and
 tube thermometer will work if the scale ranges at least from a little below the freezing
 point of water (0°C) to a little above its boiling point (100°C).

  · In the Before section of your physics notebook page, predict how the temperature of
      water changes when a container of ice cubes is placed on a heater and the ice melts,
      the liquid water warms, and then boils. Sketch a graph of temperature versus time to

244 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                            This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   illustrate your prediction.
· What happens when ice melts, warms, and boils?
· Put some ice and a little water in a container that can be heated such as in a rice

   cooker or in a pot on a hot plate or on a stove. Place a thermometer or temperature
   probe connected to a computer in the ice.
· You can use a binder clip to keep the temperature probe or thermometer from
   touching the bottom of the pan as shown in Fig. 3.2.

                              FIG. 3.2 Pot with thermometer

· Turn on the heat source and keep its level constant throughout this exploration so
   that energy is flowing at a constant rate into the system of the pot and the frozen,
   liquid, and finally boiling water.

· In the During section of your physics notebook page, record what happens to the
   temperature when you heat the ice.

· Be sure that the thermometer or temperature probe is not resting on the bottom of
   the rice cooker or pot but is measuring the temperature of the melting mixture of ice
   and liquid water. Stir occasionally to be sure the temperature is the same throughout
   the mixture of melting ice and liquid water.

· Leave the temperature probe in the warming liquid water, stirring as needed, and for
   a few minutes while the liquid water is boiling.

· If using a regular thermometer, stir and record the temperature repeatedly while the
   ice melts, the liquid water is warming, and boils.

                                                                                                             III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 245
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

  · Draw and interpret a graph of the recorded temperatures as the ice melts, liquid
      water warms, and eventually boils.

  · Discuss with your group members what the relation is between the energy flowing
      into the system and the temperature of the water in its various phases and phase
      changes. Formulate your insights into relevant central ideas.

  · In the After section of the physics notebook page, report these ideas and the
      evidence on which they are based.

  · Write a rationale that explains how the evidence supports the ideas and why these
      are important.

  · Also reflect upon this exploration such as connections you can make to other
      experiences. How might you use what you learned in your own classroom?

  · What are you still wondering?
Enter notes in Table III.1 to represent this exploration:

246 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                   This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                  TABLE III.1 Central ideas about changes in states of matter

                  TABLE III.1 Central ideas about changes in states of matter

Sketch of set up  Evidence            Central Ideas            Relevant Vocabulary

                  Draw complete       Water occurs in three    Solid phase
                  Temperature         states of matter: solid  Liquid phase
                  versus time graph   (ice), liquid, and gas   Gaseous phase
                                      (water vapor).

                  Draw complete       When solid water (ice)   Melting
                  graph and           is melting, energy       Freezing
                  highlight relevant  enters the system but    Latent heat of fusion for
                  section             the temperature does     water (about 80 calories/
                                      not change.              gram)
                  Draw complete
                  graph and           When liquid water is     c =specific heat in
                  highlight relevant  heated and energy        calories/(gram ºC)
                  section             enters the system at a   specific heat of water = one
                                      steady rate, the         calorie/(g ºC) = energy
                  Draw complete       temperature increases    needed to change the
                  graph and           at a steady rate.        temperature of one gram of
                  highlight relevant                           water by one degree Celsius.
                  section             When liquid water is
                                      evaporating, energy      Evaporation
                                      enters the system but    Heat of vaporization for
                                      the temperature does     water (about 533 calories/
                                      not change.              gram)

                                      III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 247
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   Complete documenting your exploration and writing a summary before looking at an
example of student work and discussion of nuances about changes in states of matter.

1. Example of student work about changes in states of matter

   Figure 3.1 shows a student's entries into a table about changes in states of matter. The
student's summary of ideas about energy transfers during changes in states of matter also
appears below.

                                  FIG. 3.3 Example of student's Table III.1 showing
                                  changes in state graph.

              Water occurs on Earth in three states of matter: solid (ice and snow), liquid
           (ground water, streams, oceans, clouds), and gas (water vapor). Water occurs on
           Earth in three states of matter. The first state of matter in which water occurs is as
           a solid. This is when water is in the form of snow or ice. When the same water is
           heated, it can be in the state of matter of a liquid. This is when water is in the form of
           ground water, streams, oceans, and clouds. When the same water is boiled, it can be
           in the state of matter of a gas. This is when the water is in the form of water vapor.

              When solid water (ice) is melting, energy enters the system but the temperature
           does not change. (Row 1 of Fig. 3.1) shows a graph of Temperature vs. time. In row

248 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           2, the relevant part of the graph is highlighted. The highlighted part shows what
           is happening when solid water (ice) is melting. When the ice is melting, energy is
           entering the system. In the graph, it is seen that the temperature does not change,
           even though energy enters the system.

              When liquid water is heated and energy enters the system at a steady rate,
           the temperature increases at a steady rate. (Row 1 of Fig. 3.1) shows a graph of
           Temperature vs. time. In row 3, the relevant part of the graph is highlighted. The
           highlighted part shows what is happening when liquid water is heated. When liquid
           water is heated, energy from the heat of the rice cooker is entering the system at a
           steady rate. The graph shows that the temperature is also increasing at a steady rate.

              When liquid water is evaporating, energy enters the system but the temperature
           does not change. (Row 1 of Fig. 3.1) shows a graph of Temperature vs. time. In row
           4, the relevant part of the graph is highlighted. The highlighted part shows what
           is happening when liquid water is evaporating. When liquid water is evaporating,
           energy is entering the system. The graph shows that the temperature does not
           change, even though energy enters the system.

                                                                                     Physics student, Spring 2016

This student has interpreted the flat areas of the graph as phase changes that occurred in
which energy continued to flow into the system but the temperature did not change while
the ice was melting and while the liquid water was evaporating.

2. Nuances about changes in states of matter

   This exploration provides an example of refining understandings about the difference
between heat and temperature by considering the context of application. Many students
draw a straight line when predicting the graph of temperature versus time for melting
ice, warming liquid water, and boiling. Such a straight line can seem reasonable given
prior experiences in warming things up. A straight line is appropriate for the context of
warming the liquid water. When liquid water is warming up, adding energy to the system
at a steady rate increases the temperature at a steady rate and a straight inclined line on a
temperature versus time graph represents that regular increase in temperature with time.

   In the context of changes in state, however, the temperature does not change when
adding energy to the system if ice is melting or liquid water is evaporating. The heater is
supplying a constant flow of energy into the system of the pot of melting ice or boiling

                                                                                                                 III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 249
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

water but the temperature does not change. The temperature does not change because
the energy is going into the melting process or into the evaporation process.

   According to the learning progression for the structure of matter (PS1.A) articulated in
the Next Generation Science Standards (Lead States, 2013), in the early elementary grades
students are to focus upon observable properties such as whether a substance is a solid,
liquid, or gas. Young students are not expected to envision what is happening to particles
too small to see. By middle school, however, students are expected to understand that
materials are composed of atoms and molecules, that atoms and molecules vibrate while
bound together firmly in solids and loosely in liquids, and that atoms and molecules are
free to move around in gases.

   Changes in temperature involve changes in the kinetic energy of the molecules. Kinetic
energy refers to energy associated with motion. Higher temperatures are associated with
higher vibration rates among molecules in solids and liquids and with higher speeds
for molecules in gases. See https://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulation/states-of-matter-
basics for a simulation for the movement of water molecules in solid, liquid, and gaseous
states.

   During melting and evaporating, the incoming energy goes into breaking bonds
between the molecules in solids and liquids rather than into increasing the rates of
vibration. During freezing and condensing, energy is released as such bonds form among
atoms and molecules.

   The energy involved in changing states is known as latent heat. The adjective latent
refers to something that is hidden or concealed. Latent heat refers to incoming or
outgoing energy that is not detectable by a change in temperature. The energy needed
to melt a gram of ice, the latent heat of melting, is about 80 calories. The energy released
when a gram of liquid water freezes, the latent heat of fusion, also is about 80 calories. The
energy needed to evaporate a gram of liquid water, the latent heat of vaporization, is about
533 calories. The energy released when a gram of water vapor condenses, the latent heat
of condensation, is also about 533 calories.

   Scientists and engineers design and use phase change materials to cool buildings.
Microscopic pellets of phase change materials (PCM) added to insulation absorb energy
as they melt during the day, for example, keeping a roof cool, and release energy as they
freeze at night. See
https://www.pcm-ral.org/pcm/en/pcm for a discussion of latent heat and its
engineering applications such as in designing ways to manage ambient temperatures in
buildings. This is an example of Identifying situations that people want to change as a
problem that can be solved through engineering, an aspect of engineering design that

250 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

children as young as K-2 are expected to understand according to the Next Generation
Science Standards (NGSS, Lead States, 2013) (See NGSS Appendix I
https://www.nextgenscience.org/resources/ngss-appendices .

B. Exploring phase changes in which water absorbs or releases
energy

   The water cycle, sometimes called the hydrologic cycle, involves water in its many phases
and phase changes. The phase changes occur both when water is absorbing energy as well
as when it is releasing energy. Such phenomena are the focus of the next explorations.

  Question 3.3 What are some everyday examples of water absorbing energy when water
                                          changes state?

     Light from the Sun can supply energy for changing the phase of water.

 You can explore such changes outside on a sunny day or inside with:

    · lamp
    · tray
    · food coloring
    · source of water
    · large plastic bag
    · houseplant
    · access to the Internet.

· In the Before section of a physics notebook page, note some examples of phase
   changes of water that involve absorbing energy. What are some ways to explore
   these?

For example:

              III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 251
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

  · What happens to puddles during a sunny day?
  · Pour a little liquid water onto a tray. Add a drop of food coloring to make the puddle

      easier to see.
  · Place the tray outside in sunlight or inside near a lamp shining on the puddle. What

      happens after 15 minutes? An hour?

                                FIG. 3.4 Evaporating puddles by  CC BY-SA
                                 4.0 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
                                 File:Puddle,_Vas%C3%BAt_utca,_Zichy%C3%BAjfalu
                                 _001.jpg

This phase change from liquid to gas is called evaporation. Fig. 3.4 illustrates puddles that
are in the process of evaporating. How quickly a puddle evaporates depends upon the
temperature and how much water is already in the air. The warmer the temperature, the
more moisture the air can hold. For more information, see https://water.usgs.gov/edu/
watercycleevaporation.html .

  · What happens on a hot dry day when you sweat? How does sweating cool you off?
  · What happens on a hot humid day? Why does sweating not cool you then?

252 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                            Fig. 3.5 Illustration of sweat glands that produce perspiration
                            by OpenStax College [CC BY 3.0]
                            https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
                            File:508_Eccrine_gland.jpg

Sweat is a form of moisture calledperspiration. Fig. 3.5 illustrates the sweat glands in your
skin. These help your body cool itself by producing perspiration that absorbs energy from
your body when the moisture evaporates.
Relative humidity compares how much water vapor is in the air to how much water vapor
the air can hold at a given temperature. A prediction of hot muggy weather with high
relative humidity means that the air will be very humid, holding close to as much water
vapor as possible. This means that very little perspiration will be able to absorb energy
from your body and cool you by evaporating from your skin.

  · What happens when sunlight shines on plants?
  · Cover a houseplant with a plastic bag and place in sunlight outside or inside near a

      lamp so the lamp is shining on the plant as shown in Fig. 3.6. What happens after 15

                                                                                                                 III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 253
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

      minutes? An hour?

             FIG. 3.6. Demonstration of transpiration.

This form of evaporation is called transpiration. The drops of water that form on the
plastic bag have evaporated from the leaves and then condensed on the cooler inner
surface of the bag. Plants use some energy from the Sun to grow via photosynthesis;
some energy from the Sun, however, is absorbed by liquid water evaporating from the
leaves. Transpiration from an acre of corn, for example, can total as much as three
to four thousand gallons of water each day (see https://water.usgs.gov/edu/
watercycletranspiration.html).

  · What sometimes happens to ice and snow on high mountains?

254 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                            FIG. 3.7 Example of sublimation on Mt. Everest. Image by
                            Simon Steinberger from Pixabay https://pixabay.com/
                            photos/mount-everest-himalayas-nepal-413/

Another form of evaporation occurs when ice or snow changes directly into a gaseous
form of water without a liquid phase as shown in Fig. 3.7. This form of evaporation
is called sublimation. See https://water.usgs.gov/edu/watercyclesublimation.html for
additional information about sublimation directly from a solid to a gas.
Water also absorbs energy when changing from a solid phase to a liquid:

  · What happens when ice warms?
  · Place an ice cube outside in the sunlight or inside near a lamp so the lamp is shining

      on the ice cube as shown in Fig. 3.8. What happens after 15 minutes? An hour?

                                                                                                                 III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 255
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                                 FIG. 3.8 Ice cube in a warm
                                                 room.

This phase change is called melting. During the summer melt season in the Arctic, more
sea ice has been melting than sea water has been freezing during winter in recent
years. (See the National Snow and Ice Data Center Arctic Sea Ice News and Analysis
at https://nsidc.org). For information about melting snow and ice, see:
https://water.usgs.gov/edu/watercyclesnowmelt.html.

   As shown in Fig. 3.9, melting sea ice forms fresh water melt ponds in depressions in the
surface.

                            FIG. 3.9 Melting sea ice during summer in the Artic.
                            Image by Kathryn Hansen | NASA Goddard Space Flight
                            Center used under CC BY 2.0
                            https://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/images/51335/
                            ponds-on-the-ocean

256 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

  · Record your findings, including sketches, in the During section of the physics
      notebook page

  · Discuss these examples of phase changes that absorb energy and formulate some
      central ideas that summarize your findings. Record these in the After section of the
      physics notebook page.

  · Write a rationale that explains how the evidence supports the ideas and why these
      are important.

   Phase changes also occur in the opposite direction, when phase changes of water
release rather than absorb energy.

   Question 3.4 What are some everyday examples of water releasing energy when water
                                          changes state?

 To explore such phase changes, you can use:

    · ice cold glass of water
    · tray
    · wide mouth jar
    · hot water to fill jar about half way
    · small cup that fits in opening of jar or jar lid
    · ice to put in the cup or on lid

  · In the Before section of a new physics notebook page, note some examples of phase
      changes of water that involve releasing energy. What are some ways to explore
      these?

For example:

  · What happens if you are wearing eyeglasses when you walk inside during winter? Or
      get out of a hot bath and look at a mirror?

  · What happens if you bring an ice-cold container of water into a warm room? For an

                                                                                                                 III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 257
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

      extra effect, use food coloring to make colored ice cubes and use those to cool the
      drink. What happens after 15 minutes? An hour? Are the water droplets that form on
      the outside of the container clear or the color of the melting ice cubes?

                                                FIG. 3.10 Demonstration of
                                                condensation.

This phase change is called condensation. For more information, see
https://water.usgs.gov/edu/watercyclecondensation.html. Read about the role of latent
heat released from condensing water droplets in thunderclouds and hurricanes at
http://climate.ncsu.edu/edu/Heat . As water vapor condenses into droplets, the heat
released warms the surrounding air, causing instability in the cloud as the warm air rises.

   What happens sometimes if liquid water in the atmosphere coalesces into very large
droplets?

  · Place a wide mouth jar on a tray. Pour some hot water into the jar, about half full.
      Place a cup of ice into the mouth of the jar so it just fits or simply put some ice on
      the upside-down lid on top of the jar. What happens after 15 minutes? An hour?

258 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                                 FIG. 3.11 Demonstration of
                                                 precipitation.

This is called precipitation. For more information, see https://water.usgs.gov/edu/
watercycleprecipitation.html . The higher the average temperature of the atmosphere,
the more water evaporates; the more water in the atmosphere, the more rainfall can
occur. For information about changes in heavy rainfall events in the U.S, see
http://climatesmartfarming.org/changing-climate/ .

   What happens if liquid water gets cold enough?

                                                                                                                 III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 259
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                            FIG. 3.12 Illustration of freezing liquid
                                            water to make ice cubes.

                            FIG. 3.13 Freezing winter weather. CC0 Public Domain.
                            https://www.maxpixel.net/
                            Leann-Snow-Coldly-Winter-Weather-Landscape-3077971

260 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

If the temperature gets cold enough, a liquid freezes into a solid form. This can occur in
a controlled situation in a refrigerator or in nature during a winter storm. As liquid water
freezes, energy is released. Some farmers spray crops like oranges with water to protect
the crops from freezing. Why would this work? See: http://fruitgrowersnews.com/
article/protecting-your-fruit-from-frost-and-freeze/

  · Record findings, including sketches, in the During section of this physics notebook
      page.

  · Discuss these examples of phase changes that release energy and formulate relevant
      central ideas. In the After section of this physics notebook page, report these ideas
      and the evidence on which they are based.

  · Write a rationale that explains how the evidence supports the ideas and why these
      are important.

  · Also reflect upon these explorations of phases changes, both those that absorb and
      those that release energy. What connections can you make to other experiences?
      How might you use what you learned in your own classroom?

  · What are you still wondering?

C. Exploring convection phenomena

   Liquids and gases are called fluids. Fluids can flow from one place to another. When
streams of warm and cool liquid water are flowing nearby, convection phenomena occur.
Convection also occurs with nearby streams of warm and cool air.

                     Question 3.5 What happens when convection occurs?

 To explore convection phenomena, you can use:

    · blue food coloring
    · ice cube tray to make blue ice cubes in a freezer

                                                                                                                 III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 261
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

    · clear plastic rectangular container such as a shoe storage box or a clear glass loaf
       dish

    · four paper cups and one cup that can hold almost boiling water
    · source of water to fill container
    · red food coloring in small bottle or eyedropper
    · very hot water (close to boiling)

  · In the Before section of a physics notebook page, predict what you think will happen
      when a stream of warm water and a stream of cold water are flowing in a clear
      plastic or glass container of water. Also describe a way to explore such convection
      currents.

  · Set four paper cups upside down at four corners of a rectangle so that they can
      support a rectangular container such as a clear plastic shoebox or glass loaf dish.

  · Fill the clear container with room temperature water and place it on the 4 cups.
  · Carefully use an eyedropper or small bottle of food coloring to place a red drop on

      the bottom of the clear container at one end.
  · Choose a cup that can hold very hot water so that you can slide it underneath the

      clear container.
  · Fill this cup with very hot (close to boiling) water. Slide the cup of hot water under

      the container so that it is positioned underneath the dot of red food coloring on the
      bottom of the container
  · What happens to the water above the red dot?
  · Carefully add some blue ice cubes to the water at the other end of the container.
  · What happens to the blue water melting from the ice cubes?
  · What happens to the blue and red streams of water?

262 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                 FIG. 3.14 Demonstration of convection currents.

  · Record findings, including sketches, in the During section of this physics notebook
      page

  · Discuss your findings and formulate a relevant central idea about convection
      currents. In the After section of the physics notebook page, report this idea and the
      evidence on which it is based.

  · Write a rationale that explains how the evidence supports the idea and why this is
      important.

  · Also reflect upon this exploration such as what connections can you make to other
      experiences? How might you use what you learned in your own classroom?

  · What are you still wondering?

1. Nuances about convection phenomena

   Convection phenomena occur when fluids differ in how dense they are. Density is a
measure of how much mass a material has in a given volume. Something will sink in a fluid
if it has more mass in a given volume than the fluid; something will rise in a fluid if it has
less mass than the fluid in a given volume.

   In this course, we measure mass in grams and volume in cubic centimeters. At standard
atmospheric pressure, room temperature water (about 21ºC) has a density of about 0.998
grams per cubic centimeter. Hot water close to boiling (about 93ºC) has a density of

                                                                                                                 III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 263
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

about 0.963 grams per cubic centimeter, so it rises in the room temperature water. Cold
water melting from an ice cube (about 4°) has a density of about 1.000 grams per cubic
centimeter so it sinks in the room temperature water (see: https://water.usgs.gov/edu/
density.html). These small differences in density of warm and cold water are enough to
cause the convection currents observed.

   Ocean currents are caused both by differences in temperature and by differences in
salinity. Warm water from the tropics moves near the surface of the oceans toward the
poles; cold water from the poles, being more dense, flows toward the tropics at a deeper
level. Fresh water from melting glaciers reduces salinity; freezing sea ice leaves salt and
other minerals behind in the ocean, increasing salinity with saltier water sinking and fresh
water rising. Currents of water travel across the globe via the Great Ocean Conveyor Belt,
which takes about 1000-1200 years for water to circulate throughout the global system
(see: https://www.weather.gov/jetstream/circulation ).

D. Summarizing the water cycle

   A variety of physical processes underlie the phases and changes-in-phases of water
known as the water cycle.

                             Question 3.6 What is the water cycle?

   The water cycle includes the phases of solid (ice and snow), liquid (ground water, lakes,
streams, rivers, ocean), and gas (water vapor), in addition to the changes-in-phases known
as freezing, melting, sublimating, evaporating, transpiring, perspiring, and condensing.
Briefly describe each exploration in Table III.2.

Complete documenting your explorations and writing a summary before looking at an
example of student work about explorations of the water cycle.

264 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

TABLE III.2 Central ideas about the influence of light and thermal phenomena on local weather,
                                                  including the water cycle

TABLE III.2 Central ideas about the influence of light and thermal phenomena on local
                                     weather, including the water cycle

Sketch of set up  Evidence  Central Ideas   Relevant Vocabulary

                            The Sun         Radiation
                            radiates        https://www.windows2universe.org/
                            energy in all   sun/
                            directions,     spectrum/
                            some of         multispectral_sun_overview.html
                            which shines
                            on the Earth.
                            This process
                            is called
                            energy
                            transfer by
                            radiation.

                            Sunlight        Evaporation
                            shining on      http://water.usgs.gov/edu/
                            Earth           watercycleevaporation.html
                            sometimes
                            supplies
                            enough
                            energy for
                            some liquid
                            water in the
                            soil or bodies
                            of water to
                            evaporate.

                            Sunlight        Sublimation
                            sometimes       http://water.usgs.gov/edu/
                            supplies        watercyclesublimation.html
                            enough
                            energy for
                            snow and ice
                            to sublimate
                            directly into
                            the gaseous
                            phase.

                            Water also      Transpiration
                            evaporates      http://water.usgs.gov/edu/
                            from plants.    watercycletranspiration.html
                            This is called
                            transpiration.

                            III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 265
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                                       Water also      Perspiration
                                                       evaporates      http://hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/
                                                       from people.    hbase/thermo/
                                                       This is called  sweat.html
                                                       perspiration.

                                                       Condensation    Condensation
                                                       occurs when     http://water.usgs.gov/edu/
                                                       warm moist      watercyclecondensation.html
                                                       air cools;
                                                       gaseous
                                                       water (water
                                                       vapor)
                                                       condenses
                                                       into liquid
                                                       water
                                                       droplets to
                                                       form clouds,
                                                       fog, or dew.

                                                       Precipitation   Precipitation http://water.usgs.gov/
                                                       occurs when     edu/
                                                       water           watercycleprecipitation.html
                                                       droplets        Coalesce
                                                       coalesce and    http://scijinks.jpl.nasa.gov/rain/
                                                       fall to the
                                                       Earth as rain,
                                                       snow, or hail.

                                                       Rain falls to   Force of gravity by the Earth
                                                       Earth and       https://spaceplace.nasa.gov/
                                                       water flows     what-is-gravity/en/
                                                       downhill due
                                                       to the force
                                                       by the Earth
                                                       known as
                                                       gravity.

                                                       Temperature     Fluid Convection current
                                                       differences     https://
                                                       within fluids   www.youtube.com/
                                                       cause           watch?v=IpHAj4R-Z8
                                                       differences in
                                                       density. Less
                                                       dense warm
                                                       regions rise
                                                       and more
                                                       dense cool
                                                       regions sink.
                                                       This process
                                                       is called
                                                       energy
                                                       transfer by
                                                       convection.

266 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Water cycles  Hydrosphere
among land,   http://water.usgs.gov/
bodies of     edu/watercycle.html
water, and
the
atmosphere.

1. Example of student work about explorations of the water cycle

   Figure 3.15 shows a student's entries into a table about phase changes and convection
currents that occur during the water cycle.

III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 267
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Sketch of set up Evidence Central Ideas  Relevant
                                         Vocabulary

                                       FIG. 3.15 Example of a student's entries into Table III.2
                                       about the water cycle.

   In row 1, which focused upon evaporation, the student drew a picture of a sun shining
on a puddle with arrows pointing upward representing evaporating water, the natural

268 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

phenomenon being modeled by the equipment drawn in the upper right corner, a tray
with a puddle of water on which a lamp is shining. The student wrote, On a warm day
where it rained the day before, mud puddles dry up and added the statement, There was less
water in the tray at the end of class than there was at the beginning of class.

   In row 2, which focused upon sublimation, the student drew a picture of the sun
shining on ice on a mountain with arrows pointing upward representing water sublimating
directly from ice into water vapor. The student wrote, On a cold, dry day, ice will go away
without any water being seen.

   In row 3, which focused upon transpiration, the student drew a picture of a lamp shining
on a plant enclosed in a clear plastic bag. The student wrote, Water was seen on the plastic
bag around the plant.

   In row 4, which focused upon condensation, the student drew a picture of a large jar
filled part way with warm water, with a cup with ice cubes sitting in its opening, and
droplets of water on the bottle. The student wrote, I can see water droplets on the outside
of a water bottle that has ice in it.

   In row 5, which focused upon precipitation, the student drew a picture of a rain falling
from a cloud. The student wrote, We see this when it rains.

   In row 6, which focused upon the force of gravity by the Earth, the student drew a
picture of a waterfall and wrote, A water fall flows downhill.

   In row 7, which focused upon convection, the student drew a picture of a clear plastic
container filled with water, with a blue ice cube floating at the left end with melting blue
water streaming down and with a hot cup under red food color at the right end with a
stream of red water floating up and over toward the ice cube. The student wrote, The hot
water (red food coloring) rised and the cold regions (blue ice) sank.

   In row 8, which focused on the water cycle, the student drew a picture of the sun,
shining on a puddle with arrows, representing evaporating water, pointing up toward a
cloud and with raindrops falling down. The student wrote, The water cycle is visible to us:
rain creates puddles that dry up.

   The student wrote the following rationales for the central ideas claimed in the third
column of the table:

              Sunlight shining on Earth sometimes supplies enough energy for some of the
           liquid water in the soil and bodies of water to evaporate. My sketch of the
           evaporation demonstration is seen in (row 1of the table). For this demonstration, we
           had a tray of water, which represents some of the liquid water in the soil and bodies
           of water. There was also a lamp that was shining on the water, which represents
           the sunlight shining on the Earth. In this demonstration, we observed the water at

                                                                                                                III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 269
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           the beginning of class and at the end of class. Since there was less water in the tray
           at the end of class than at the beginning of class, this shows that some water was
           evaporated. This model is a demonstration that shows that sunlight shining on earth
           sometimes supplies enough energy for some of the liquid water in the soil and bodies
           of water to evaporate.

              Sunlight shining on Earth sometimes supplies enough energy for snow and ice
           to sublimate directly into the gaseous phase. Sublimation occurs if snow or ice
           vaporizes directly into the gaseous phases without first melting and going through
           the liquid phase.

              Water also evaporates from plants. This is called transpiration. My sketch of the
           transpiration demonstration is seen in (row 3 of the table). For this demonstration, a
           plastic Ziploc bag was placed around a plant. A lamp was shining on the plant. Some
           water droplets were able to be seen on the bag, which demonstrates this process of
           water evaporating from plants, which is called transpiration.

              Condensation occurs when warm moist air cools; gaseous water (water vapor)
           condenses into liquid water droplets to form clouds, fog, or dew. My sketch of the
           condensation experiment is seen in (row 4 of the table). For this experiment, a jar
           was filled with warm water. Then, a container with ice in it was placed on the top of
           the jar. The warm moist air that is in the jar, below the container, cools because of
           the ice in the container on the top of the jar. Water droplets form on the bottom of the
           container and on the sides of the jar, which is the gaseous water that has condensed
           into liquid water droplets. This process of the gaseous water condensing into liquid
           water droplets is how clouds form.

              Precipitation occurs when water droplets condense, coalesce, and fall to the
           Earth as rain, snow, or hail. Rain falls to Earth and water flows downhill due to the
           force by the Earth known as gravity. My sketch of a precipitation demonstration is
           seen on (rows 5 and 6 of the table). First, I drew water droplets falling to the Earth
           as rain, which shows the process of precipitation. Then, I drew the water flowing
           downhill in the form of a waterfall, due to the force of gravity.

              Temperature differences within fluids cause differences in density. Less dense
           warm regions rise and more dense cool regions sink. This process is called energy
           transfer by convection. My sketch of the convection experiment can be seen in (row 7
           of the table). For this experiment, a container of room temperature water was placed
           on four cups. Warm water was colored red by food coloring and was warmed by
           very hot water that was placed directly below the food coloring. The warm water
           first rose up from the bottom of the container toward the top, and then it started

270 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           moving horizontally along the top of the water toward the ice cube. Then, the blue
           ice cube that was placed on the top of the water was observed. The blue melted
           water first sank down to the bottom of the water and then it moved horizontally
           along the bottom of the container toward the red food coloring. These movements
           set up a circular current within the container. The hot water rising and the cold
           water sinking created convection currents. This idea of warm regions rising and
           cool regions sinking can also be seen in ocean currents.

              Water cycles among land, bodies of water, and the atmosphere. Figure (3.3) shows
           the water cycle.

                            FIG 3.16 Example student's diagram of the water cycle.

The student has included labels with the phase changes of evaporation, sublimation,
transpiration, condensation, precipitation, freezing and melting as well as illustrations of
snow on the mountains, rain falling, clouds in the sky, and bodies of liquid water on the
Earth. The student described the water cycle as follows:

              First of all, the sun heats up the water and turns it into water vapor. The water
           vapor leaves the source and goes into the air. The water vapor comes from different
           forms of water on earth such as lakes and rivers through the process of evaporation,
           it comes from plants through the process of transpiration, and it comes straight from
           ice or snow without melting first through the process of sublimation. Once the water
           vapor rises, it goes through the process of condensation. Condensation is when the
           water vapor in the air becomes cold and turns back into a liquid, forming clouds.
           Once enough water has condensed and the clouds are full, the water falls to the
           ground, which is known as precipitation. Some of the water falls back into oceans,

                                                                                                                  III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 271
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           lakes, rivers, or other water sources. Other parts of that water can be stored in ice or
           snow, which is known as freezing. Then, when that frozen snow or ice becomes liquid
           water again, this is known as melting. This process of the water cycle is continuous
           and will repeat itself again and again.

                                                                                     Physics student, Spring 2016
   The next section develops some additional central ideas useful in explaining intriguing
phenomena that students may experience when enjoying a sunny day at the beach.

272 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

IV. Developing Additional Central
Ideas Based on Evidence

   A sunny day at the beach can be a lot of fun. Why does the sand get so hot, however,
while the water is so cool when the sun has been shining on both the sand and the water
in the same way for the same time? Sometimes the sky clouds over and a breeze comes
up in the afternoon. Why does that happen? This section explores how light and thermal
phenomena sometimes affect the local weather during a sunny day at the beach.

A. Exploring the effects of properties of materials

              Question 3.7 What happens when light shines on sand and water?

 Equipment: To explore the effects of various properties on what happens when light
 shines on sand and water, use:

    · Lamp with bendable stem,
    · Light probe connected to a computer with graphing software or cell phone app for

       reflectivity (LUX meter)
    · Black paper, white paper
    · Two identical clear cups
    · Balance
    · Sand and water at room temperature
    · Two temperature probes, and a computer or two regular bulb and tube

       thermometers with a range from at least about 15°C to 35°C.

 [In a remote learning situation, brown rice, split peas, or dried beans can serve as a
 substitute for sand if necessary. A simple balance can be made with a board (a ruler will
 do) and something on which to balance it like a playground teeter totter. Set this up so

                                                                                                  IV. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 273
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

 it is balanced and then use two identical clear cups to put about half a cup of water on
 one side and as much sand as you need to balance it on the other side. ]

  · What properties of sand and water might affect what happens when light from the
      Sun shines in the same way for the same time on both the sand and the water?

  · In the Before section of a physics notebook page, record your ideas and predictions
      about the effect of properties explored in units 1 and 2: reflectivity, thermal
      conductivity, and specific heat. How can you explore the effects of these properties
      of sand and water on what happens when sunlight shines on a beach?

  · To explore the property of reflectivity, move a light probe connected to a computer
      or a cell phone with a LUX meter app over black and white paper as well as over sand
      and water. Does the angle of reflection seem to matter?

  · One way to explore differences in thermal conductivity and specific heat is to use
      equal amounts of the materials. Should one use equal amounts by mass or by
      volume?

  · The property of specific heat is expressed in terms of the number of calories needed
      to change the temperature of one unit of mass by one degree Celsius so equal
      amounts by mass seem appropriate. Use a balance and identical clear cups to
      measure equal masses of sand and water at room temperature. Compare the
      volumes of the equal masses of sand and the water in the cups. What does this imply
      about the density of sand compared to the density of water?

  · Set up a lamp with curved stem shining from the same distance away on cups with
      equal masses of sand and water at room temperature.

  · Put both temperature probes in the same cup of water to make sure that they read
      the same number if put in the same container. If the probes do not read the same or
      close to the same number (within 0.2ºC or so), calibrate them in the computer. If
      using regular thermometers, put both in the same cup of water and see if they read
      the same number; if they do not, record their temperatures and correct the final
      readings for this difference.

  · Connect the two temperature probes to a computer and place one probe near the
      top of the cup of water and the other probe near the top of the cup of sand. Set the
      time on the computer for 900 seconds, about 15 minutes. (Or place regular
      thermometers near the tops of the sand and water and regularly read and record the
      temperatures while the lamp is shining on the cups of sand and water).

  · Start the computer program (or use the regular thermometers) to record the initial

274 | IV. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                            This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   temperatures of the sand and water. If both the sand and the water have been sitting
   in the same room for a long time, these temperatures should be the same or close to
   the same (within a degree or so). If they are not the same, record the temperatures
   and include this difference in interpreting your results.
· Turn on the lamp. Monitor the temperatures of the sand and water, by looking at the
   temperature versus time graphs on the computer (or regularly record the regular
   thermometer readings at least every minute).
· What do you observe after at least 10 minutes?
· Move the temperature probes (or thermometers) to near the bottom of the cups.
   What do you observe?
· In the During section of the physics notebook page, record your findings. Draw a
   picture of the temperature versus time graph and indicate the parts of the graph that
   represent the different materials that you tested. Note any vocabulary that is new to
   you.

                                   Fig 3.17 End of experiment to compare the way
                                   that energy from a lamp warms up sand and
                                   water. Line graph shows temperature versus
                                   time for sand (red) and water (blue). Note the
                                   difference in heights of the equal masses of
                                   sand and water. Which is more dense?
                                   ©Vernier Software & Technology-used with
                                   permission.

· When interpreting the line graph, a helpful way to proceed is to consider:
       What does the vertical axis represent?
       What does the horizontal axis represent?

                                                                                              IV. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 275
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

          What do the lines represent?
          What does the shape of the lines imply about the phenomena represented by the

            graph?
  · Discuss your findings and formulate relevant central ideas. In particular, compare

      the slope of the graph for sand with the slope of the graph for water.
  · Compare the change in temperature of the sand during ten minutes with the change

      in temperature of the water during ten minutes. How is this result related to a
      comparison of how much the temperature changes for each unit of time (one
      minute)? How is this result related to a comparison of how much the temperature
      changes for each unit of incoming energy from the lamp?
  · Also discuss findings about the reflectivity of black and white paper and of sand and
      water. Compare your findings with those by other groups. Do they agree?
  · Formulate central ideas based on the findings.
  · In the After section of the physics notebook page, report these central ideas and the
      evidence on which they are based.
  · Write a rationale that explains how the evidence supports the central ideas and why
      these are important.
  · Also reflect upon this exploration such as what connections can you make to other
      experiences? How might you use what you learned in your own classroom?
  · What are you still wondering?
     Enter notes in Table III.3 representing these explorations:
   Sketch of set upEvidenceCentral IdeasVocabulary

276 | IV. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence
 This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

TABLE III.3 Central ideas about the properties of materials

TABLE III.3 Central ideas about the properties of materials

                                           Materials differ in the
                                           property of
                                           reflectivity, how well
                                           they reflect light
                                           Corollary: Materials
                                           differ in how well they
                                           absorb light

                       Materials differ in the
                       property of thermal
                       conductivity, how well
                       they transfer energy

                       Materials differ in the
                       property of density,
                       how much mass there
                       is in one unit of
                       volume. Density and
                       thermal conductivity
                       are different
                       properties that are
                       not related.

Compare the change     Materials differ in the
in temperatures, T     property of specific
for sand and T for     heat, how much
water , during 10      energy is needed to
minutes with the lamp  change the
shining equally on     temperature of one
sand and on water.     gram by one degree
                       Celsius.

                       IV. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 277
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                                                       Materials differ in how
                                                                       their properties affect
                                                                       what happens when
                                                                       they convert light
                                                                       energy into energy
                                                                       that warms a surface.

Complete documenting your exploration and writing a summary before looking at an
example of student work. Also consider nuances about exploring the effect of thermal
conductivity, specific heat, and reflectivity on what happens when light shines on sand
and water.

1. Example of student work about what happens when light shines on sand and
water

   Figure 3.18 shows a student's entries into a table about ideas about properties of
materials. The student's summary also appears below.

278 | IV. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                          FIG. 3.18 Example of student's entries into Table III.3 about
                          properties of materials.

   In row 1, the student drew a picture of a light shining on white and black paper. The
student wrote, The graph showed an increase when the probe was over the white paper,
decreased when over black paper.

   In row 2, the student drew a picture of a cup with sand and a cup with water, each with
a temperature probe, and a light shining on the cups. (Note that the student indicated
more rather than less sand than water.) The student wrote, The water stays the same temp
throughout, meaning the energy is throughout. The sand is cooler on the bottom so the energy
isn't transferred.

   In row 3, the student drew a picture of a cup of sand and a metal plate, with a light
shining on each, and notes sand isn't thermally conductive and metal plate is thermally
conductive. The student wrote, The sand was more dense than the water, but was less

                                                                                                  IV. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 279
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

thermally conductive. This differs from the more dense metal plate being highly thermally
conductive.

   In row 4, the student drew a picture of a light shining on a cup with sand and a cup
with water. The student wrote, Supported by the sand heating up more than the water in
the same time with the same amount of energy put in. (Note that the student again drew
containers with higher rather than lower sand than water).

   In row 5, the student drew a sun shining on a beach with sand and water, with labels
equal throughout in the water and sand heats at top in the sand. The student wrote, The
water and the sand take in energy differently, the sand absorbs and the water reflects some.
The sand is less thermally conductive, the water is more thermally conductive. The student
also drew a light and a dark arrow with the note don't use the energy.

The student wrote the following rationales for the ideas claimed in the third column of the
table:

              Materials differ in the property of reflectivity, how well they reflect light.
           Corollary: Materials differ in how well they absorb light. ...The white paper showed
           an increase on the graph, because it has greater reflectivity and the black paper
           showed a decrease on the graph, because it has lower reflectivity. We also compared
           the reflectivity of the dry sand and water with a light sensor. The reflectivity of water
           depends upon the angle at which the light source is shining on the water. Water is
           highly absorbent when the Sun in high and more reflective when the sun is shining
           on it at an angle...

              Materials differ in the property of thermal conductivity. Thermal conductivity is
           how well a material transfers energy. The second row of (the table) shows the light
           source shining equally on the equal masses of water and sand. For ten minutes the
           light was shining over both cups with temperature probes in the cups.

              After ten minutes, the water warmed from an initial temperature of 21.6ºC to
           22.9ºC throughout the cup of water. The temperature near the top of the sand was
           31.1ºC. The temperature near the bottom of the sand was the same as the initial
           temperature, which was 24.4ºC. I would infer that the water has higher thermal
           conductivity because the temperature was the same throughout the substance,
           meaning energy was transferred from the top to the rest of the liquid.

              The same amount of light shined for the same amount of time on the same mass of
           water and dry sand, but the temperature of the sand was hotter on the top than the
           bottom. The water was the same temperature throughout, therefore the sand kept
           more of the energy it absorbed near the surface of the sand.

280 | IV. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                  This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   Materials differ in the property of density, how much mass there is in one unit of
volume. The third row of (the table) describes this idea. When I was filling the cups
with equal masses of sand and water I had to add some sand. I added a little bit of
sand and put the cup on the scale, which showed the sand weighed much more than
the water. I poured a little of the sand out and scale showed the sand cup was much
lighter than the water. The little bit of the sand made a big difference, showing sand
is dense. The sand was denser, so there was less sand (by volume) in the cup than
water in the cup. If sand was added to water, the sand would sink to the bottom,
demonstrating the sand is denser. Water is the standard, so the mass of one gram
of water has a volume of one cubic centimeter at 4ºC. The density of the sand is
approximately 1.6 grams for each cubic centimeter.

   The metal plate appeared denser than the Styrofoam plate that we experimented
with before. The metal plate had more thermal conductivity than the Styrofoam
plate, which was demonstrated by the cool feeling we experienced when touching the
metal plate. When touching the Styrofoam plate there was no temperature change
felt. The sand was denser than the water, but as demonstrated above, the sand had
lower thermal conductivity. This is evidence that there is no relation between the
properties of density and thermal conductivity.

   Materials differ in the property of specific heat, how much energy in calories is
needed to change the temperature of one gram by one degree Celsius. The fourth
row of (the table) represents this idea. Water is the standard, meaning one calorie
is needed to change the temperature of one gram of water by one degree Celsius, at
standard atmospheric pressure and 20ºC. This can be shown by cwater =1 cal/(g ºC).
The specific heat of sand is smaller; sand only needs approximately 0.2 calories to
change one gram of sand by one degree Celsius. This can be represented by csand =0.2
cal/(g ºC).

   These ideas can be used to decide which material changes temperature more. If
the sand and the water have the same mass, the sand will change temperature more.
Less energy is needed to change one gram of sand by one degree Celsius than is
needed for water; it only takes 0.2 calories to change one gram of sand one degree
Celsius while water needs one calorie to change one gram of water by one degree
Celsius. One calorie of energy from the Sun will change one gram of water one
degree Celsius. For sand, one calorie of energy from the Sun will change one gram of
sand by five degrees Celsius. Therefore, sand will change temperature by five degrees
more.

   Materials differ in how their properties affect what happens when they convert

                                                                                 IV. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 281
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           light energy into energy that warms a surface. Two cups were filled with equal
           masses of water and dry sand. These cups were placed under a light where the light
           could shine on them equally for an equal amount of time. When light shined equally
           on the equal masses of the sand and water, the water heated evenly throughout the
           cup. The sand was warmer near the surface but remained the initial temperature
           near the bottom of the cup. The sixth row of (the table) shows this idea.

              Figure (3.19) shows the graph that represents our findings over ten minutes.
           The graph shows both water and sand increased in temperature gradually and
           constantly. The temperature of the sand increased more than the temperature of the
           water. The initial temperature of the sand was 24.4ºC, which increased to 31.1ºC. The
           initial temperature of the water was 21.6ºC which increased to 22.9ºC.

              Water is more thermally conductive than sand. This is demonstrated by the
           temperature of the water being the same throughout the cup. Sand has a low thermal
           conductivity, demonstrated by the differences in temperature between the surface of
           the sand and the bottom of the sand.

              The temperature of the sand (near the surface) increased more than the
           temperature of the water even though they were exposed to the same amount of
           energy for the same amount of time. This demonstrates that sand has a smaller
           specific heat. One gram of sand can change one degree Celsius with only 0.2 calories
           of energy, which means the sand needs less energy than water to change the same
           amount in temperature, which is shown on the graph.

                                 FIG. 3.19 Student's graph of temperature changes for
                                 sand and water

282 | IV. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                                                                     Physics student, Spring 2016
   2. Nuances about the exploration of effects of properties of materials
   (a) Noticing the lack of a relationship between the properties of thermal conductivity and
density.
   As this student noted clearly above, this exploration refutes the tempting inference that
thermal conductivity and density are related. Although the more dense metal blocks were
also more thermally conductive in the exploration in Unit 2, here the less dense water was
more thermally conductive than the more dense sand.
   The temperature of the sand near the bottom of the cup was lower than the
temperature of the sand at the top of the cup. From this we inferred that the energy
absorbed by the sand near the top of the cup stayed near the top of the cup rather
that spreading throughout the sand, that sand has a low thermal conductivity. The
temperature of the water near the bottom of the cup, however, was the same as the
temperature of the water near the top of the cup. From this we inferred that some of the
energy absorbed by the water near the top of the cup flowed throughout the water in the
cup rather than staying on the surface, that water has a high thermal conductivity.
   These results indicate that in this case the more dense material, sand, had a lower
thermal conductivity than the less dense material, water. This is opposite to the earlier
result in Unit 2 in which we inferred that the more dense materials, the 2 metals, had
higher thermal conductivities than the less dense materials, wood and Styrofoam. These
contradictory results indicate that there is no relation between the properties of thermal
conductivity and density.
   (b) Interpreting the difference in initial heights of the lines in Fig. 3.19. Visually it is
clear from the graph that the temperature of the sand changed more rapidly than the
temperature of the water. The lines do not start at the same height, however, as would be
expected if the sand and water started at the same temperature. It is not clear whether
the sand and water were at different temperatures at the start of the experiment, whether
the temperature probes were not calibrated so they did not read the same temperature
although the sand and water actually were at the same temperature, or whether the
temperatures of the sand and water were already different at the instant in time that the
computer started displaying the graph because the students turned on the light before
they started the computer program recording the temperature probes. It is important to
turn on the computer first, to document that the sand and water are starting out at the
same temperature. Then turn on the light to start the warming process. It is clear from the
graph, however, that the temperature probe in the sand increased in temperature much
faster than the temperature probe in the water.

                                                                                                  IV. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 283
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   (c) Interpreting the slopes of the lines in Figs. 3.17 and 3.19. The vertical axes of the graphs
shown in Fig. 3.17 and Fig. 3.19 represent the temperature of the sand (red line) and water
(blue line). The horizontal axes represent the time that the lamp was shining on the sand
and water. The height of the line at any point represents the temperature at that instant
of time. The slope of the line represents how much the height changed during some time
interval. The horizontal axis is marking off time in one-minute time intervals. For these
graphs, the slope of the line represents how much the temperature was changing during
one minute of time.

   Because the lamp was the same distance away from the sand and water, the horizontal
axis represents not only the time that the light was on but also the incoming energy
shining on the sand and water. Therefore the slopes of the lines also represent how much
the temperatures of sand and water were changing for each unit of incoming energy.

   The straight lines indicate that these slopes were constant, that the temperature of the
sand was changing at the same rate at the end of the ten minutes as it was changing at
the beginning of the ten minutes that the light was shining on the cups of sand and water.
The same was true for the water, that the rate of change of temperature for each unit of
time was constant for the water.

   (d) Comparing the slopes of the lines. How did the slope of the line for the sand compare
to the slope of the line for the water? Clearly the slope of the red line, representing how
much the temperature changed for sand for each unit of energy, was greater than the
slope of the blue line, representing how much the temperature changed for water for each
unit of energy absorbed.

   (e) Relating the slopes of the lines to the specific heats of sand and water. How does this
result for the slopes of the lines relate to a comparison of the specific heats of sand and
water? As discussed in Unit 2, a material's specific heat is the amount of energy needed to
change the temperature of a mass of one gram of the material by a temperature of one
degree C. A table of specific heats (See http://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/specific-
heat-capacity-d_391.html ) lists the specific heat of sand as 0.19 cal/(gºC) and the specific
heat of water as 1.00 cal/(gºC).

   If the specific heat of sand is about 0.2 cal/ gºC, how much would the temperature of
1 gram of sand increase if it absorbed 1 calorie of energy? If a gram of sand increases in
temperature by 1ºC when it absorbs 0.2 cal of energy and the sand absorbs (0.2 cal + 0.2
cal + 0.2 cal +0.2 cal + 0.2 cal) of energy, how much does its temperature increase?

   If the specific heat of water is 1.0cal/gºC, how much would the temperature of 1 gram of
water increase if it absorbed 1 calorie of energy?

   For each calorie of energy absorbed by a gram of sand, the temperature of the sand

284 | IV. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

goes up about 5 degrees C compared to one degree C for each calorie of energy absorbed
by a gram of water. This major difference in the properties of sand and water has major
implications for what happens when light from the Sun shines on sand and water at the
beach! The difference in their specific heats is the primary cause of why the sand gets hot
and the water stays cool during a sunny day at the beach.

   ( f) Considering the effect of the property of reflectivity. In our course, students sometimes
obtain different results for the property of reflectivity; some report the water reflects
more than the sand and some less. It seems to depend upon the angle at which they hold
the light probe. To what extent is this a problem for interpreting results?

   The percent of incident light reflected is called a material's albedo. Water's albedo
depends upon many aspects, including whether the sun is shining straight down (low
albedo) or at an angle (high albedo) as shown in Fig. 3.20. The water absorbs more of the
Sun's energy when the Sun is high in the sky than when the Sun is rising or setting.

                 FIG. 3.20 Dependence of solar reflection upon angle of incidence.
                 https://atmos.washington.edu/~mcmurdie/articles/katsaros_etal_1985.pdf,
                 p. 7314. Kristina B. Katsaros, Lynn A. McMurdie, Richard J. Lind, and John E.
                 DeVault, "Albedo of a water surface, spectral variation, effects of atmospheric
                 transmittance, sun angle and wind speed," Journal of Geophysical Research,
                 90(C4), 7313-7321 (July 20, 1985).

   Water's albedo also depends upon its state, whether it is liquid in the ocean, bare ice,
or ice with snow. Fresh snow reflects the most, about 90%, whereas liquid water in the
oceans reflects very little, about 6% as shown in Fig. 3.21. Desert sand reflects about 40%
(http://www.climatedata.info/forcing/albedo/).

                                                                                                  IV. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 285
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                                   Fig. 3.21 Albedo of water in
                                                   liquid and solid states.
                                                   Image courtesy of the
                                                   National Snow and Ice Data
                                                   Center, University of
                                                   Colorado, Boulder.
                                                   https://nsidc.org/
                                                   cryosphere/seaice/
                                                   processes/albedo.html

Is there ever a time when the water warms up more than the sand because of these
differences in reflectivity? If one calorie of energy from light from the Sun falls on one
gram of water and all of that energy is absorbed by the water, its temperature will go up
at most 1ºC because its specific heat is 1.0 cal/(gºC).

   What happens when one calorie of energy from light from the Sun falls on one gram of

286 | IV. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

sand? If the sand absorbs all of the energy, we saw above that its temperature goes up 5ºC
because its specific heat is only 0.2 cal/(gºC).

   If the sand reflects 40% of the incoming energy, however, how much does one gram of
sand's temperature go up if it receives 60% of the incoming energy? If one gram of sand
only needs 0.2 calories to increase in temperature by one degree Celsius and it absorbs
0.2 cal + 0.2 cal + 0.2 cal = 0.6 cal, its temperature will go up 3ºC.

   Even in this worst case, with the water absorbing the most it can and the sand reflecting
the most it can and absorbing the least it can, the sand will increase in temperature
much more than the water. This confirms that the differences in reflectivity are not very
important; what matters more is the difference in specific heats.

   (g) Considering the relative importance of various properties. Thinking about what
properties and processes might matter during an exploration is an important part of doing
science. Figuring out which matter more than others is useful so that one can focus on the
causes of major effects before investing a lot of time and effort in exploring less important
effects.

                                                                                                  IV. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 287
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

V. Using Central Ideas to Explain
Intriguing Phenomena Involving Local
Weather at the Beach

   Students in our area of the country can go to the beach on sunny days. The sand is
warm; brrr, the water is cold! How can that be? Later in the day, however, the sky often
clouds over and a breeze comes up from over the water. Why would that happen?

A. Considering the influence of the properties of materials on
thermal effects

  Question 3.8 Why is the sand warm and the water cool at the beach if the Sun has been
                     shining on both in the same way for the same time?

  · Use central ideas about the properties of sand and water, such as their thermal
      conductivities, specific heats, and reflectivities, to explain why the sand is hot and
      the water cool at the beach even though the Sun has been shining on them in the
      same way for the same time.

1. Example of student work explaining about hot sand and cool water at the beach

              At a sunny day at the beach, the top of the sand is warm. The radiation from the
           Sun heats up the surface of the sand, but sand has a low thermal conductivity, so
           this energy stays at the surface of the sand. When you dig your feet into the sand it
           is cool below because the energy from the Sun was not transferred below the surface
           of the sand.

              Water has a higher thermal conductivity, meaning the energy from the Sun is
           quickly transferred throughout the water, a big area. This means the heat will be

288 | V. Using Central Ideas to Explain Intriguing Phenomena Involving Local Weather at the Beach
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           even throughout the water, taking a lot more energy than is supplied to finally heat
           up the entire ocean. The water also feels cool because water has a bigger specific
           heat than sand. Despite the water receiving the same amount of energy for the same
           amount of time as the sand, the water needs more energy to change one gram of
           the water one degree Celsius. It takes 1 calorie of energy from the Sun to change one
           gram of the water one degree Celsius, while sand only needs 0.2 calories of energy
           from the Sun to change the same amount. This means it will take longer for the
           water to increase in temperature because water needs more energy to do so.

              Another factor contributing to water temperature is the angle of the Sun. If the
           Sun is shining on the water from an angle, some of the light is reflected. When
           the light is reflected the energy is not being absorbed, so the temperature is not
           increasing as much. When the Sun is high in the sky above the water, the energy will
           be absorbed because the light is not being reflected.

                                                                                     Physics student, Spring 2016
   B. Considering the influence of light and thermal effects on weather at the beach
   A wonderful sunny day at the beach can turn cloudy and somewhat chilly with a breeze
coming off the water late in the afternoon. What causes this shift in the weather?

Question 3.9 Why do clouds and sea breezes often form in the afternoon after a sunny day
                                          at the beach?

  · Draw a diagram that illustrates why sand is warm, water cool, clouds often form in
      the sky, and breezes blow in from the sea in the afternoon after a sunny day at the
      beach.

  · Explain these aspects of local weather at the beach in terms of transfer of energy
      processes such as radiation from the Sun, reflection, absorption, conduction,
      evaporation, condensation, and convection.

  · To explain a complex sequence of physical processes, start with radiation from the
      Sun and discuss each step with your group members. What is the influence of
      differences in thermal conductivity and specific heat between sand and water? What
      roles do conduction, evaporation, condensation, and convection play in setting up a
      circulation of air above the sand and water?

  · Monitoring what one is doing can be helpful when developing complicated
      explanations. Every so often, step back and consider: What are we doing? Why are
      we doing this? How is doing this helping us?

                                                 V. Using Central Ideas to Explain Intriguing Phenomena Involving Local Weather at the Beach | 289
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   Complete your explanations before looking at an example of student work. Next
consider nuances about the influence of light and thermal phenomena on local weather at
the beach. Then enjoy reading about how three young children learned to interpret a sea
breeze diagram like the one below.

1. Example of student work explaining about cloudy skies and sea breezes forming
in the afternoon after a sunny day at the beach

   This student created a clear diagram of the convection cycle underlying sea breezes:

                            FIG. 3.22. Student's diagram explaining why clouds and sea
                            breezes often appear in the afternoon after a sunny day at the
                            beach.

The diagram is labeled Convection Cycle and as a diagram illustrating explanation for sea
breezes. The student drew and labeled a Sun whose rays shine on both the land and sea,
heating the sand and water. The warm sand warms the air above by conduction, and the
heating air rises, represented by the gray upward arrow. Some water evaporates forming
cool moist air above the water, which blows toward the shore forming a sea breeze,
represented by the gray arrow toward land. A cloud forms in which Condensation into
cloud occurs as moisture in the warm moist air condenses in the cooler upper atmosphere.

290 | V. Using Central Ideas to Explain Intriguing Phenomena Involving Local Weather at the Beach
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

The cooling air sinks, represented by the gray arrows to become cool moist air over the
water, which then blows toward shore, represented by the gray arrow toward the land.

The student interpreted the diagram as follows:
              As we have learned in the past few weeks, light leaves a source such as the Sun

           and travels in all directions, (including) to the sand and to the water. Sand is a
           poor conductor of heat so when the Sun warms the sand, the heat is not distributed
           evenly, making the surface hot. Also the specific heat of sand is lower than that of
           water so when both are exposed to the same amount of light, the sand at the surface
           will have a higher change in temperature.

              Water is a good conductor of heat so the heat from the sunlight is evenly
           distributed throughout the water. Also water has a higher specific heat than sand so
           it will not warm as much when exposed to the same light.

              Over the water, some of the light energy is used to change the state of some water,
           evaporating it into a gas state. This makes the air over the water cooler moist air.

              The air above the sand continues to heat, because the sand heats at a higher rate
           than the water. As the air (above the sand) warms, it rises. The cool moist air above
           the water begins to move toward the sand, ( forming the sea breeze).

              The hot sand heats the cool moist air in a process called conduction, causing the
           air to rise, (cool), and the gaseous water to form a cloud through condensation. As
           the air cools, it sinks back toward the water. As the warm and cool air moves, it is
           called "convection."

                                                                                          Physics Student Fall 2015

2. Nuances about explaining changes in the weather during a sunny day at the
beach

   There are many sea breeze diagrams available on the Internet. Some are quite detailed,
such as http://www.yachtingmonthly.com/sailing-skills/understand-sea-breeze-49027
). This is intended for people interested in sailing in coastal waters. Some diagrams show
land breezes that occur at night as well as sea breezes that occur during the day, such as
http://climate.ncsu.edu/edu/Breezes . This website refers to differences in air pressure
that are related to changes in the density of air. As the land warms by energy radiated from
the Sun, the air immediately above it also warms by conduction; as the warm air expands,
it become less dense than the cool air above it and the warm air rises. This forms a low

                                                 V. Using Central Ideas to Explain Intriguing Phenomena Involving Local Weather at the Beach | 291
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

pressure region over the land. The cool moist air over the water is more dense. This forms
a high-pressure region over the water. The cool moist air then flows toward the land,
which forms the sea breeze. As this moist air warms over the warm land by conduction,
it also expands and rises. This sets up a convection current of warm moist air rising and
cool air flowing from the ocean over the land up into the upper atmosphere and back
down to the water. The upper atmosphere is cool and as the rising warm moist air cools,
the moisture condenses into tiny droplets of water, forming clouds. This complex cycle
is an example of the interactions of several of Earth's systems, the geosphere (rock, soil,
and sediments including sand), hydrosphere (water in the ocean and atmosphere), and
atmosphere (air over both land and sea).

3. Example of learning and teaching about sea breezes with friends and/or family
members

 Question 3.10 What happens when teaching friends or family members about the physical
                 phenomena underlying changes in the weather at the beach?

The student who drew the diagram in Fig. 3.22 chose to discuss sea breezes with three
children for whom she baby sat: Lucie-7, Ava-4 and Ruby-4:

              I did this project with some of the children I babysit, Lucie, Ava, and Ruby. I asked
           the girls if they had ever heard about sea breezes and what they think when they
           hear that phrase.

              Lucie, said: "um is that like breezes from off of the sea?" Ava and Ruby asked: "is
           that like when you can see the wind moving leaves and stuff?" I then showed the girls
           a diagram of sea breezes and asked them their initial thoughts.

              Mind you the girls are 4 and 7 so the answers I got are interesting.
              Me: Which do you think is warmer when you go to the beach, the water or the
           sand?
              R: "The sand!"
              A: "The water..... I mean the sand!"
              L: " the sand, cause sometimes the sand is super hot and burn-y and you have to
           dig down to where it isn't as hot."
              Me: Okay so do you think the air above the water is warmer or colder than the air
           above the sand?

292 | V. Using Central Ideas to Explain Intriguing Phenomena Involving Local Weather at the Beach
                  This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   L: "The air above the sand is probably warmer, cause it is being warmed up by the
sand."

   Me: Okay good. Does warm air sink or rise do you know?
   A:" Um, I think warm air rises."
   Me: Why?
   A: " Well cause in our room during the summer it was always way hotter on my
top bunk than it was on Ruby's bottom bunk. And it was way hotter at the top of the
house than in the downstairs and dad said its cause hot air likes to go up."
   Me: That's really good thinking Ava. So do you think that the warm air at the beach
warms and rises too?
   A: "Well yeah probably."
   Me: Okay so say there is wind that comes and blows the air above the sea over to
the sand, what would happen?
   L: "well the air would get warmer, cause it would be with the warm sand. Then it
would rise up like the hot air in the house does."
   Me: Ruby can you show me on the diagram where you think this is happening?
   Ruby pointed to where the arrow points up on the diagram and goes towards the
cloud.
   R: Right here is where it is happening. It goes up and into a cloud.
   Me: Good job Ruby. Okay so when the hot air goes up something called
condensation happens, which is like when you have a cold water bottle and the water
drops collect on the outside of the bottle. This is because the water inside the bottle
is colder than the water in the air outside the bottle. This is also how clouds form.
The different air temperatures mix and the water drops form into a cloud because a
cloud is actually a mist and a lot of water drops. Now on the diagram what looks like
it happens to the cloud?
   L: The cloud goes back out to the ocean.
   Me: Okay and as the air goes back to the ocean it gets colder, what happens to
colder air?
   R: Colder air goes down!
   Me: Good job Ruby, Ava can you point to where the colder air is going down?
   Ava pointed to the arrow of cold air descending back to the top of the water.
   Me: Okay now what do you think will happen to the air when it gets back above
the water?
   L: I think it will keep going in this circle like the diagram says. Cause it will get
pushed by sea breezes; then it will get all hot again over the sand. And that will make

                                V. Using Central Ideas to Explain Intriguing Phenomena Involving Local Weather at the Beach | 293
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           it rise up into the air and be a cloud. Then it will get pushed back out to sea and sink
           again when it gets cold. And start again and again.

              One thing that I think Lucie in particular learned about was patterns, which
           described by the article are: "Patterns. Observed patterns of forms and events guide
           organization and classification, and they prompt questions about relationships and
           the factors that influence them." Lucie was able to say that she thought that the air
           would continue in a cycle and would follow the sea breeze cycle in a pattern that the
           cold air would always sink and the hot air would always rise.

              I also think that the girls participated in engaging in argument from evidence.
           When Ava explained to me why she thought that the hot air would rise she used
           evidence she had from her own life to explain what she thought would be true. She
           was engaged in forming an argument, and backing it up with what she already
           knew.

              Also the girls worked on asking question and on finding a good way to answer the
           questions that I proposed to them, to think about what the other girls had said, and
           to make a guess or to answer with that in mind.

              I also learned that I am not completely comfortable explaining this phenomena,
           mostly because I am not sure that I fully understand how this cycle is taking place
           yet so I was not sure how to phrase questions. I also didn't do the best job of having
           the girls try and figure out the diagram on their own. This is something for me to
           work on in the future when I work with other students.

                                                                                          Physics student, Fall 2015

294 | V. Using Central Ideas to Explain Intriguing Phenomena Involving Local Weather at the Beach
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

VI. Using Mathematical
Representations to Estimate a Quantity
of Interest

   In our area, going to the beach involves being aware of and prepared for the possibility
of a tsunami occurring. A tsunami is a large wall of water that may flood a beach and
surrounding areas because of an earthquake. Geologists have used mathematics and
knowledge of physical phenomena to build complex computer models for predicting
earthquakes and tsunamis.

A. Exploring computer models designed to predict earthquakes
and tsunamis

   A major 9.0 earthquake may occur, for example, off the coast of northern California,
Oregon, Washington and British Columbia. This region is called the Cascadia Subduction
Zone (see http://www.oregon.gov/oem/hazardsprep/Pages/Cascadia-Subduction-
Zone.aspx ). This fault line is about 600 miles long and lies under the Pacific Ocean about
70 to 100 miles beyond the shoreline. If there is a major earthquake along this fault line, a
tsunami wave that comes ashore is predicted to be up to 100 feet high.

             Question 3.11 How do geologists predict earthquakes and tsunamis?

   The Earth's surface is broken up into tectonic plates, (https://www.geolsoc.org.uk/Plate-
Tectonics/Chap2-What-is-a-Plate ). A subduction zone is a region in which one plate
moves underneath another. The cause of multiple earthquakes in the Pacific Northwest
region is attributed to movement of the Juan de Fuca oceanic plate under the North
American plate as shown in Fig. 3.23.

                                                                           VI. Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate a Quantity of Interest | 295
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                              FIG. 3.23 Model of Juan de Fuca Plate subsiding under the
                              North American Plate. CC0
                              http://www.oregon.gov/oem/hazardsprep/Pages/
                              Cascadia-Subduction-Zone.aspx

   When one tectonic plate presses against another, pressure builds up until motion
occurs; the earthquake releases energy that travels outward through the Earth as seismic
waves (http://www.geo.mtu.edu/UPSeis/waves.html ). The primary waves, known as p-
waves, are compression waves that travel quickly through the Earth as shown in Fig. 3.24.
P-waves move the earth back and forth in the direction of motion. Secondary waves,
known as s-waves, are like water waves, they move the earth up and down, or side to side,
as shown in Fig. 3.24. https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Historical_Geology/Seismic_waves

                                       FIG 3.24. Top: p-waves; Bottom: s-waves.
                                       Actualist [CC BY-SA 3.0]
                                       https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/
                                       Historical_Geology/Seismic_waves

296 | VI. Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate a Quantity of Interest
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

  · For each pair of students to model what happens during an earthquake: Use a
      Slinky® .

  · To model p- waves, each pair holds the end of a Slinky® with the Slinky® stretched
      out along the floor. One gives the Slinky® a hard push toward the other.

  · Next model s-waves. One person gives the Slinky® a quick jerk side to side. If the
      pair are standing up, jerk the Slinky® up and down.

   If such an earthquake happens off the Pacific Northwest coast, a series of large ocean
waves, up to 100 feet high, may quickly flood coastal areas in 15 to 20 minutes (see:
http://www.oregongeology.org/tsuclearinghouse/ ). These huge waves are called
tsunamis. Tsunamis might also originate in distant earthquakes occurring under the ocean
elsewhere, with perhaps several hours warning. Signs in tsunami zones alert residents and
visitors with a visual display of the danger as shown in Fig. 3.25.

                                            FIG. 3.25 Tsunami danger alert sign.
                                            http://www.oregongeology.org/pubs/
                                            tsubrochures/
                                            NewportSouthEvacBrochure-12-12-12_
                                            onscreen.pdf

Residents of these areas and visitors to the beaches and coastal towns need to be aware
of where high ground is and how to get there. For links to evacuation maps for many
Oregon locations see, for example: http://www.oregongeology.org/tsuclearinghouse/
pubs-evacbro.htm . Details are available at http://www.oregongeology.org/pubs/fs/
TIM-maps-factsheet.pdf. Before leaving home, visitors should locate where they will be
and review evacuation routes and what to do in case of a tsunami (see
http://nvs.nanoos.org/TsunamiEvac and Fig. 3.26 and Fig. 3.27.)

                                                                           VI. Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate a Quantity of Interest | 297
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                  FIG. 3.26 Tsunami evacuation map for South Newport, OR:
                  https://www.oregongeology.org/pubs/tsubrochures/
                  NewportSouthEvacBrochure-12-12-12_onscreen.pdf

298 | VI. Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate a Quantity of Interest
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

The instructions at the top of the map state:

      FIG. 3.27 Instructions if you feel an earthquake.
      https://www.oregongeology.org/pubs/tsubrochures/
      NewportSouthEvacBrochure-12-12-12_onscreen.pdf

The predicted safe areas are green, the areas likely to be inundated by a local tsunami

are yellow, and those likely to be inundated not only by a local tsunami but also by a distant

tsunami from an earthquake far away from the Oregon coast are orange. An A on the green

area of the map indicates a designated assembly area in the event of an evacuation.

Steps to be prepared include making a disaster plan, preparing supplies in case of a

disaster, protecting yourself during an earthquake, evacuating if necessary, and following

your  plan  (see:        http://www.oregongeology.org/tsuclearinghouse/steps-

visitors.htm#prepare ). Although an enticing very low shore may occur just before and

after a large wave, it is important to head immediately away from the beach as more very

large waves may follow.

Preparation includes assembling a `Go-Bag' to keep in your car in case of a disaster

(see, for example, the suggested list for a 3-day emergency kit at the end of

https://www.oregongeology.org/pubs/tsubrochures/

SeasideGearhartEvacBrochure-6-3-13_onscreen.pdf or https://www.redcross.org/get-

help/how-to-prepare-for-emergencies/survival-kit-supplies.html . Suggested items

include water (1 gallon per person per day), 3-day supply of non-perishable food, first aid

kit, non-prescription drugs, tools and supplies, sanitation items, entertainment (games,

books), clothing and bedding, special requirements, and copies of important family

documents.

                         VI. Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate a Quantity of Interest | 299
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

1. Examples of student reflections upon discussing earthquake and tsunami
preparedness with a friend or family member

   A guest, Douglas Lownsbery, facilitated a class session in which he provided information
and set up four centers about earthquakes and tsunamis: a set of items for students to
choose within 10 seconds which they would put in a "go bag," a large plastic container
with sand, water, and toy people and houses with which to model a tsunami occurring,
a long slinky® to model p- and s-waves, and a core sample that he had prepared with
5th graders at a local beach, that included evidence of a previous tsunami in our area.
After the session, the students wrote about their experiences discussing earthquake and
tsunami preparation with a friend or family member. A student provided the reference for
an article and a reflection on a conversation with a roommate. The article was a follow-
up to an earlier article about the expected major earthquake in the Pacific Northwest, The
Really Big One by Kathryn Schulz in The New Yorker, July 13, 2015 issue
(https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2015/07/20/the-really-big-one ).

              The New Yorker Magazine, How to Stay Safe When the Big One Comes
           https://www.newyorker.com/tech/annals-of-technology/how-to-stay-safe-when-
           the-big-one-comes

              My "learner" this week was one of my roommates. I had her read over the article
           that I had chosen from the New Yorker and we had quite a big discussion about it. We
           talked about how we and no one we know bolt things down in our homes for safety.
           We also do not have a kit to be prepared for a tsunami or an earthquake.

              After talking about the article, I started talking about how we should all have "go
           bags." Many of us do not think that this would affect us, but it could happen at any
           time we are near the coast and it is best to be prepared to help yourself and to help
           others. We were wondering what exactly we SHOULD put in our go bag because that
           was not extremely clear when we were learning about it in class. The city of Seaside
           Oregon has a "go bag" section on their website. They recommend that you pack:

·       First Aid kit,

·       prescriptions and non-prescription medication

·       Water bottle and treatment supplies capable of providing 1 gallon per person per

   day

·       Non-perishable food

·       Cooking and eating utensils, can opener, cook stove.

300 | VI. Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate a Quantity of Interest
          This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

·  Waterproof matches, lighter or flint

·  Shelter (tent, tarp or poncho)

·  Emergency blanket

·  Portable NOAA weather radio

·  Flashlight or headlamp, and extra batteries

·  Warm clothing

·  Personal hygiene items (toilet paper, soap, toothbrush)

·  Tools and supplies (pocket knife, shut-off wrench, duct tape, gloves, whistle, plastic

   bags)

·  Cash

           This did not include things like rope or an emergency blanket, but a "go bag" can be
           different for everybody. The important part is that we always have one in our car.

              We talked a lot about cause and effect. When an earthquake hits-what do we do?
           What happens next? When can you tell a tsunami is about to hit? Where should you
           go when it is hitting? What happens to houses and people that are not in the safe
           zone? What does a town look like after a tsunami hits? How far away from the coast
           can a tsunami travel?
           The cause: the earthquake/tsunami
           The effect: how it effects people and towns
           In doing this we used the science and engineering practice of asking questions and
           defining problems. This was an easy one to cover because we do not know much
           about tsunamis and earthquakes because this area does not seem to be worried about
           them even though we should be.

Another student talked with a family member who lives in a tsunami evacuation zone
              I decided to engage my mom in learning about earthquakes and tsunamis. I chose

           to talk to her about this topic because she lives on the coast and will directly be
           impacted by the earthquake and tsunami that are due to occur anytime soon. I have
           noticed that many people are aware of the fact that Oregon is expecting a natural
           disaster in the near future but no one has done anything to prepare for this.

              I first began by asking my mom what she knew about earthquakes and what
           she has done so far to prepare for an earthquake and tsunami. She knew a lot of
           facts about earthquakes along with understanding the scientific reasoning for why
           tsunamis happen but unfortunately she has not done anything to prepare.

              I took this time to pull up the elevation map that was shown in class to show the

                      VI. Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate a Quantity of Interest | 301
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           best places to run to during a tsunami. While looking at this map we both realized
           that our house is in a zone that is expected to be under water in the event of a
           tsunami.

              "I am not even sure what I would put in a go bag if I needed to make one." stated
           my mother. I took this opportunity to talk to her about the activity we did in class
           where we had 10 seconds to pack 10 items in a bag. I told her about some of the items
           I put in the bag and why I put these things in. She asked what types of food would be
           best to start stocking up on.

              I told my mom the story about the little girl named Tilly that saved not only her
           family but also other people while on vacation in Thailand. Since my mom is a
           fourth grade teacher I told her the importance of talking about this topic with her
           students. She understood and agreed with me and said she wants to start talking
           about earthquakes and tsunamis more in her classroom.

              ...We also talked about evacuation routes, plans, and communication. My mom
           made the decision to continue this investigation by researching different ways to
           educate her students on the importance of being prepared during this type of event.
           The crosscutting concept that we used during this discussion was cause and effect.
           We talked about earthquakes and tsunamis and the impact it would have on our
           family physically, mentally, and emotionally.
An emphasis on how to prepare helps to mitigate the fear that one may experience in
realizing what might happen should a major earthquake occur.

B. Exploring computer models designed to predict the weather

Computers also can make weather predictions based on complex mathematical models.
Many of these are developed by government agencies and are available for public use on
the Internet.

302 | VI. Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate a Quantity of Interest
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                  Question 3.12 How do meteorologists predict the weather?

   Meteorologists use mathematics to build complex computer models that they use to
predict the weather. See an example provided by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration's Weather Prediction Center at http://www.wpc.ncep.noaa.gov/ Also put
in http://www.weather.gov and enter a zip code for a local prediction.

                                                                           VI. Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate a Quantity of Interest | 303
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

VII. Making Connections to
Educational Policies

   Many US states have adopted the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS, Lead
States, 2013). In addition to science and engineering practices and crosscutting concepts,
this document recommends disciplinary core ideas that student should learn at various
grade levels.

   A. Learning about the US Next Generation Science Standards:
                          Disciplinary Core Ideas

  Question 3.13 What NGSS science and engineering practices, crosscutting concepts and
disciplinary core ideas have you used in developing an explanation for the occurrence of hot

  sand, cool water, clouds, and sea breezes late in the afternoon after a sunny day at the
                                              beach?

The Next Generation Science Standards describes disciplinary core ideas in terms of
learning progressions (NGSS, Lead States, 2013, Appendix E) (See:
https://www.nextgenscience.org/resources/ngss-appendices.) These indicate what
students should learn about a topic in Kindergarten-2nd grade, 3rd-5th grade, 6th-8th
grade and 9th-12th grade.

   Disciplinary core ideas in physical science, for example, include:
              PS3.B Conservation of energy and energy transfer:

          During Kindergarten-2nd grade, students should learn that sunlight warms
            Earth's surface.

          During 3rd-5th grade, students should learn that energy can be converted from
            one form to another form.

          During 6th-8th grade, students should learn that the relationship between the
            temperature and the total energy of a system depends on the types, states, and
            amounts of matter.

304 | VII. Making Connections to Educational Policies
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

          During 9th-12th grade, students should learn that the total energy within a
            system is conserved.

  · How are these disciplinary core ideas relevant to the development of an explanation
      for sea breezes?

  · Provide an example of how the explanation of sea breezes incorporates one or more
      of the eight NGSS science and engineering practices: asking questions and defining
      problems; developing and using models; planning and carrying out investigations;
      analyzing and interpreting data; using mathematics and computational thinking;
      constructing explanations and designing solutions; engaging in argument from
      evidence; and obtaining, evaluating, and communicating information.

  · Provide an example of how the explanation of sea breezes incorporates one or more
      of the seven NGSS crosscutting concepts: patterns; cause and effect; scale,
      proportion, and quantity; systems and system models; energy and matter: flows,
      cycles, and conservation; structure and function; and stability and change.

The disciplinary core ideas, science and engineering practices, and crosscutting concepts
are called dimensions of science learning and teaching. It is important to consider all three
dimensions when designing learning experiences in science contexts.

B. Reflecting upon this development of a complex explanation

   Explaining sea breezes is complicated. As the conversation with Ava above illustrates,
however, even four-year-old children know that "hot air rises" and can support that claim
with evidence "in our room during the summer it was always way hotter on my top bunk
than it was on Ruby's bottom bunk. And it was way hotter at the top of the house than in
the downstairs..." This four-year-old already has understood the essence of the nature of
science, being able to make an argument based on evidence. Young children are capable
of scientific reasoning in contexts with which they are familiar and have had relevant
experiences upon which to draw in making sense of what they are learning.

   What happens when energy radiated from the Sun shines on sand and water at a
beach in the same way for the same time? A more complex version of Ava's scientific
reasoning occurs in making an argument about what happens when different materials
absorb incoming energy. One way to explore this question is to create a model of the

                                                                                                                VII. Making Connections to Educational Policies | 305
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

situation in the laboratory. What happens when energy radiated from a lamp shines on
equal masses of sand and water in the same way for the same time?

   The graphs in Fig. 3.17 and 3.19, for example, demonstrate a major difference in that the
temperature versus time line for the sand was clearly steeper than the line for the water.
This replicates the effects seen at the beach, that equal input of energy results in very
difference changes in temperature for sand and water. Using specific heat information
from outside sources indicated that the specific heat of sand was about 0.2 calories of
energy to change the temperature of one gram by one degree C whereas the specific heat
of water was by 1.0 calories of energy to change the temperature of one gram by one
degree C.. This difference in the property of specific heat, in how much energy is needed
to change the temperature of one gram of a material by one degree Celsius, is the key to
explaining why sand at the beach is hot and the water cool even though the sun has been
shining on both in the same way for the same time.

   Differences in other properties, such as thermal conductivity and reflectivity, also
contribute to causing this effect. The temperature near the bottom of the cup of sand was
lower than the temperature near the surface, whereas the temperature of the cup of water
was the same throughout. This indicates that the sand had a low thermal conductivity.
This means that the incoming energy absorbed by the sand stayed near the surface,
warming the surface sand whereas the incoming energy absorbed by the water on the
surface flowed throughout the cup of water. Using reflectivity data from outside sources
also demonstrated that reflectivity effects were minor compared to the big difference in
effect due to the property of specific heat.

   Tracing the flow of energy in a system also is useful in understanding what is happening.
As shown in Fig. 3.14, convection occurs when a circular current forms as warm fluid
rises and cold fluid sinks. Similarly, as energy flows from the warm sand to the dry air
above it by conduction, the less dense warm air rises; as energy flows from the warm air
into the cooler upper atmosphere, the cooling air becomes more dense, and sinks back
down toward the surface, setting up a convection current. Meanwhile some of the liquid
water absorbs enough energy from the sun to evaporate into the cool air above the water's
surface. As the warm air rises above the hot sand, the cool moist air above the surface of
the water blows toward shore, forming a sea breeze. When the moist air warms, rises, and
cools in the upper atmosphere, the moisture condenses back into liquid water droplets
and forms clouds.

   Developing this complex explanation of local weather that students have experienced
at the beach seems to be motivating. Several have identified this session as a highlight of
the course. The pleasure students seem to experience in this accomplishment may help

306 | VII. Making Connections to Educational Policies
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

them to appreciate the hard work of figuring something out as well as understanding the
emotional satisfaction that scientists derive from their studies.

   One goal of this course has been to build confidence in using the tools of science,
particularly graphs and diagrams. Creating a graph of data and telling the `story' that the
graph displays can be a powerful skill to have, both professionally and personally. Also
powerful is the ability to create and use diagrams that visually explain whatever needs
explaining. In addition, the process of articulating what was done, found, and understood
in this complex context can help students gain confidence as science writers, able to set
forth their own ideas and reasoning in clear and coherent ways.

C. Making connections to NGSS understandings about the
nature of science

This unit provides a good example of the NGSS science and engineering practice of
constructing explanationsas well as the crosscutting concept of cause and effect in
focusing upon the difference in the property of specific heat for sand and water. The very
low specific heat of sand compared to that of water causes large differences in increases
in temperature when light from the Sun shines on sand and water in the same way for the
same time. This is an example of aspects that students in grades 3-5 should learn to do,
to identify the evidence that supports particular points in an explanation. They also should
understand that the transfer of energy can be tracked as energy flows through a designed
or natural system while they are learning disciplinary core ideas about the conservation of
energy and energy transfer.

   Unit 3 also has provided additional examples of the nature of science such as
that science knowledge assumes an order and consistency in natural systems (NGSS
Appendix H https://www.nextgenscience.org/resources/ngss-appendices . This unit
assumes, for example, that what happens with small amounts of sand and water warmed
by a lamp in the laboratory is consistent with what happens with large amounts of
sand and water at a beach. Also assumed is that similar mechanisms cause the apparent
paradox that the sand is very hot but the water is cool even though the Sun is shining
on both in the same way. The students explored possible causes for these different
effects by considering the role of differences in three properties of sand and water: their
reflectivities, thermal conductivities, and specific heats. They observed differences in how

                                                                                                                VII. Making Connections to Educational Policies | 307
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

much the temperatures changes on the surface when energy flowed from a lamp placed
equal distances from cups of sand and water.

   The process of explaining why the sand is hot but the water cool as well as why
sea breezes and cloudy skies often appear in the afternoon after a sunny day at the
beach was a culmination of the earlier explorations of the nature of light and thermal
phenomena. Students may gain from this exploration some understandings about how
scientific knowledge grows and connects in multiple ways across many contexts. The
process of engaging friends and family members in learning about sea breezes at the
beach also may help convey some of these understandings about the nature of science to
others.

308 | VII. Making Connections to Educational Policies
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

VIII. Physical Phenomena: Summary of
Equipment and Supplies for Unit 3

                                                                            VIII. Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 3 | 309
           This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 3

Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 3

When used              For instructor and      For each group of 3            For each student
                        demonstrations

Unit 3                                         1 cup of water
Week 5
 Day 9

Question 3.1
Connecting to initial
knowledge about
water and weather

Question 3.2           Rice cooker or pot and                                 U3H2 Diagnostic
Exploring changes in   hot plate                                              Question about
states of matter                                                              Changes in States of
                       Tray of ice cubes                                      Matter
                         2 digital

                       thermometers to
                       connect to laptop
                       computer
                       (or two regular
                       thermometers with
                       range below 0ºC
                       and above 100°C)

310 | VIII. Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 3
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 3

Question 3.3         Evaporation:
Exploring the water  Tray, food coloring,
cycle                water to make puddle,
                     lamp,

                     Transpiration:           If feasible, provide
                     Plant, plastic bag to  equipment for
                     fit over it,           convection
                                            demonstration for
                       Condensation:        each small group
                     metal container,
                     blue ice cubes,                                  U3H3 Table.III.1
                                                                      U3H4 Table.III.2
                       Precipitation:                                 U3H5 Water cycle
                     Large jar, cup that                            diagram
                     fits inside opening,
                     ice for cup, about ½
                     jar of very hot
                     water,

                       Convection:
                     Plastic bin (shoe box
                     size)
                     Red food coloring,
                     Blue ice cubes,
                     4 paper cups to
                     support bin,
                     1 ceramic or
                     Styrofoam cup for
                     very hot almost
                     boiling water,
                     Room temperature
                     water to fill bin 2/3
                     full

                                            U3H1 Exit Ticket

                       Container for
                     waste water if no
                     sink in room

                     VIII. Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 3 | 311
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 3

           Unit 3      2 digital temperature
          Week 5       probes connected to
           Day 10      laptop (or regular
                       thermometers)
Question 3.7
Explaining hot sand,   2 clear plastic cups
cool water, clouds,      Sand (about 1/3
and sea breezes in
the afternoon after a  cup)
sunny day at the         Room
beach
                       temperature water
                       (about ½ cup)                                            U3H6 Table.III.3 &
                                                                              graph
                         Lamp with
                       bendable stem                                            U3H7 Sea breeze
                                                                              diagram)
                         1 tray

   Question 3.13                                                                U3H8 NGSS
Reflecting upon the                                                           Crosscutting
NGSS Crosscutting                                                             concepts
Concepts
Experienced in Unit2                                                            U3H9 Anonymous
and 3                                                                         questionnaire

                                                                                U3H10 NGSS
                                                                              practices
                                                                              review Units 1-3

                                                                                U3H11 NGSS
                                                                              crosscutting
                                                                              concepts review,
                                                                              Units 1-3

                       U3H1 Exit Ticket

312 | VIII. Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 3
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

UNIT 4: CONSIDERING THE
INFLUENCE OF LIGHT AND
THERMAL PHENOMENA ON
GLOBAL CLIMATE

Exploring Physical Phenomena: What happens when light from the Sun shines on the
Earth?

                        Unit 4 Table of Contents

     I. Introduction ............................................................................................................................ 321
        II. Identifying Student Resources ..................................................................................... 323
              A. Connecting to everyday experiences ................................................................ 323
                     Question 4.1 What happens when a closed car is parked in the Sun on a
                 sunny day? .................................................................................................................. 323
              B. Documenting initial knowledge about aspects of global climate ............. 323
                     Question 4.2 What do you already know about the influence of light and
                 thermal phenomena on global climate? ................................................................. 323
                    1. Diagnostic questions about aspects of light and thermal phenomena on
                 global climate ...................................................................................................................0
        III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence ......................................................... 326
              A. Developing additional powerful ideas about light phenomena ............... 326
                     Question 4.3 Are rays of light visible or invisible? ........................................327
                     Question 4.4 What is "invisible light"? ............................................................327
                    1. Example of student work about visible light and infrared radiation ..... 335
                    2. Discovery of infrared radiation ......................................................................337
                    3. Discoveries of the other invisible portions of the electromagnetic spectrum
                   ......................................................................................................................................... 340
              B. Reviewing central ideas about thermal phenomena developed in earlier
           units ..................................................................................................................................... 344

                                                            Unit 4: Considering the Influence of Light and Thermal Phenomena on Global Climate | 313
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                     Question 4.5 How does energy flow from one place to another? ............... 344
                     Question 4.6 What is the role of systems thinking in understanding the
                 Earth's energy budget? ............................................................................................. 346
                    1. Example of student work about energy transfer processes and the Earth's
                 energy budget .............................................................................................................. 348
        IV. Using Central Ideas about Light and Thermal Phenomena to Explain the
     Greenhouse Effect ..................................................................................................................... 350
              A. Considering what happens during the greenhouse effect in a garden . 350
                     Question 4.7 What is the greenhouse effect that occurs within a greenhouse
                 in a garden? ................................................................................................................. 350
                    1. Example of student work about exploring the greenhouse effect in garden
                 greenhouses ................................................................................................................. 353
              B. Considering what happens during the greenhouse effect on a global scale
             ................................................................................................................................................ 355
                     Question 4.8 What is the greenhouse effect in the context of the entire
                 Earth? ........................................................................................................................... 355
                    2. Examples of students' initial diagrams about the greenhouse effect on
                 Earth ............................................................................................................................. 355
                    3. Greenhouse effect diagram provided by the Intergovernmental Panel on
                 Climate Change .......................................................................................................... 358
                    4. Example of student's written work about the greenhouse effect on the entire
                 Earth ............................................................................................................................ 360
                    5. Nuances about the greenhouse effect and the Earth's energy budget .... 362

                               a) Mechanisms that underline the statement that energy is "trapped"
                            by greenhouse gases. .................................................................................. 362

                               b) Details about what happens to energy entering and leaving the
                            Earth's system. ..................................................................................................0
                    6. Examples of student work in engaging a friend or family member in
                 learning about the greenhouse effect ......................................................................367
        V. Considering the Evidence for Global Climate Change ............................................370
              A. Viewing evidence for global climate change ..................................................370
                     Question 4.9 How is the evidence for global climate change being
                 communicated? ...........................................................................................................370
                    1. An example of an effort to create a visually compelling display ..............370
                    2. Examples of Internet resources available to the public: Children, Teachers,
                 General Public, Policy Makers .......................................................................................0

314 | Unit 4: Considering the Influence of Light and Thermal Phenomena on Global Climate
                         This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

              3. Examples of the international community of scientists presenting findings
           to policy makers: IPCC Reports ................................................................................ 380
   VI. Using Central Ideas Based on Evidence to Consider the Impact of Global Climate
Change ...........................................................................................................................................397
        A. Exploring the impact of global climate change on sea levels ....................397

               Question 4.10 What evidence indicates that sea levels are rising? ............397
               Question 4.11 What happens when light from the Sun shines on snow and ice
           on glaciers on land or on icebergs in the ocean? ................................................ 399
               Question 4.12 What happens when light from the Sun shines on the oceans?
             ......................................................................................................................................... 400
              1. Example of student work about modeling and comparing the impact of light
           from the Sun shining on snow and ice on land and in the sea ......................... 401
              2. Example of student work about modeling the impact of light from the Sun
           shining on the oceans ................................................................................................ 403
        B. Exploring ways to reduce one's own impact on global climate change . 409
               Question 4.13 What can you do to reduce your impact on global climate
           change? .......................................................................................................................... 409
              1. Example of student work in engaging a friend or family member in learning
           about living in more sustainable ways .................................................................... 411
   VII. Developing Mathematical Representations of Changing Quantities ................ 414
        A. Developing familiarity with motion graphs for a tossed ball .................... 414
               Question 4.14 How do position, velocity, and acceleration of a tossed ball
           change with time? ...................................................................................................... 415
        B. Becoming aware of melting glaciers ................................................................ 323
               Question 4.15 What is the evidence that glaciers are melting? ..................425
        C. Making an analogy between falling balls and melting glaciers ................425
               Question 4.16 How can familiarity with motion graphs guide making
           projections for the way glaciers will be melting over the next decade(s)? ..... 434
              1. Example of student work making an analogy between moving and melting
           phenomena .................................................................................................................. 436
              2. Summary of the analogy between moving and melting phenomena ..... 440
              3. Example of student work reflecting upon engaging a friend or family
           member in learning about global climate change's impact on melting
           glaciers. .........................................................................................................................442
   VIII. Exploring Internet Resources about Taking Action to Address Climate Change
Issues ............................................................................................................................................ 443

                                                   Unit 4: Considering the Influence of Light and Thermal Phenomena on Global Climate | 315
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                     Question 4.17 What are some ways to take action? ...................................... 443
                    1. Example of student work in reflection upon exploring Internet resources in
                 class and with a friend or family member ............................................................. 446
        IX. Making Connections to Educational Policies ........................................................... 451
              A. Learning more about disciplinary core ideas articulated in the US Next
           Generation Science Standards ......................................................................................... 451
                     Question 4.18 What relevant NGSS disciplinary core ideas have you used
                 in considering the influence of light and thermal phenomena on global climate
                 change? ........................................................................................................................... 451
              B. Reflecting upon this explanation of the science underlying claims of global
           climate change .................................................................................................................... 451
              C. Making connections to the NGSS understandings about the nature of
           science ................................................................................................................................... 451
         X. Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit
     4 ...................................................................................................................................................... 458

                                   Figures

          FIG. 4.1 Using light rays to explain why a pinhole projection is upside down.
         (See Unit 1, Fig. 1.15) .............................................................................................................. 326
          FIG. 4.2 Electromagnetic spectrum................................................................................. 330
          FIG. 4.3 Wave diagram showing wave length, , and amplitude. ..................................0
          FIG. 4.4 Black plastic bag does not transmit white light but does transmit
         infrared. ........................................................................................................................................0
          FIG. 4.5 Clear glass pane transmits white light but does not transmit infrared. .....0
          FIG. 4.6 A student's entries for Table IV.1....................................................................... 335
          FIG. 4.7 Herschel's drawing showing a thermometer placed beyond the red band in
         the spectrum from a prism placed in his window. ....................................................... 338
          FIG. 4.8 Student diagram for explaining sea breezes (repeated from Unit 3) ...... 344
          FIG. 4.9 A student's entries for Table IV.1 (continued) ................................................ 348
          FIG. 4.10 A greenhouse in a garden. .....................................................................................0
          FIG. 4.11 Student drawing of a model of exploring the greenhouse effect in a
         garden greenhouse............................................................................................................... 353

316 | Unit 4: Considering the Influence of Light and Thermal Phenomena on Global Climate
                     This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

FIG. 4.12 Group 3's initial diagram for the greenhouse effect on Earth................. 356
FIG. 4.13 Group 5's initial diagram for the greenhouse effect on Earth..................357
FIG. 4.14 Group 2's initial diagram for the greenhouse effect on Earth................. 358
FIG. 4.15 IPCC diagram representing the greenhouse effect for the entire
Earth......................................................................................................................................... 359
FIG. 4.16 "The Greenhouse Effect" diagram by Delaware Department of Natural
Resources and Environmental Control............................................................................ 360
FIG. 4.17 Student drawn computer diagram of the greenhouse effect. .................. 361
FIG. 4.18 Three modes of vibration for a molecule of carbon dioxide.................... 363
FIG. 4.19 An analysis of incoming and outgoing energy of the Earth's system in
balance..................................................................................................................................... 365
FIG. 4.20 Graph of global temperature versus time for 1880-2014. .............................0
FIG. 4.21 Line graph of global temperature anomaly versus time for 1880-2018......0
FIG. 4.22 Example from NASA ClimateKids website. .......................................................0
FIG. 4.23 Example of educational resources for teachers by region. ..........................0
FIG. 4.24 Evidence of rising sea levels on the eastern US coast. ..................................0
FIG. 4.25 IPCC Fifth Assessment Report: The Physical Science Basis. ........................0
FIG. 4.26 IPCC Fifth Assessment Report: Impacs, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. ...0
FIG. 4.27 IPCC Fifth Assessment Report: Mitigation of Climate Change. ...................0
FIG. 4.28 Observations: Annually and globally averaged combined land and surface
temperature anomalies relative to the average over the period 1986 to 2005. .........0
FIG. 4.29 Observations: Annually and globally averaged sea level change relative to
the average over the period 1986 to 2005 in the longest-running dataset.................0
FIG. 4.30 Observations: Atmospheric concentrations of the greenhouse gases
carbon dioxide (CO2, green), methane (CH4, orange), and nitrous oxide (N2O, red)
determined from ice core data (dots) and from direct atmospheric measurements
(lines). ............................................................................................................................................0
FIG. 4.31 Indicators: Global anthropogenic CO2 emissions from forestry and other
land use as well as from burning fossil fuel, cement production, and flaring............0
FIG. 4.32 Graph representing past, recent, and predicted global mean sea level
rises. ......................................................................................................................................... 398
FIG. 4.33 Student drawing of ice cubes melting on rock and in liquid water........ 401
FIG. 4.34 Tray on left overflowed when ice cubes on rock melted but tray on right
did not overflow when ice cubes in water melted. ...................................................... 402
FIG. 4.35 Student drawing of modeling the expansion of water in warming
oceans. ..................................................................................................................................... 404

                                              Unit 4: Considering the Influence of Light and Thermal Phenomena on Global Climate | 317
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

          FIG. 4.36 Computer model for predicted flooding in northwest Oregon if sea levels
         rise 8 feet according to Surging Seas Risk Zone Map.................................................. 405
          FIG 4.37 Computer model for predicted flooding in New York City and New Jersey
         if sea levels rise 8 feet according to Surging Seas Risk Zone Map. .......................... 406
          FIG. 4.38 Pounds of CO2 emissions per serving. ..............................................................0
          FIG. 4.39 Create a position versus time graph by standing in front of the motion
         detector. ................................................................................................................................... 416
          FIG. 4.40 Create position versus time graphs by moving back and forth in front of
         the motion detector. ..............................................................................................................417
          FIG. 4.41 Create velocity versus time graphs by moving back and forth in front of
         the motion detector .............................................................................................................. 418
          FIG. 4.42 Identify connections among position versus time and velocity versus
         time graphs.............................................................................................................................. 419
          FIG. 4.43 Identify connections among position versus time, velocity versus time
         graphs, and acceleration versus time graphs. ................................................................ 421
          FIG. 4.44 Position, velocity, and acceleration versus time graphs for a tossed
         ball. .............................................................................................................................................422
          FIG. 4.45 Photographs of Muir Glacier, Alaska, in 1941 and 2004. ........................... 426
          FIG. 4.46 Retreat of Ilulissat Glacier, Greenland 1851-2008. ..........................................0
          FIG. 4.47 Calving face of Ilulissat Glacier in Greenland in 2009. ..................................0
          FIG. 4.48 Calving event, Ilulissat Glacier in Greenland in 2009. ...................................0
          FIG. 4.49 Representation of the volume of ice loss during this 75-minute calving
         event. .............................................................................................................................................0
          FIG. 4.50 Graph representing the forming and melting of ice on Greenland,
         2002-2015................................................................................................................................ 432
          FIG. 4.51 Cumulative mean annual ice mass balance world wide, 1980 to 2016........0
          FIG. 4.52 Projection for graphs representing how glaciers worldwide may be
         melting during the next decade. ....................................................................................... 435
          FIG 4.53 Student drawing of observed position versus time graph for tossed
         ball.............................................................................................................................................. 437
          FIG 4.54 Student drawing of observed velocity versus time graph for tossed
         ball.............................................................................................................................................. 437
          FIG.4.55 Student drawing of observed acceleration versus time graph for tossed
         ball............................................................................................................................................. 438
          FIG. 4.56 Student drawing of projected mass of ice versus time graph for melting
         glaciers..................................................................................................................................... 438

318 | Unit 4: Considering the Influence of Light and Thermal Phenomena on Global Climate
                     This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

FIG. 4.57 Student drawing of projected velocity of melting ice versus time graph
for melting glaciers............................................................................................................... 439
FIG. 4.58 Student drawing of projected acceleration of melting ice versus time
graph for melting glaciers................................................................................................... 440

                             Tables

TABLE IV.1 Central ideas about the influence of light and thermal phenomena on
global climate ......................................................................................................................... 334
TABLE IV.1 (continued) .........................................................................................................347
TABLE IV.2 Central ideas about evidence that the Earth's average global
temperature is increasing........................................................................................................0
TABLE IV.3 Central ideas about rising sea levels ..........................................................407
TABLE IV.4a Summary of analogy between moving and melting phenomena..... 436
TABLE IV.4b Summary of analogy between moving and melting phenomena
completed ................................................................................................................................ 441
TABLE IV.5 Relevant NGSS disciplinary core ideas for teaching about climate
change...................................................................................................................................... 453

                                              Unit 4: Considering the Influence of Light and Thermal Phenomena on Global Climate | 319
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

320 | Unit 4: Considering the Influence of Light and Thermal Phenomena on Global Climate
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

I. Introduction

   The theme for this course is: What happens when light from the Sun shines on the
Earth? In this unit, you will be exploring the effect of light from the Sun on the Earth's
atmosphere, land, and oceans. In particular, you will be developing additional central ideas
about light and thermal phenomena as well as considering ways that energy from the Sun
enters and leaves the Earth. While exploring these phenomena, you will be:

          identifying resources such as what you already know about aspects relevant to
            global climate change

          developing additional central ideas based on evidence about models of light and
            thermal phenomena

          explaining intriguing phenomena such as the greenhouse effect and rising sea
            levels

          developing mathematical representations of changing quantities such as the rate
            of change in the mass of melting glaciers

          using mathematical representations to estimate a quantity of interest such as
            predictions about the likelihood of flooding at particular locations

          considering ways you and others already are and/or can take action to address
            climate change issues and

          making connections to educational policy, such as the Next Generation Science
            Standards (NGSS Lead States, 2013), the science standards adopted by many US
            departments of education.

   This unit continues your exploration of learning processes as well as of physical
phenomena. The main sections present questions with suggestions for exploring topics
and for writing reflections about your findings. Text in gray font indicates that these are
suggestions; you may think of other ways to explore the topic. Asking your own questions
as well as those posed here will enhance learning both about physics and about learning.
Check with your instructor if you choose to devise an alternative approach.

                                                                                                                                                                I. Introduction | 321
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   Small groups will be exploring various phenomena in class. Keeping track of what one
is doing and thinking is important. In this course, use a template for a physics notebook
page on which to record your notes during class. The physics notebook page can help
you remember your thoughts before, during, and after an exploration. An experienced
elementary teacher, Adam Devittt, designed this notebook page to mirror the structure of
before, during, and after reading strategies:

   Before starting your exploration, think about and discuss with your group members
what you know already about this topic, how you plan to conduct the exploration, and
what you think you might find out.

   During your exploration, record what is happening, what you are observing, and what
you are thinking about what you are observing. Include sketches of equipment and
observations. Note any words that are new and their definitions.

   After your exploration, record any central ideas that have emerged from your
observations and discussions. Also note the evidence on which you have based these ideas.
State explicitly how the evidence is relevant and supports the claims you are making in
stating these ideas. Also explain why this result is important. Then write a reflection about
whatever you want to remember about this experience. In addition, briefly state what you
are still wondering in this context.

   In summarizing and reflecting upon your explorations, you also will be integrating
science and literacy learning. This includes learning to speak clearly, listen closely, write
coherently, read with comprehension, and create and critique media.

   After writing your own summary of your findings, read some examples of student work.
The student authors first wrote drafts, received feedback for ways to enhance content
and clarity, and submitted these final versions. Also read about some nuances to consider
when explaining the phenomena explored. You should read both of these sections of the
text to be sure you have understood both the physics and the learning processes involved.

   Also available are students' reflections about teaching a friend or family member about
what they have just learned in class. Some additional sections present historical
information about ways knowledge about the topic developed. In addition, some sections
reflect upon relevant aspects of the nature of science in the context of the topic explored.
Read these sections to broaden your understanding of science and of science learning and
teaching.

322 | I. Introduction
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

II. Identifying Student Resources

   In this section you will consider a local example of the influence of light and thermal
phenomena on a closed system. You also will be documenting some of what you already
know about aspects of global climate change.

A. Connecting to relevant everyday experiences

   A phenomenon that you may have experienced occurs when light from the Sun shines
into an enclosed area.

    Question 4.1 What happens when a closed car is parked in the Sun on a sunny day?

  · Discuss with your group members experiences you may have had in getting into cars
      that have been parked with the windows up on a sunny day. Why do you think that
      happens?

This is an example of a system in which more energy enters than leaves the system.
Although the mechanisms differ, the result, an increase in temperature inside the car, is
similar to what seems to be happening to the global climate here on Earth.

B. Documenting initial knowledge about aspects of global
climate.

     Question 4.2 What do you already know about the influence of light and thermal
                                 phenomena on global climate?

   Document your initial knowledge about the influence of light and thermal phenomena
on global climate by responding to the following diagnostic questions. These diagnostic

                                                                                                                                      II. Identifying Student Resources | 323
          This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

questions focus upon two aspects of changes in global climate: the greenhouse effect and
rising sea levels. Your responses will not be graded. You will answer the same questions
again near the end of the unit, compare initial and current responses, and write a
reflection about changes in understandings and ways these occurred.

   Name_________________________ Date___________
                                                 Diagnostic Questions

                 about Aspects of the Influence of Light and Thermal Phenomena
                                                  on Global Climate

  1. How aware are you of the greenhouse effect?

     1       2        3         4          5

Have not  Have     Have      Have        Have
  heard   heard    talked     read    studied it
   of it   of it  about it  about it
                                          in a
                                       course

2. What is the greenhouse effect?

3. What can cause an increase or decrease in sea levels?

 4. In what grades/courses, if any, have you learned about global climate change? In
      what ways?

Elementary school:
Middle school:

324 | II. Identifying Student Resources
              This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

High school:
College:

5. What question(s) do you have about global climate change?

                                                              II. Identifying Student Resources | 325
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

III. Developing Central Ideas Based on
Evidence

   When light from the Sun shines on a person, the person feels warmer; when light from
the Sun shines on a closed car, the seats, dashboard, steeling wheel, and air inside the car
get warmer; when light from the Sun shines on a greenhouse in a garden, the plants, soil,
and air inside the greenhouse get warmer.
What happens when light from the Sun shines on the atmosphere, land, and oceans of
the Earth? Discussions about a warming Earth often refer to the greenhouse effect. To
understand what is happening in the greenhouse effect on the entire Earth, we first
need to review some of the central ideas developed in earlier units and to develop some
additional central ideas about light and thermal phenomena.

  A. Developing additional central ideas about light phenomena

   Unit 1 developed the central idea that light can be envisioned as rays traveling in straight
lines. As shown in Fig. 4.1, this was useful in drawing ray diagrams to explain the upside-
down projection in a pinhole camera. Such ray diagrams also were useful to explain the
apparent rise of a dot on the inside of a cup when the cup is filled with water as well as
the appearance of rainbows in the sky.

      Fig. 4.1 Using light rays to explain why a pinhole projection is upside down. (Repeated from
      Unit 1, Figs. 1.12 and 1.15)

326 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   Sometimes sunlight shining through clouds looks like rays of light, often informally
called sunbeams and known as crepuscular rays (http://www.atoptics.co.uk/atoptics/
ray1.htm). Children typically draw pictures of a sun with bright rays shining out in all
directions. However, can you actually see rays of light traveling from various objects
straight to your eyes?

                       Question 4.3 Are rays of light visible or invisible?

  · Discuss with your group members in what sense you think light rays are visible or
      not.

   When a driver sees a traffic light turn bright green, light must be traveling from the bulb
to the driver's eyes but the light rays' journeys are not visible. Are there other experiences
in which you can detect something even though its journey is not visible? When standing
near an oven, for example, you can see the oven but how do you know whether the oven
is "on" or not?

                            Question 4.4 What is "invisible light"?

   If you are standing near an oven that is cooking dinner, you likely are aware the oven
is on because you can feel its warmth. How is that energy getting to you? The oven is
radiating energy even though you cannot see that energy is leaving the oven and traveling
to your body. This process is called energy transfer by thermal radiation. You too are warm
and radiating energy!

    Equipment: If you have access to a thermal camera or to a computer with a "thermal
 camera" effect:

  · What do think you will see in a thermal camera? Which areas of someone's face, for
      example, might appear to be brighter than other areas when viewed through a
      thermal camera?

   All objects radiate energy. Thermal cameras detect thermal radiation and represent it
on the camera screen with varying levels of brightness that indicate varying levels of
temperature as shown in Fig. 4.2.

                                                                                                                 III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 327
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                             Fig. 4.2 Infrared image of a cat. CC by-NC 2.0
                             https://www.flickr.com/photos/cd_1940/2481838891

   Sometimes called night-vision cameras, thermal cameras are helpful for "seeing" warm
bodies in the dark or in smoky settings such as houses on fire. Thermal cameras have
many uses in safety, law enforcement, healthcare, electronics, and maintenance. For
information about various ways to use such cameras, search the Internet for "uses of
thermal cameras" and view a website such as https://reductionrevolution.com.au/blogs/
news-reviews/69333381-over-60-unexpected-uses-of-infrared-thermal-imaging-
camera-images .

   Thermal radiation also is known as infrared radiation. Some telescopes can "see"
infrared radiation emitted by astronomical phenomena. Visible light images and infrared
images look very different, as shown in Fig. 4.3. Both of these images are of the
constellation known as Orion, the Hunter (https://in-the-sky.org/data/
constellation.php?id=61). This constellation is visible in both northern and southern
hemisphere skies.

328 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

       Fig. 4.3 Visible light image (left) and infrared image (right) of the constellation known as
       Orion, the Hunter. Credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech/IRAS /H. McCallon
       (https://photojournal.jpl.nasa.gov/catalog/PIA08656)

On the left image, the light green lines connect the stars outlining the envisioned hunter's
shoulders, belt, and knees; a sword seems to hang below the belt. Within the blade
of the hockey-stick figure is a giant cloud of dust, gas, and young stars known as the
Orion nebula. This region of active star formation may be faintly visible on a clear dark
night away from city lights. (See: https://www.nasa.gov/feature/goddard/2017/
messier-42-the-orion-nebula). The constellation's dusty clouds are vividly visible,
however, in the infrared image on the right.

   Infrared radiation is part of the electromagnetic spectrum. Your eyes cannot see infrared
radiation but your skin can detect it as warmth. Light that you can see when light shines
onto the retinas of your eyes is called visible light and consists of white light and its
component colors. As shown in Fig. 4.4, however, visible light is only a small part of the
electromagnetic spectrum.

                                                                                                                 III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 329
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                          FIG. 4.4 Electromagnetic spectrum.
                                          https://imagine.gsfc.nasa.gov/science/
                                          toolbox/emspectrum1.html

   Although the names used in the electromagnetic spectrum refer both to rays (infrared
radiation, ultra violet radiation, x-rays, gamma rays) and to waves (microwaves, radio
waves), all of these forms of light can be described as waves, with varying wavelengths,
as shown in Fig. 4.4. They also have varying frequencies, the number of waves that pass a
point each second.

   Fig. 4.5 illustrates the meaning of wavelength, the distance from one crest to the next,

330 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

from one midpoint to the next, or from one trough to the next of a wave. The Greek letter
lambda, , is typically used as the symbol to represent wavelength.

FIG. 4.5 Wave diagram showing wave length, , and amplitude. Modified from Phil Stoffer
http://geologycafe.com/images/wavelength.jpg

Forms of light with larger wavelengths than visible light are known as infrared radiation,
microwaves, and radio waves. Forms of light with smaller wavelengths than visible light
are known as ultra violet radiation, x-rays, and gamma rays. Radio waves have the largest
wavelengths but the lowest frequencies and lowest energies. Gamma rays have the
smallest wavelengths but the highest frequencies and energies.

                                                             Exploring the wave model of light
                                                 Equipment: Use a Slinky® for each pair of students

          With a partner, hold an end of a Slinky® with the Slinky® stretched out along
            the floor. What happens when one person gives the Slinky® a quick jerk side to
            side? These waves are similar to the s-waves that travel through the earth
            during an earthquake (see Fig. 3.24 in Unit 3).

          For more information about the electromagnetic spectrum, search on the
            Internet and read one of the many relevant websites, such as

                                                                                                                 III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 331
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

            http://earthsky.org/space/what-is-the-electromagnetic-spectrum and
            https://hubblesite.org/contents/articles/the-electromagnetic-spectrum

.

  · To learn more about infrared radiation, watch Infrared: More Than Your Eyes Can
      See (6:45 min), with astrophysicist Dr. Michelle Thaller, from NASA's Spitzer Space
      Telescope, at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v4J56lnl1UE&feature=emb_title

  · Watch carefully what happens when Dr. Thaller demonstrates differences in the way
      that different materials transmit white light and infrared radiation:
          What happens when she puts her hands inside a black plastic bag when viewed
            with a regular camera? With an infrared camera?
          What happens when she brings a clear pane of glass near her face when viewed
            with a regular camera? With an infrared camera?

· The clear glass pane and black plastic bag differ in the property of transmissivity, how
they transmit different forms of light. This black plastic bag transmits infrared but not
visible light. This clear pane of glass transmits visible light but not infrared.

· Two related properties are absorptivity, how well a material absorbs light, and
emissivity, how well the material emits light. Materials that absorb energy from visible
light, emit infrared radiation as they warm up.
· Another property of materials is known as reflectivity, how well a material reflects light.
This property was explored in Unit 1, VII.A.Question 1.20. All of these properties of
materials affect what happens when light from the Sun shines on the Earth.
· Also relevant is the composition of light from the Sun: about 44.7% of solar energy is in
the visible range, about 48.7% is in the near-infrared, and about 6.6% is ultraviolet (See:
https://coolcalifornia.arb.ca.gov/science-of-cool-roofs ).

Additional information about infrared radiation is available at many websites such as
https://science.nasa.gov/ems/07_infraredwaves .
For information about what astronomers observe in the infrared region of the spectrum,
see
https://herschel.jpl.nasa.gov/farIRandSubmm.shtml. The Herschel Space Observatory is
named after William Herschel, who was the first to notice this invisible form of light.

332 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                            This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

· Complete entries in Table IV.1. Then write a summary of what you have learned
   before reading an example of student work about visible light and infrared radiation.

                                                                                                            III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 333
                              This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

TABLE IV.1 Central ideas about the influence of light and thermal phenomena on global climate

TABLE IV.1 Central ideas about the influence of light and thermal phenomena on global climate

URL/Sketch of set up          Evidence                 Central Ideas               Relevant Vocabulary

https://hubblesite.org/                                Visible light and infrared  Electromagnetic
contents/articles/                                     radiation can be            spectrum
the-electromagnetic-spectrum                           represented as waves and
                                                       are part of a broad         Infrared radiation
                                                       spectrum of such waves.

https://science.nasa.gov/                              Hot objects emit energy     Emissivity
ems/07_infraredwaves                                   as infrared radiation.

http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=2-0q0XlQJ0
(Dr. Thaller)

334 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

http://www.youtube.com/  Materials differ in how    Properties of
watch?v=2-0q0XlQJ0       much visible light and     materials:
(Dr. Thaller)            infrared radiation can     transmissivity
                         pass through the material  reflectivity
                         or are blocked.            absorptivity

1. Example of student work about visible light and infrared radiation.

           Many of us have experienced the heat of the sun, as light shines on Earth and heats
           up the surface. We have noticed that sidewalks are hot on a sunny day, and that a
           car with the windows rolled up is hotter than a car with the windows rolled down.

              Table (IV.1) features ideas explored in this lab about the influence of light and
           thermal phenomena on global climate.

                            FIG. 4.6 A student's entries for Table IV.1.

   In row 1, the student drew a picture of a wave and a half wave and identified a wave
length as extending from one crest to the next.
In row 2, the student drew a person with arrows representing infrared radiation emitted
from the person's body.

                                                                                                                 III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 335
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

In row 3, the student drew a black plastic bag and wrote goes through plastic; the student
also drew a glass pane and wrote doesn't go through glass.

   The student wrote the following rationales for the ideas claimed in the third column of
the table:

              Visible light can be represented as a wave and is part of a broad spectrum of such
           waves. In this lab we stretched our perception of light, envisioning it as moving in
           waves. The wave still travels in a straight line, which is the midpoint of the wave.
           The distance between each crest is the wavelength. The height of a wave is called
           amplitude, and frequency is how often the wave crest passes a point each second.
           Light waves emitted by the sun come in various wavelengths, which create the
           electromagnetic spectrum. Waves are classified by their wavelengths. The shortest
           waves are gamma rays, then x-rays, then UV rays. The visible light is what the
           human eye can see. The next largest wavelength is microwaves, and then radio
           waves have the largest wavelength on the spectrum.

              Hot objects emit energy as infrared radiation. Dr. Michelle Thaller,
           http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2-0q0XlQJ0, introduces the idea that,
           "Everything in the universe emits some kind of light." Infrared radiation is a kind of
           light wave that is not visible to the human eye. Dr. Thaller provides many examples
           of infrared cameras, which measure the energy being emitted by an object, or
           temperature. Warmer objects look bright in infrared, because they are giving off
           more infrared radiation. Colder objects look dark because they are giving off less
           infrared radiation.

              Materials differ in whether visible light and infrared radiation can pass through
           the material or are blocked. Dr. Michelle Thaller introduces the idea that visible
           light and infrared light pass through and are blocked by different materials. Infrared
           radiation can often pass through things that visual light cannot, such as a black
           plastic bag. Infrared also gets stopped by something visible light gets through, such
           as clear glass.

                                                                                     Physics student, Spring 2016
   The history of the development of knowledge about various forms of "invisible light" is
an example of the way that science develops, with participation and different points of
view expressed and explored by a variety of individuals in many countries over several
centuries (1600 to present day). To broaden your understanding, read about the discovery
of infrared radiation as well as discoveries of the other forms of invisible light in the
electromagnetic spectrum. The following two sections (III.A.2 and 3) provide a glimpse of
this journey if the reader has time and interest. Otherwise proceed to Section III.B below.

336 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

2. Discovery of infrared radiation

   In 1672, in England, Sir Isaac Newton published in the Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society of London a paper about his new theory about light and colors and the
experiments that supported his claims. (See Unit 1, IX.) He was curious what happens
when light from the Sun shines through a prism and found that the light separated into
a spectrum of colors, with each color bending as it entered a prism at its own angle of
refraction. In 1704, he explained in detail his many experiments with white light and its
component colors in a book, Opticks.

   About a century later, an astronomer in England, Sir William Herschel (1800 a, b, c,
d) reported his discovery of the invisible rays of the Sun in a series of papers he also
published in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. What did
Herschel mean by the "invisible rays of the Sun"?

   Herschel was interested in the Sun as well as in the stars. To study the Sun during the
day, he used different colored filters on his telescope to reduce the sunlight's intensity.
Some colored filters seemed to warm his eye more than others and he became curious
about this uncomfortable effect.

   To explore how the different colors in the spectrum warmed a material, Herschel placed
a prism in a window and oriented it to make a spectrum of red, orange, yellow, green,
blue, and violet light shine on a table. As Newton had observed about 100 years earlier,
the red light rays were bent the least by the prism and violet the most (see Unit 1, IX).
Herschel, however, was asking a different question, about how light of different colors
warmed materials.

   As shown in Fig. 4.7, Herschel used three thermometers: thermometer #1 measured
changes in temperature when its bulb was placed within a band of color in the spectrum
on the table; thermometers #2 and #3 served as controls when placed nearby but outside
the spectrum.

                                                                                                                 III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 337
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                     FIG. 4.7 Herschel's drawing showing a
                                     thermometer placed beyond the red band in the
                                     spectrum from a prism placed in his window.
                                     http://rstl.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/
                                     90/284.full.pdf+html, p. 292.

Herschel was surprised that thermometer (#1) warmed up when he placed it just beyond
the red band of the visible spectrum. It warmed even though no light appeared to be
shining on it! Like Newton, Herschel referred to the refraction of light rays by the prism
as refrangibility. After reporting details of his experimental setup and data collected,
Herschel concluded:

              The first four experiments prove that there are rays coming from the sun, which
           are less refrangible than any of those that affect the sight. They are invested with a
           high power of heating bodies, but with none of illuminating objects; and this
           explains the reason why they have hitherto escaped unnoticed.

                                                                          Herschel, 1800b, p. 290
   These were invisible rays of the Sun because they could heat an object without
appearing to shine on the object, illuminating it. These invisible rays were bent by the

338 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

prism less than any of the colored rays, landing on the apparatus just beyond the red band
of the visible spectrum.

   Herschel also demonstrated that these invisible rays exhibited the same laws of
reflection and refraction that were well known for white and colored light. He also studied
similar effects for terrestrial rays such as from fires whose embers were no longer red hot
but still warmed thermometers placed nearby.

   This was the discovery of what is known as infrared radiation, energy that warms
materials but does not make them visible to human eyes. This is an example of an
unexpected finding during an exploration motivated by a practical need: Herschel wanted
to understand why filters of different colors warmed his eye differently when he was
looking at the Sun through his telescope. He was surprised when he noticed the increased
temperature of the thermometer placed beyond the red band of the spectrum.

   Herschel also had placed a thermometer beyond the violet band of the spectrum. Seeing
little if any temperature change, however, he had concluded, "I was now sufficiently
persuaded that no rays which might fall beyond the violet, could have any perceptible
power, either of illuminating or heating" (Herschel, 1800b, p. 288).

  · One way to explore infrared radiation is to replicate Herschel's experiment. See, for
      example, https://coolcosmos.ipac.caltech.edu/page/lesson_herschel_experiment .
      This experiment uses a glass prism, several identical thermometers, a way to hold
      the prism still, a white sheet of paper, a box, and a sunny day.

  · See https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zmiU5tJRJd4 for an introduction to infrared
      radiation and a demonstration of this experiment.

  · Neil deGrasse Tyson, an astrophysicist who is director of the Hayden Planetarium,
      has described "the brilliant way that infrared light was discovered" at
      https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Pr4qEhcGPq8.

Herschel and his sister Caroline became world famous for their surveys of the skies
with telescopes made and used in their home. Among Caroline Herschel's achievements
were the discovery of three nebulae and eight comets as well as development of an
extensive catalogue of stars and nebulae (https://www.skyandtelescope.com/observing/
in-caroline-herschels-footsteps; https://mathshistory.st-andrews.ac.uk/Biographies/
Herschel_Caroline/ . In 1828, she was the first woman to be awarded a Gold Medal of the
Royal Astronomical Society (https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Space_Science/
Herschel/Caroline_and_William_Herschel_Revealing_the_invisible).

                                                                                                                 III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 339
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   Herschel's papers and Newton's 1672 paper in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London are available online as is Newton's Opticks:

          Herschel, W. (1800a). Investigation of the powers of the prismatic colours to heat and illuminate
             objects; with remarks, that prove the different refrangibility of radiant heat. To which is added,
             an inquiry into the method of viewing the sun advantageously, with telescopes of large apertures
             and high magnifying powers. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London 90, 255-283.
             http://rstl.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/90/255.full.pdf+html

          Herschel, W. (1800b). Experiments on the refrangibility of the invisible rays of the sun. Philosophical
             Transactions of the Royal Society of London 90, 284-292. http://rstl.royalsocietypublishing.org/
             content/90/284.full.pdf+html

          Herschel, W. (1800c). Experiments on the solar, and the terrestrial rays that occasion heat; with a
             comparative view of the laws to which light and heat, or rather the rays which occasion them,
             are subject, in order to determine whether they are the same, or different. Part I. Philosophical
             Transactions of the Royal Society of London 90, 293-326. http://rstl.royalsocietypublishing.org/
             content/90/293.full.pdf+html

          Herschel, W. (1880d). Experiments on the solar, and the terrestrial rays that occasion heat; with a
             comparative view of the laws to which light and heat, or rather the rays which occasion them,
             are subject, in order to determine whether they are the same, or different. Part II. Philosophical
             Transactions of the Royal Society of London 90, 437-538. http://rstl.royalsocietypublishing.org/
             content/90/437.full.pdf+html

          Newton, I. (1672). A letter of Mr. Isaac Newton, Professor of the Mathematics in the University of
             Cambridge; Containing his new theory about light and colors: Sent by the author to the publisher
             from Cambridge, Febr. 1671/72; in order to be communicated to the R. Society. Philosophical
             Transactions of the Royal Society of London, 6, (60-80) 3075-3087.
             https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/pdf/10.1098/rstl.1671.0072

          Newton, I. (1704). Opticks: Or a treatise of the reflections, refractions, inflections and colours of
             light. London: Printed for Sam. Smith and Benj. Walford. Printers to the Royal Society.
             http://www.gutenberg.org/files/33504/33504-h/33504-h.htm

3. Discoveries of the other invisible portions of the electromagnetic spectrum

   Discovery of the rest of the invisible portion of the electromagnetic spectrum occurred
during the next hundred years, 1800-1900. A German scientist, Johann Wilhelm Ritter, was
aware of Herschel's discovery of invisible rays beyond the red band in the spectrum of

340 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

visible light and decided to check for himself whether there were invisible rays beyond the
violet band.

   Ritter had been experimenting with a chemical, silver chloride, that darkened when
placed in sunlight. In 1801 he found that this chemical reacted very little when placed
in the red band of the spectrum, darkened when placed in the blue band, and reacted
intensely when placed beyond the violet band in the spectrum, demonstrating the
presence of an invisible form of light there also. He attributed this effect to chemical
rays, which later were called ultraviolet radiation (see: https://www.britannica.com/
biography/Johann-Wilhelm-Ritter .)

   A hundred years earlier, Newton and Huygens had disagreed about whether light should
be envisioned as rays, made up of particles traveling in straight lines, or as waves, traveling
in spreading circles. This discussion continued with Herschel writing in terms of rays and
a contemporary, Thomas Young, writing in terms of waves.

   Herschel described his findings in terms of invisible rays of the Sun that were reflected
and refracted in the same way as white light and the colors of the visible spectrum. Young,
however, envisioned light as undulations that spread out from a source in expanding
waves, like sound waves and water waves when a pebble is dropped in a puddle. In an
article published in 1802 in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London,
Young used a wave model of light to explain findings from a double-slit experiment, in
which light passing through two slits created interference patterns on a screen (see:
http://micro.magnet.fsu.edu/primer/java/interference/doubleslit/.)

          Young, T. (1802). The Bakerian Lecture: On the Theory of Light and Colours. Philosophical
             Transactions of the Royal Society of London, 92, 12-48.
             http://rstl.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/92/12.full.pdf+html

   More than sixty years passed before a Scottish scientist, James Clerk Maxwell predicted
the existence of other forms of electromagnetic waves in his theoretical article, A
dynamical theory of the electromagnetic field, published in 1865 in the Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London (see: https://science.hq.nasa.gov/kids/
imagers/ems/consider.html ).

          Maxwell, J. C. (1865). A dynamical theory of the electromagnetic field. Philosophical Transactions
             of the Royal Society of London, 155, 459-512. http://rstl.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/155/
             459.full.pdf+html

   In 1888, a German scientist, Heinrich Hertz, designed ways to produce and study radio
waves and microwaves experimentally (http://www.sparkmuseum.com/

                                                                                                                 III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 341
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

BOOK_HERTZ.HTM). [Percy Spencer, an American scientist, invented the microwave
oven in 1946 after noticing that something had melted in his pocket one day as he
was working on improving radar technology (http://www.popularmechanics.com/
technology/gadgets/a19567/how-the-microwave-was-invented-by-accident/ .]

   A German scientist, William Roentgen, received the first Noble Prize in Physics, in
1901, for discovering X-rays in 1895. He named these new puzzling rays after the "x"
representing unknowns in mathematics (https://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/
physics/laureates/1901/rontgen-bio.html)

   A French scientist, Paul Villard, discovered gamma rays in 1900. Gamma rays are
generated by radioactive atoms (https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/
s000160050028). He was using a radioactive sample he had been given by a Paris
colleague, Marie Curie. She won the Nobel Prize twice, in 1903 and 1911, for her studies
of radioactivity https://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/1903/
marie-curie-facts.html )

   The issue of what IS light continued to be discussed during the 20th century: is light a
series of spreading waves or is light a stream of particles moving in straight lines? In 1905,
Albert Einstein wrote:

              Indeed, it seems to be that...the production or conversion of light can be
           understood better if one assumes that the energy of light is discontinuously
           distributed in space. According to the assumption to be contemplated here, when
           a light ray is spreading from a point, the energy is not distributed continuously
           over ever-increasing spaces, but consists of a finite number of energy quanta that
           are localized in points in space, move without dividing, and can be absorbed or
           generated only as a whole.

          Einstein, A. (1905). On a heuristic point of view concerning the production and transformation of
             light. Annelen der Physik 17: 132-148. (translated from the German by Dr. Anna Beck and Professor
             Peter Havas in The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein Volume 2: The Swiss Years: Writings,
             1900-1909, p. 87 (http://einsteinpapers.press.princeton.edu/vol2-trans/101 ) Princeton University
             Press.

Einstein received the Nobel Prize in 1922 for this paper, in which he explained the
photoelectric effect in terms of particles of light, now known as photons. A series of
Nobel Prizes were awarded during the 20th century for theorists and experimentalists
exploring the wave and particle natures of both light and matter as inferred in the
context of quantum mechanics. See https://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/themes/

342 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

physics/ekspong/ for the story of evolving understandings about the wave-particle
duality of light and matter.

   See https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/5-111sc-principles-of-chemical-science-fall-2014/
pages/unit-i-the-atom/lecture-3/ for a recent lecture about the Wave-Particle Duality
of Light in an open source course at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology by
Professor Catherine Drennen (https://drennan.mit.edu/education/group-members/
catherine-l-drennan/) and (http://dyslexiahelp.umich.edu/success-stories/catherine-
drennan ). Her lecture on the Wave-Particle Duality of Matter and the Schrodinger
Equation is available at https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/5-111sc-principles-of-chemical-
science-fall-2014/pages/unit-i-the-atom/lecture-4/.

   Professor Lisa Randall (https://www.physics.harvard.edu/people/facpages/randall), a
theoretical physicist at Harvard University, has written about the wave-particle duality
in terms of the level at which one is looking, whether one is using one's eyes looking at
everyday things or "looking" at an atomic level where quantum mechanical effects occur.
The phrase classical refers to physics understandings in the everyday world. The phrase
quantum mechanical refers to physics understandings at the level of and within atoms and
molecules.

           ...none of us (with the possible exception of superheroes) sees individual photons, so
           quantum mechanical effects cannot be easily detected. Ordinary light doesn't look as
           if it's made up of quanta. We see bunches of photons that constitute visible light. The
           large number of photons together act as a classical wave.

              You need a very weak source of photons, or a very carefully prepared system, to
           observe the quantized nature of light. When there are too many photons, you can't
           distinguish the effect of any single one. Adding one more photon to classical light,
           which contains many photons, just doesn't make a big enough difference. If your
           lightbulb, which behaves classically, emitted one additional photon, you would never
           notice. You can observe detailed quantum phenomena only in carefully prepared
           systems.

                 Randall, L. (2005). Warped passages: Unraveling the mysteries of the universe's hidden
                    dimensions. New York: Harper Collins, p. 136-137.

                                                                                                                 III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 343
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

B. Reviewing central ideas about thermal phenomena developed
in earlier units

   Units 2 and 3 developed some central ideas about how energy flows from one place
to another. These ideas are relevant in exploring what happens when light from the Sun
shines on the Earth.

                Question 4.5 How does energy flow from one place to another?

   Energy transfer processes include transmission, reflection, absorption, emission,
conduction, convection, melting, freezing, sublimation, transpiration, evaporation, and
condensation. Properties of materials such as specific heat, thermal conductivity, and
reflectivity also affect what happens when energy flows from one place to another such
as on a sunny day at the beach when the sand is hot, the water cool, and a cloudy sky as
well as sea breezes often occur in the afternoon (Unit 3, V. Questions 3.8 and 3.9). Tracing
the flow of energy in this scenario involved interpreting a diagram as shown in Fig. 3.9 and
repeated as Fig. 4.8 below.

                      FIG. 4.8 Student diagram for explaining sea breezes.

344 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   The explanation of sea breezes included the following story about how energy flows
from the Sun and circulates around the sand, water, and atmospheric system during a
sunny day at the beach:

     The Sun radiates energy to the Earth.
     Some of the energy is reflected by the sand and the water
     Some of the energy is absorbed by the sand and the water.
   Sand and water differ in the property of specific heat. One gram of water needs about
five times as much energy as one gram of sand to change temperature by one degree C.
This means that if equal masses of sand and water absorb the same amount of energy,
the sand's temperature will increase about 5 times as much as the water's temperature
increases.
   Sand and water also differ in the property of thermal conductivity. Sand's thermal
conductivity is low; this means that energy absorbed by the sand stays near the surface of
the sand; sand below the surface remains cool. Water's thermal conductivity is high; this
means that energy absorbed by the water at the surface spreads throughout the water;
water below the surface warms along with the water at the surface.
   Because energy absorbed stays near the surface of the sand and less energy is needed
to increase the sand's temperature, sand gets hot. Because energy absorbed spreads
throughout the water and more energy is needed to increase the water's temperature, the
water stays cool even though the sun has been shining on both sand and water in the same
way for the same time.
   Sand and water also differ in the property of reflectivity. Sand reflects up to 40% of
incoming sunlight depending upon its composition whereas liquid water reflects only
about 6% unless the Sun is close to the horizon. However, this difference is masked by
the large difference in specific heats. Even if a gram of water absorbed an entire calorie of
energy from the sun and a gram of sand reflected 40% of a calorie of energy from the sun,
the sand would still warm up three times as much as the water.
   Also some of the water evaporates into the air above the surface of the water.
Evaporation uses energy to change water from a liquid to a gaseous form, so the energy
from some of the light from the Sun shining on the water goes into this process rather
than into warming the water.
   Energy flows from hot objects to cold objects. When the objects are touching this
process is called energy transfer by conduction. The hot sand warms the cool air above it
by conduction.
   Fluids expand when warmed. The warmed air, becoming less dense, rises into the cooler

                                                                                                                 III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 345
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

upper atmosphere; the warmed air cools as its energy flows into the cooler surrounding
air; cool more dense air sinks back toward the surface. This process is called energy
transfer by convection.

   As the warm air rises, moist cool air over the water forms a sea breeze by flowing toward
the land. The hot sand warms the moist air; the warmed moist air becomes less dense
and rises into the cooler upper atmosphere; the warmed moist air cools as its energy
flows into the cooler surrounding air; as the moist air cools, the moisture condenses into
water droplets, forming clouds; this releases some energy into the upper atmosphere as
the water changes back from a gaseous to liquid form; this energy may get dissipated
during storms as wind, thunder, and lighting; the cool more dense air sinks back toward
the surface.

   This complex process of tracing the energy from the Sun as it flows from one place to
another is useful preparation for thinking about happens when the Sun shines not only on
the sand and water at a beach but on the entire Earth.

   Question 4.6 What is the role of systems thinking in understanding the Earth's energy
                                             budget?

   In Unit 2, Question 2.10, it was important to think about the system involved when
comparing the ratio of masses of hot and cold water to the ratio of their changes in
temperature when mixed together. Was all the energy lost by the hot water flowing
into the cold water or was some energy flowing into the containers or nearby air? To
completely account for all of the energy lost by the hot water, one needed to think what
was happening to the energy in the entire system, not only in the cups of hot and cold
water but also in their surroundings.

   In this unit, the system of interest includes the entire Earth. What is happening to the
energy that the Sun is radiating to the Earth? Is the amount of energy radiated to Earth
from the Sun also the same as the amount of energy flowing away from the Earth into
space? The balance between energy flowing in and out is referred to as the Earth's energy
budget in analogy to a financial budget that monitors the balance between income and
expenses.

   For a system to be in thermal equilibrium, the amount of energy leaving the system must
equal the amount of energy entering the system. This central idea underlies the influence
of light and thermal phenomena on global climate and in particular, the phenomenon
known as the greenhouse effect.

346 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

· Complete entries in the continuation of Table IV.1

TABLE IV.1 Central ideas about influence of light and thermal phenomena on global climate
                                                         (continued)

TABLE IV.1 Central ideas about the influence of light and thermal phenomena on global climate
                                                            (continued)

URL/Sketch of set up          Evidence  Central Ideas          Relevant Vocabulary

                                        Energy transfer        Radiation
                                        occurs through a       Reflection
                                        variety of processes.

                                                               Absorption

                                                               Emission of infrared
                                                               radiation

                                                               Transmission

                                                               Conduction

                                                               Convection

                                                               Changes in State

http://earthobservatory.nasa            The Earth's energy     System
.gov/Features/                          budget is the flow of
EnergyBalance                           incoming and
/page4.php                              outgoing energy.

Complete documenting your exploration and writing a summary before looking at an
example of student work about energy transfer processes and the Earth's energy budget.

                                                      III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 347
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

1. Example of student work about energy transfer processes and the Earth's energy
                                        budget.

                             FIG. 4.9 A student's entries to Table IV.1 (continued)

   In the first row, the student drew a picture of a hand touching a block (from Unit
2,III,A,Question 2.2) and wrote From our touch: The student also drew a picture of a
light bulb and wrote From another source. The student also wrote, Energy transfer occurs
through touch, and through emission.

   In the second row, the student drew a half circle representing Earth and an arrow
pointing in from the Sun, represented with a small circle, as well as an arrow pointing out
from the large half circle representing Earth.

   The student wrote the following rationales for the central ideas claimed in the third
column of the table:

              Energy transfer occurs through a variety of processes. Energy from the Sun is
           transferred through radiation - light rays traveling to an object - like sand, and
           transferring the energy, heating the sand. Reflection can block some energy from
           being transferred, such as the ocean reflecting radiation when the Sun is at an angle.
           The sand on the beach absorbs the Sun's energy all along the top layer of the sand,
           heating it. Infrared radiation is emitted from warm objects, such as a person's hand.
           An infrared camera can detect and display warm and cold regions based on the
           emission of infrared radiation. Conduction transfers energy through direct contact,
           such as a warm hand on a piece of metal. Convection is the energy transfer that can
           occur in fluids, when a heat source heats an area of water... The warm water rises
           and travels towards the cooler area, and the cool water sinks and travels towards the

348 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           warmer area...An example of a change in state of water due to energy is evaporation.
           Sometimes sunlight provides enough energy for some of the liquid water in bodies of
           water to evaporate.

              The Earth's energy budget is the flow of incoming and outgoing energy. Through
           the processes of radiation, reflection, and absorption, energy enters and exits Earth's
           atmosphere. For a stable environment, Earth's incoming energy should be equal to
           Earth's outgoing energy. If the budget is not balanced, the temperature within Earth's
           atmosphere, oceans and land forms will change. If the incoming energy is greater
           than the outgoing energy, then the temperature will rise. If the outgoing energy is
           greater than the incoming energy, then the temperature will decrease. For stabile
           temperatures on Earth, the incoming and outgoing energy should be equal.

                                                                                     Physics student, Spring 2016
   These central ideas about energy transfer processes and the concept of the Earth's
energy budget are key for understanding the greenhouse effect within the Earth's climate
system.

                                                                                                                 III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 349
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

IV. Using Central Ideas about Light and
Thermal Phenomena to Explain the
Greenhouse Effect

   The greenhouse effect is often mentioned in discussions about global climate. The name
of this effect refers to an analogy between what happens when the Sun shines on the
entire Earth and what happens when the Sun shines on a greenhouse in a garden here on
Earth.

A. Considering what happens during the greenhouse effect in a
garden greenhouse

   A student noted that sometimes people have no idea what is happening in a greenhouse
here on Earth:

              I asked my sister if she knew anything about the greenhouse effect and she said
           nothing. So I asked if she ever heard of it before and she said no. Then I reminded
           her that greenhouses are used for gardens. She went `Oh, right' but didn't know what
           they did for the gardens...

                                                                                 Physics 111 Student, Spring 2016
   Therefore it can be helpful to start this discussion with a focus on greenhouses in
gardens here on Earth

  Question 4.7 What is the greenhouse effect that occurs within a greenhouse in a garden?

  · Figure 4.10 shows a photograph of a greenhouse. What do you know about
      greenhouses: How are they made? What is their purpose? Why do they work?

350 | IV. Using Central Ideas about Light and Thermal Phenomena to Explain the Greenhouse Effect
                               This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                   FIG. 4.10 A greenhouse in a garden by Steve Daniels CC BY-SA 2.0 Source:
                   https://www.geograph.org.uk/of/4182114

To explore the greenhouse effect in a greenhouse in a garden, you will need:
  · 2 identical clear glass or plastic containers,
  · 2 thermometers that agree on the same number for room temperature or 2 digital
     temperature probes connected to a computer and calibrated so that they read the
     same temperature
  · 2 rulers,
  · 2 moist paper towels
  · access to a place to put the containers in the Sun or 2 identical lamps with identical
     incandescent bulbs* or one lamp that can shine equally on both containers with an
     incandescent bulb
  · clear plastic wrap or glass cover for one of the containers.

 · How could you use this equipment to explore what happens when an energy source
     (the Sun or a lamp) shines on an open versus a closed container?

 · To model the greenhouse effect that occurs in garden greenhouses, prepare two

                                              IV. Using Central Ideas about Light and Thermal Phenomena to Explain the Greenhouse Effect | 351
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

      clear glass or plastic containers in the same way:

          put two paper towels moistened in the same way in the bottom of each
            container

          check that two thermometers or two temperature probes connected to a
            computer give the same reading for room temperature

          place a ruler diagonally in each container with one end on the bottom and the
            other end resting on an edge of the container

          lay a thermometer on the ruler in each container so that the bulb of the
            thermometer is not resting on the bottom of the container but is supported at
            about a third of the height of the container, with the scale facing up so that the
            thermometer reading is visible (or place a digital thermometer on the ruler in
            each container)

          record the initial temperatures of the air in the containers; these should be the
            same

  · At the top of your physics notebook page, record the Topic of this exploration. Under
      Before, draw a picture of the set up. What do you predict will happen to the
      temperatures of the containers after one container is covered and both are placed in
      the Sun or under identical lamps with incandescent bulbs placed the same distance
      away from the containers? Why do you predict this will happen?

  · Continue preparing to model the greenhouse effect:

          cover one of the containers with a clear glass plate or plastic wrap
          place the containers in the sun or place two identical lamps with identical

            incandescent bulbs so that they shine on the containers in the same way from
            the same distance away or place one lamp so it shines equally on the two
            containers
          monitor the temperatures every few minutes or so
  · Under the During section of your physics notebook page, make a table recording the
      temperatures of the containers or draw or take a picture of the graph drawn by the
      computer connected to the temperature probes.
  · Note any vocabulary that is new to you.
  · Discuss your findings and formulate a relevant central idea. In the After section of
      the physics notebook page, report this central idea and the evidence on which it is
      based.
  · Write a rationale that explains how the evidence supports this idea and why this is
      important

352 | IV. Using Central Ideas about Light and Thermal Phenomena to Explain the Greenhouse Effect
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

  · Also reflect upon this exploration such as what connections can you make to other
      experiences? How might you use what you learned in your own classroom?

  · What have you learned and what are you still wondering?
Write a summary of what you have learned about the greenhouse effect in a garden and
explain why a greenhouse in a garden gets warm when light from the Sun shines upon it.

   Complete documenting your exploration on your physics notebook page and writing a
summary before looking at an example of student work about exploring the greenhouse
effect in garden greenhouses.

  · Use lamps with incandescent bulbs rather than lamps with LEDs so that the bulbs
      warm the air in the containers.

    1. Example of student work about exploring the greenhouse effect in garden
                                     greenhouses

Greenhouse effect. (Figure 4.11) is a sketch of the experiment done in class.

                 FIG 4.11 Student drawing of model of the greenhouse effect in a garden
                 greenhouse.

The student labeled two lamps shining on two clear plastic tubs. Both tubs had wet paper
towels in the bottom and temperature probes on rulers leaning on one edge of the tub, with
the ruler resting on the bottom. One tub had plastic wrap covering the top of the tub.

                                               IV. Using Central Ideas about Light and Thermal Phenomena to Explain the Greenhouse Effect | 353
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

               Two plastic tubs were set up under lamps with a wet paper towel in each. Both
           tubs also had a temperature probe attached to a ruler so we could track any changes
           in temperature that may have occurred. One tub had plastic wrap covering the
           opening, and the other had no covering. We predicted what would happen, and
           many of us thought that the one with plastic would be warmer, since heat could not
           escape as easily as the tub without plastic wrap. At the beginning of this experiment
           both temperatures were about 22°C. Later in the lab we returned to these tubs to
           see that the tub with plastic wrap had condensation on the plastic, and was much
           warmer than the other tub. At the end of this experiment, the tub without plastic
           was 27.9° and the tub with the plastic wrap was 35.7°C. Both tubs had an increase
           in temperature as a result of heat from the lamp. However, with the plastic wrap
           blocking heat (energy) from leaving the tub, it was much hotter than the tub without
           a blocked exit. Like this model, if greenhouse gasses block energy from leaving the
           Earth, then Earth's temperature will drastically increase.

                                                                                     Physics student, Spring 2016
   The greenhouse effect in this model of greenhouses in gardens involves an enclosed
container getting warmer when more energy from the light source enters than leaves the
container. The warmed air in the open container can circulate outside the container so
the open container does not warm as much as the covered container.
   Enclosed greenhouses in gardens prevent warmed air from circulating with cooler air
outside. In addition, the garden greenhouse may be made out of glass that transmits
visible light but not infrared light. Although the plants use some of the energy they absorb
to grow, they also emit infrared radiation as they warm, as do the other contents of the
greenhouse such as the soil, tables, and tools. If the infrared radiation cannot travel out
through the glass and remains within the greenhouse, the temperature of the contents
and the air increases. This mechanism differs from what happens when light from the Sun
shines on the entire Earth, but the overall effect, an increase in temperature because of
energy that does not leave the system, is the same.
   If more energy enters than leaves, a system warms up. Within a garden greenhouse,
the owner can use vents to modulate the energy flow in and out if the greenhouse gets
too hot (see, for example, https://www.advancingalternatives.com/blog/getting-started-
greenhouse-ventilation-systems/. With a greenhouse effect operating within the entire
Earth, however, what can the Earth's "owners" do if the Earth gets too hot? That is the
issue that concerns scientists and others convinced on the basis of evidence that the Earth
is warming up now much more rapidly than in the past.

354 | IV. Using Central Ideas about Light and Thermal Phenomena to Explain the Greenhouse Effect
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

 B. Considering what happens during the greenhouse effect on a
                                global scale

       Question 4.8 What is the greenhouse effect in the context of the entire Earth?

          To consider the greenhouse effect in the context of the entire Earth, each group will need: a large white
       board as well as a white board marker and eraser for each student.

  · With your group members, talk about the greenhouse effect on a global scale.
  · On a large white board, draw a diagram to represent your group's initial ideas about

      what is happening to the energy that enters the Earth's system when light from the
      Sun shines on the Earth:

          Where does this energy go?
          What changes does it undergo while on Earth?
          How does it leave the Earth?

  · Plan and practice briefly what each group member will say when presenting your
      group's diagram to the whole group.

  · Share your ideas and their representation on a whiteboard with the whole group:
          What patterns do you notice in these presentations?
          How are the groups' ideas similar? How are they different?
          How do they help you think about the greenhouse effect on the Earth?

1. Examples of students' initial diagrams about the greenhouse effect

   As shown in Fig. 4.12, Group 3's diagram portrays the basic idea of the greenhouse effect,
that thermal energy travels in rays from the Sun to the surface of the Earth and some of
this thermal energy travels back out from the surface through the atmosphere to space.
Some energy travels from the surface into the atmosphere but is trapped and returns back
to the surface. The atmosphere includes two gases, water vapor and carbon dioxide that
are relevant to this process.

                                               IV. Using Central Ideas about Light and Thermal Phenomena to Explain the Greenhouse Effect | 355
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                            FIG. 4.12 Group 3's initial diagram for the greenhouse effect
                            on Earth.

        As shown in Fig. 4.13, Group 5's diagram portrays the basic idea of the greenhouse
     effect with some details. These include that rays from the Sun heat up the surface
     of the Earth; that some rays cannot penetrate the atmosphere due to water vapor;
     that some rays bounce back and forth between the Earth's surface and clouds in
     the atmosphere (It's a TRAP!), and some rays escape out to space, which raises an
     interesting question, does light disappear?? in space because Space is dark. A red star
     draws attention to the statement light can only penetrate the atmosphere if it is not
     blocked by clouds!

356 | IV. Using Central Ideas about Light and Thermal Phenomena to Explain the Greenhouse Effect
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                            FIG. 4.13 Group 5's initial diagram for the greenhouse effect
                            on Earth.

   As shown in Fig. 4.14, Group 2's diagram portrays the basic idea of the greenhouse effect
with some additional details. The Sun sends rays in many directions, including toward
Earth. Implied is that some of these rays get through the atmosphere and interact with the
surface, which keeps the earth warm - also heats it up! The surface includes our classroom,
Room 328, within a building within our country. Three clouds represent what happens
in the atmosphere: a cloud, this is also a cloud...and so is this. Just so you know . The
water vapor heats up - doesn't allow the light to go through. The atmosphere contains :
gases...oxygen and nitrogen. These students recognized that the Sun affects other planets
and they suggest use your imagination to consider the Sun's effect there.

                                                IV. Using Central Ideas about Light and Thermal Phenomena to Explain the Greenhouse Effect | 357
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                            FIG. 4.14 Group 2's initial diagram for the greenhouse effect on
                            Earth.

The students moved their chairs to form a circle and each group presented their
whiteboard to the others. These examples demonstrate that the students already had
useful knowledge about the importance of the Sun and the atmosphere, about some of
the relevant processes, and about their effects. Many of the details needed elaboration
and/or refinement but the small groups were able to make reasonable first attempts at
creating these complex diagrams. The actions of talking with one another in the small
groups, creating their group's initial greenhouse effect diagrams, and sharing these ideas
and diagrams through the circle conversation set the context for studying a controversial
and complex topic in a respectful way.

2. Greenhouse effect diagram provided by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change

   The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC, www.ipcc.ch) is an organization
with 195 member countries through which scientists work together to collect and analyze
information about climate change from studies all over the world. Figure 4.15 presents
a diagram prepared by this organization to represent what happens to the energy that
radiates to the Earth from the Sun.

358 | IV. Using Central Ideas about Light and Thermal Phenomena to Explain the Greenhouse Effect
                            This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                   FIG. 4.15 An idealized model of the natural greenhouse effect.
                   Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Assessment Report 4,
                    Chapter 1, Historical Overview of Climate Change Science, p. 115
                   Question 1.3, Figure 1, What is the Greenhouse Effect?
                    https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/03/
                   ar4-wg1-chapter1.pdf To download this figure, see:
                   https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar4/wg1/
                   historical-overview-of-climate-change-science/

· To interpret this diagram, tell the story of what happens to the energy radiated from
   the Sun as it moves through the Earth's climate system:
       What do each of the three yellow rays represent?
       What does the narrow reddish ray represent?
       What does the thick reddish ray represent?
       What does each of the orange rays represent?

· Put "greenhouse effect diagram" in your computer browser and view the many
   versions available for representing the greenhouse effect. Select one or make your

                                           IV. Using Central Ideas about Light and Thermal Phenomena to Explain the Greenhouse Effect | 359
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

      own and write your own interpretation of a diagram presenting the greenhouse
      effect.

3. Example of student's written work about the greenhouse effect on the entire
Earth

              I went to the Internet to learn more about the process and the flow of energy
           surrounding the greenhouse effect. I came upon this diagram:

                      FIG. 4.16 "The Greenhouse effect." Greenhouse Effect. Delaware
                      Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control, n.d.
                      Philippe Rekacewicz, Emmanuelle Bournay, UNEP/GRID-Arendal
                      See http://www.grida.no/resources/6888

           I used this diagram to help create my own diagram, because I learn best though my
           own creations. I decided to make a diagram that had steps to show how the radiation
           from the sun goes through a course to heat up the earth:

360 | IV. Using Central Ideas about Light and Thermal Phenomena to Explain the Greenhouse Effect
                  This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

          FIG. 4.17 Student drawn computer diagram of the greenhouse effect.

         1. Solar radiation is emitted from the sun, headed toward Earth.
        2. Most of the sun's radiation is absorbed by the earth's surface, thus

            warming the earth.
        3. Some of the solar radiation is reflected back out to space by the earth

            surface and atmosphere.
        4. As the solar radiation heats up the earth's surface and lower atmosphere,

            the radiation is converted into thermal energy called infrared radiation.
        5. Some of the infrared radiation escapes Earth's atmosphere, but most of it

            is absorbed and re-emitted to the earth by the greenhouse gasses in the
            atmosphere, warming the surface even more.
   The earth should be able to keep a proper balance of energy in and energy
out in order to keep the surface temperature stable for our current ecosystems;
however this is no longer true. The earth's "energy budget" has been disrupted by the
presence of more than the natural amount of greenhouse gases in our atmosphere.
Deforestation, excessive use of fossil fuels, and massive beef consumption all are
factors that contribute to excess greenhouse gasses such as carbon dioxide and
methane. Infrared rays have a hard time passing though these gases in the

                               IV. Using Central Ideas about Light and Thermal Phenomena to Explain the Greenhouse Effect | 361
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           atmosphere, trapping more from escaping. This means that the earth is receiving the
           same amount of energy from the sun as it always had, but it is unable to release a
           balanced amount back out to space, throwing off the energy budget. Unfortunately,
           while there are things we as humans can do to aid in this issue, many people are not
           willing to make the necessary changes in order to save the planet.

                                                                                          Physics Student, Fall 2016

       4. Nuances about the greenhouse effect and the Earth's energy budget

   A computer simulation provides many opportunities for students to explore various
aspects of the greenhouse effect on their own or as part of small group activities in class,
https://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulations/greenhouse/ . Some students are curious
about what it means for the infrared radiation to be "trapped" by the green house gases.
Some have questions about the details involved in what happens to the energy entering
and leaving the Earth's system. This section provides additional information for those
interested.

   (a) Mechanism that underlies the statement that energy is "trapped" by greenhouse gases.
Discussions of the greenhouse effect often refer to energy being "trapped" by greenhouse
gases in the atmosphere. What are greenhouse gases and what does being "trapped" mean
in this context?

   The Earth's atmosphere is composed of a mixture of gaseous molecules (see, for
example, https://climate.ncsu.edu/learn/climate-change-lessons/ (Part 1, slide 3,
Earth's Atmosphere). Most of the atmosphere consists of nitrogen molecules (N2) and
oxygen molecules (O2). These molecules transmit the sunlight shining through them.
Greenhouse gases, however, are molecules that interact with infrared radiation from the
Sun as well as with infrared radiation emitted from the surface of the Earth. The major
greenhouse gases are:

                water vapor, formed by two atoms of hydrogen bonded to one atom of
                  oxygen, H2O

                carbon dioxide, formed by one atom of carbon and two atoms of oxygen,
                  CO2

                methane, formed by one atom of carbon and four atoms of hydrogen, CH4.

   The greenhouse gas molecules in the atmosphere "trap" energy by absorbing infrared

362 | IV. Using Central Ideas about Light and Thermal Phenomena to Explain the Greenhouse Effect
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

radiation and then emitting infrared radiation in all directions, including back toward

the surface of the Earth. These gases absorb and emit infrared radiation by vibrating

in complex ways. Compare, for example, the Phet simulations of infrared versus visible

photon absorption by methane, carbon dioxide, water, nitrogen, and oxygen molecules

(https://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulations/greenhouse/). Also see information about

the effect of infrared radiation on the atmosphere (http://energyeducation.ca/

encyclopedia/Infrared_radiation         and  https://www.youtube.com/

watch?v=AauIOanNaWk ) for forms of vibration in carbon dioxide molecules. A diagram of

such vibrations is shown in Fig. 4.18.

                                      FIG. 4.18 Three modes of vibration for a
                                      molecule of carbon dioxide.
                                      Credit: Martin C. Doege, Windows to the
                                      Universe®, © 2007 National Earth Science
                                      Teachers Association. CC 3.0

   The black dot represents a carbon atom, the two clear dots represent the oxygen atoms
and the coils of springs represent the chemical bonds holding these atoms together as one
molecule. The vibrations may involve (a) the two oxygen atoms both moving away from the
carbon atom, (b) one oxygen atom and the carbon atom moving toward each other while
the other oxygen atom moves away, or (c) the carbon atom moving one way perpendicular
to the bonds while the two oxygen atoms move in the opposite direction.

   This mechanism of the greenhouse gas molecules absorbing energy by vibration differs

                                               IV. Using Central Ideas about Light and Thermal Phenomena to Explain the Greenhouse Effect | 363
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

from the mechanism creating the greenhouse effect in greenhouses on earth. Green
houses made out of glass panes that do not transmit infrared radiation warm up when
incoming visible light is transmitted through the glass panes, absorbed by the contents
of a greenhouse, emitted as infrared radiation, but not transmitted back out through the
glass panes. Also, the greenhouse effect can occur simply by enclosing a container as
in the exploration described in Question 4.7. However, the effects are the same in that
the temperature of a system increases if more energy enters a system than leaves it.
See (https://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulations/greenhouse/ ) to explore the difference
between the greenhouse effect constrained by glass panes and open to the Earth's
atmosphere.

   (b) Details about what happens to energy entering and leaving the Earth's system. Figure
4.19 presents a more detailed analysis of what would happen to the energy radiated from
the Sun to the Earth during the greenhouse effect process if the Earth's energy budget
were balanced. To be in balance:

              i. the incoming energy at the edge of the atmosphere should equal the
                  outgoing energy at the edge of the atmosphere;

             ii. the incoming energy within the atmosphere should equal the outgoing
                  energy within the atmosphere and

            iii. the incoming energy absorbed by the surface of the Earth should equal the
                  outgoing energy at the surface.

364 | IV. Using Central Ideas about Light and Thermal Phenomena to Explain the Greenhouse Effect
               This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

       FIG. 4.19 An analysis of incoming and outgoing energy of the Earth's
       system in balance. NASA illustration by Robert Simmon, adapted from
       Trenberth et al. 2009, using CERES flux estimates provided by
       Norman Loeb.
       https://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Features/EnergyBalance/
       page6.php

i. What happens at the edge of the atmosphere if the Earth's system is in
    balance? The thick yellow ray represents the incoming energy from the Sun
    (100%). The thinner yellow ray at the upper left corner of the diagram
    represents that 29% of that energy would be reflected back out into space
    from clouds, the atmosphere, and the surface. The somewhat thick red ray
    near the top right of the diagram represents that 71% of that energy would
    pass back out of the Earth's atmosphere into space. If the Earth's energy
    budget were in balance, the total incoming radiation would be balanced by
    the total outgoing radiation after reflection by the clouds, atmosphere and
    surface as well as after various absorption and emission processes within
    the atmosphere.

ii. What happens within the atmosphere if the Earth's system is in balance?
    The thin yellow branch of the incoming ray that points into the atmosphere
    represents the 23% of the incoming energy absorbed by the atmosphere.
    Also entering the atmosphere are three sources from the surface:
    convection as in the sunny day at the beach (5%), evaporation (25%), and

                           IV. Using Central Ideas about Light and Thermal Phenomena to Explain the Greenhouse Effect | 365
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                  surface radiation (117%) for a total of 170%. Leaving the atmosphere is energy
                  emitted by the atmosphere (50%), emitted by clouds (9%), and energy from
                  the surface that gets through the "atmospheric window" directly out to
                  space (12%) for a total of 71% and also energy emitted from greenhouse
                  gases back in the direction of the surface (100%) for a total of 171%, which is
                  balanced (the extra 1% probably due to rounding).
            iii. What happens at the surface of the Earth if the Earth's system is in balance?
                  Incoming energy absorbed by the surface would be transferred to the
                  atmosphere by several processes: The thin waving red ray, pointing upward,
                  represents transfer of the incoming energy through convection (5%) in ways
                  similar to those described in explaining sea breezes in Unit 3. Air warmed by
                  the surface by conduction, expands, rises into the cool upper atmosphere,
                  and cools as energy flows from the warm air into the cooler surrounding
                  atmosphere. The red ray made out of horizontal segments, pointing upward,
                  represents transfer of energy from the surface to the atmosphere through
                  evaporation (25%) such as from puddles, streams, oceans and through
                  transpiration by plants. When moist air is warmed, rises, and cools, the
                  gaseous water releases energy as it condenses into droplets, forming clouds.
                  The thick red ray with the arrow pointing upward represents the transfer of
                  energy from the surface to the atmosphere when the surface emits infrared
                  radiation (117%) at a rate determined by its temperature. The total energy
                  from the surface to the atmosphere would be 148%. Some gases such as
                  water vapor, carbon dioxide, and methane absorb most of the infrared
                  radiation and re-emit it in all directions, including back down toward the
                  surface of the Earth (100%), represented by the red ray with the arrow
                  pointing downward. There would be a net sum of the energy emitted from
                  the surface that would equal the incoming energy that is absorbed by the
                  surface. Also some of the energy from the sun shines directly on the surface
                  (48%) represented by the yellow ray pointed toward the surface. The energy
                  reaching the surface (148%) would balance the energy leaving the surface
                  (148%).

   As the amount of water vapor, carbon dioxide, and methane gases in the atmosphere
increases, however, more infrared radiation will be absorbed, emitted in all directions,
including back toward the surface, with more and more energy staying in the Earth's
system, increasing the global temperature of the Earth. For more information about

366 | IV. Using Central Ideas about Light and Thermal Phenomena to Explain the Greenhouse Effect
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

the Earth's energy budget, search on the Internet for "Earth's energy budget" and view,
for example, a series of pages (4-7) at https://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Features/
EnergyBalance/page4.php

   To deepen understanding about the influence of light and thermal phenomena on global
climate read some students' reflections about engaging a friend in learning about the
greenhouse effect.

5. Examples of student work reflecting upon engaging a friend or family member
in learning about the greenhouse effect

   The students explored websites that discuss the greenhouse effect and selected one
or more to use in engaging a friend or family member in learning about the greenhouse
effect. One student wrote:

              I chose to explore the greenhouse effect with my two friends. Prior to exploring
           the website, they told me that they knew that the greenhouse effect was related
           to "gases getting trapped in the atmosphere and heating it up." The website,
           https://energyeducation.ca/encyclopedia/Greenhouse_effect is provided by
           Energy Education Canada. Both of them said that is was very helpful to observe
           a diagram depicting the greenhouse effect, which aided their understanding of the
           readings provided by the website. One of my friends said that the thing that hindered
           his understanding was that the arrow accompanying the text that reads, "Infrared
           radiation is emitted by the Earth's surface," emerges from water, rather than from
           land or a combination of land and water, which led him to believe that the diagram
           was indicating that only water emits infrared radiation.

              Both of them asked me what infrared radiation is, and I explained to them that
           infrared emits energy in the form of heat, as well as that the color of an object
           when observed through night vision goggles indicates how much infrared radiation
           it emits, with objects that appear red emitting a lot of infrared radiation, and objects
           that appear blue emitting much less infrared radiation. Neither of them had prior
           knowledge of infrared radiation, and they stated that this was the most interesting
           thing they learned from the website. Additionally, neither of them had ever heard the
           term "enhanced greenhouse effect," which is what is referred to in discussions of the
           greenhouse effect and climate change.

              When I asked them how they felt about the potential consequences of climate

                                                IV. Using Central Ideas about Light and Thermal Phenomena to Explain the Greenhouse Effect | 367
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           change, including rising sea levels, they both wondered if climate change will
           drastically affect them personally in their lifetime. Additionally, they wondered how
           much of the greenhouse effect is due to livestock, which sparked an interesting
           discussion about how many cows and chickens are on the earth, as well as how
           the raising and consuming of animal products contributes to climate change. This
           experience taught me that sometimes a conversation may not go the way you expect
           it to, but it can still lead to beneficial discussion and learning. I was not expecting
           to discuss livestock with them, but they were very interested in the various layers of
           climate change, and I felt that they gained a lot from the website and grew in their
           curiosity throughout our discussion.

              Both of my friends engaged in the NGSS Science practice of obtaining, evaluating,
           and communicating information during this exploration. Not only did they obtain
           information from the website that I showed them, but when our discussion shifted
           toward the effect of livestock farming on climate change, they both began to research
           articles on the topic, obtained knowledge from them, and shared that knowledge
           to enhance our discussion. They also engaged in the NGSS crosscutting concept of
           systems and system models, as the diagram from the website helped them to envision
           the system of the greenhouse effect and see how it works.

                                                                                     Physics student, Winter 2018
   Another student chose to talk about the greenhouse effect with her father:

              So I did this assignment with my father. I had a feeling it would not go well but I
           wanted to show him evidence of climate change. I first started by asking him what
           he knew about the greenhouse effect. He said "It causes global warming, climate
           change, and has something to do with too many cows giving off ethanol into the
           air." I then decided to show him the NASA website https://climate.nasa.gov/causes/
            because it was my favorite. We looked over the website. It was easy to navigate the
           website and the pictures were really helpful. The pictures helped the most and the
           website even had before and after photos of bad events around the world. We talked
           about the future effects of global warming but he did not ask any questions. After we
           finished exploring the website I explained the model diagram of the greenhouse effect
           again and explained that humans are the real cause of this. I then asked what my
           father thought about global warming. He said "the planet has always been changing
           and it always will." So after showing all this proof to my father he then says "it's
           propaganda." My father just nodded while looking at the website.

              I think my father did not have any questions because he is closed off and does not
           want to hear that humans are causing the Earth to heat up and it could harm/ is

368 | IV. Using Central Ideas about Light and Thermal Phenomena to Explain the Greenhouse Effect
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           harming the environment. I went into more detail about the greenhouse gasses being
           the real cause and that human activity is the cause but he just wasn't interested.
           Through this experience I think I have learned that it is hard to teach topics that
           people already think they know or feel strongly one way about. No matter how much
           evidence is shown. It is discouraging to think about how many people are out there,
           unable to face the facts that global warming is real. The older I get, the more I
           realize a lot of people do not listen to science and just believe what they want to.
           For example, learning about vaccines. It does not matter how much we show the
           scientific evidence of the safety and success of vaccines, people still believe they
           cause autism and make people sick.

              The crosscutting concept of cause and effect is strongly shown in the topic of
           greenhouse gasses because we are showing that human activity is causing an effect
           on the Earth, causing it to warm up. One NGSS practice used was modeling. We used
           the model given on the website to help explain the greenhouse effect.

                                                                                     Physics student, Winter 2018
These students had very different experiences, with a welcome sharing of thoughts and
additional learning for all concerned in the first and with a reluctant listener not yet
open to alternative points of view in the second. Afterward, the second student raised
in class the question of what to do. This is a difficult question to which there are no
easy answers. To what extent is one willing to risk personal relationships in discussing
controversial topics? How can one convey information based on evidence effectively?
How can one keep one's own spirits up in the face of such discouraging encounters? Our
hope is that the small group activities and whole group discussions in class will at least
make possible more positive experiences as well as increase information getting to the
reluctant listeners whose friends or relatives choose to risk the conversation.

                                               IV. Using Central Ideas about Light and Thermal Phenomena to Explain the Greenhouse Effect | 369
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

V. Considering the Evidence for Global
Climate Change

   Science is a way of knowing that involves noticing that something is happening, being
curious about why it is happening, and asking questions and seeking answers based on
evidence, particularly if what is happening seems threatening in some way. If the Earth is
warming more quickly than in the past, what evidence is there that this is happening?

           A. Viewing evidence for global climate change

   Scientists from all over the world have collected and analyzed data that confirm that
the Earth's climate is warming more rapidly than in the past. In order for citizens to learn
about and understand what is happening, this evidence needs to be communicated in
readily understood ways.

     Question 4.9 How is the evidence for global climate change being communicated?

   A variety of approaches are available. A visually compelling display may be more
persuasive than a more detailed presentation. The Internet provides many resources
suitable for different audiences such as children, teachers, and the general public.
Scientists have formed an international community to collaborate by assembling evidence
from multiple studies and to interpret these findings for policy makers.

            1. Examples of efforts to create visually compelling displays

Tables of data are hard to interpret. Long paragraphs reporting findings are hard to grasp.
Therefore, many presentations about climate change include visually compelling displays
of data.

   What, for example, is the evidence that the mean global temperature is rising? As shown

370 | V. Considering the Evidence for Global Climate Change
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

in Fig. 4.20, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) provides a 33
second video graphic showing an image of the globe on which changing temperatures
are represented as the colors shift from cooler (gray blue) toward warm (yellow) and then
warmer (red) as time shifts from 1880 to 2018.

  · Click on the URL in the caption for Fig. 4.20 for an updated version of this website.
  · What is this display demonstrating?

      FIG 4.20 Global temperature anomalies from 1880 to 2018. NASA's Scientific Visualization
      Studio. Data provided by Robert B. Schmunk (NASA/GSFC GISS) https://climate.nasa.gov/
      climate_resources/139/graphic-global-warming-from-1880-to-2018/

A similar display notes that 2020 tied for the hottest year on record, matching 2016. (See
https://www.giss.nasa.gov/research/news/20210114/ ).

   Such video displays vividly illustrate differences across the globe in the ways that annual
mean temperatures are changing; higher mean temperatures than normal are happening
particularly in northern regions, for example, more than elsewhere.

   This display represents changes in mean temperatures in an interesting way. Rather
than the actual mean temperature for an area, this represents the temperature anomaly,
how much the mean temperature for a given area differs for a specific year from normal

                                                                                                       V. Considering the Evidence for Global Climate Change | 371
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

for that area. The normal is defined as the mean temperature over a span of years, in this
case the mean temperature for the span of thirty years from 1951 to 1980.

   The reason scientists use anomalies rather than actual temperatures is explained at
http://www.realclimate.org/index.php/archives/2014/12/absolute-temperatures-and-
relative-anomalies/ . The basic idea is that the mean temperature for a year at a
monitoring station in a valley is likely to be different from the mean temperature for the
year at a monitoring station on a nearby mountain. The changes in the mean temperature
for both monitoring stations in this overall area, however, are likely to be similar if the
mean temperature for the overall area is changing.

   The data analyzed for 2018, for example, indicate that global mean temperatures were
0.83° Celsius (1.5° Fahrenheit) warmer than the 1951 to 1980 global mean temperature. See
https://www.nccs.nasa.gov/services/climate-data-services for information about how
worldwide temperature data are collected and interpreted.

   Another visually compelling way to present such data is to provide a line graph. Fig. 4.21,
for example, shows a line graph of global temperature anomaly versus time for 1880 to
2018.

       Fig. 4.21 Line graph of global temperature anomaly versus time for 1880-2018.
       Data source: NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS).
       NASA/GISS https://climate.nasa.gov/vital-signs/global-temperature/

The key to interpreting line graphs is to ask oneself:

372 | V. Considering the Evidence for Global Climate Change
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

  · What does the vertical axis represent?
  · What does the horizontal axis on the graph represent?
  · What does the line represent?
  · What does the shape of the line imply?

The vertical axis for Fig. 4.21, for example, represents the temperature anomaly in degrees
Celsius, that is, how much the global mean temperature for a specific year differed from
normal (defined here as the global mean temperature over the thirty-year span from 1951
to 1980).

   The horizontal axis represents time from years 1880 to 2020.
   A gray dot represents the mean temperature anomaly for a specific year.
   The jagged gray line represents how the mean temperature anomaly changed year by
year from 1880 to 2018.
   The black line represents a mathematically "smoothed" plot of these mean temperature
anomalies from 1880 to 2018.
   Years with negative mean temperature anomalies were cooler than normal (the mean
temperature during 1951 to 1980). These occurred primarily before 1960.
   Years with positive mean temperature anomalies were warmer than normal (the mean
temperature over the years during 1951-1980). These occurred primarily after 1960.
   A general interpretation of the line graph shown in Fig. 4.21 is that globally mean
temperature anomalies have been increasing in recent years, indicating an on-going
increase in the mean global temperature beyond the normal for the years during 1951 to
1980.
   Another animated way to illustrate how mean global temperatures are increasing is
to show how a line graph for temperature anomaly changes during one year, for the
months January through December (See: https://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/blogs/
earthmatters/2016/09/12/heres-how-the-warmest-august-in-136-years-looks-in-
chart-form/ ).
   Evidence presented via vivid line graphs can support arguments not only about whether
global temperatures are rising but also about probable causes. A perspective sometimes
stated, for example, is that the Earth's climate has always been changing and therefore
no action is possible or needed. A company providing news to the business and financial
communities, www.Bloomberg.com, presents an animated graphic, What's Really
Warming the World? that directly confronts this perception. Go to
https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/2015-whats-warming-the-world/ to appreciate
this effort by Eric Roston and Blacki Migliozzi to create a visually simple yet compelling

                                                                                                       V. Considering the Evidence for Global Climate Change | 373
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

display. They based a series of line graphs on findings from NASA's Goddard Institute
for Space Studies. The scientists described their methodology for distinguishing
contributions of various possible causes of global warming in detail in a paper published
in the Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (Miller et al,
2014) (https://pubs.giss.nasa.gov/abs/mi08910y.html ).
Interpret the first graph in this series:

  · What does the vertical axis represent?
  · What does the horizontal axis represent?
  · What does the black line represent?
  · What does the shape of the line imply?

Scroll down to see the subsequent graphs.

  · What do the colored lines on these graphs represent?
  · What factors do the graphs compare?
  · Which factor seems to have had the most influence on the average global

      temperature?
  · What aspects of this series of graphs make them visually compelling?

Scroll down and skim the notes about methodology. Note that the designers of this
animated graphic used the thirty years from 1880 to 1910 to calculate a
normal temperature to which to compare what happened each year. They also used the
term "average" when referring to the "mean" temperature; both terms refer to the same
number, the result of adding up a series of numbers and dividing by the number of
numbers. The black line for the observed data ends at 2012. The designers of the graphic
present results from a study of climate modeling that ended in 2005 so the colored lines
for various possible causes end at 2005.

   The graph of the combined effects tracks the line representing the rising global
temperature, with the greenhouse gases providing the biggest contribution. By separating
the graphs of the possible effects and then combining them, this presentation
demonstrated the correlation of the increase in greenhouse gases with the increase in
average global temperature.

   Scientists can make inferences about earlier global temperatures and climates based
on evidence from a wide variety of sources such as bore holes, ice cores, lake levels,

374 | V. Considering the Evidence for Global Climate Change
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

tree rings, and plant and animal remains as recorded in paleoclimatology datasets. (See:
https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/products/paleoclimatology

   2. Examples of Internet resources available to the public
   Many agencies have been developing and providing resources on the Internet for
learning about global climate change. A wide variety of websites discuss, for example,
the evidence that change is already underway. These websites typically target particular
audiences such as children, teachers, the general public, and policy makers as shown in
Figs. 4.22-4.30.
   Intended Audience: Children How do we know the climate is changing?
   The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) has developed an extensive
website for children: Climate Kids. The website considers: Big Questions, Weather and
Climate, Atmosphere, Water, Energy, and Plants and Animals
(See: https://climatekids.nasa.gov/climate-change-evidence/ ) Fig. 4.22 shows an
example question from the Weather and Climate webpage.

                                  Fig. 4.22 Example from NASA ClimateKids website.
                                  (https://climatekids.nasa.gov/menu/
                                  weather-and-climate/)

Many children's books about climate change are available for use at home and school See:
https://www.yaleclimateconnections.org/2018/08/childrens-books-about-climate-
change/ .

   For an extensive discussion of ways to engage children in becoming caring,
participatory, and resilient citizens in their local and global communities, see:

                                                                                                       V. Considering the Evidence for Global Climate Change | 375
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   Kenneth Winograd (Ed.), Education in Times of Environmental Crises: Teaching Children
to be Agents of Change, (Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group, New York, 2016).
( https://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/osu/reader.action?docID=4505770 )
For an open-source children's story about the concept of exponential growth that can be
adapted to considering the increasing global temperature and its impact, see:

   Katrina van Zee and Emily van Zee, Thank You Notes: A Children's Story about
Exponential Growth, (2020) https://www.merlot.org/merlot/viewSite.htm?id=9162542

   This book provides an emotionally positive example of exponential growth as a way to
develop conceptual and mathematical understandings of this phenomenon. Also included
is an example of the impact of limited resources.
Intended Audience: Teachers How can teachers engage students in talking and writing
about climate change?
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) has developed resources
for teachers to use in engaging students in learning about climate change
(https://www.climate.gov/teaching ). See, for example, a 5th grade teacher's reflection
about her students' climate change essays ( https://oceanservice.noaa.gov/education/
planet-stewards/talking-about.html ). As shown in Fig. 4.23, the U.S. Global Change
Research Program provides regional resources for teachers about the National Climate
Assessment (NCA).

376 | V. Considering the Evidence for Global Climate Change
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                      Fig. 4.23 Example of educational resources for teachers by region.
                      National Climate Assessment (NCA) Teaching Resources
                      https://cleanet.org/clean/literacy/tools/nca.html

By clicking on the region in which they live, teachers can access resources directly
relevant to how global climate change may be impacting their students' lives. A summary
for the Northwest, for example, states:

       Changes in the timing of streamflow reduce water supplies for competing demands.
       Sea level rise, erosion, inundation, risks to infrastructure, and increasing ocean
       acidity pose major threats. Increasing wildfire, insect outbreaks, and tree diseases
       are causing widespread tree die-off.

           National Climate Assessment https://nca2014.globalchange.gov/report/regions/
                                                                                                               northwest

   Additional resources are now available at https://nca2018.globalchange.gov.

                                                                                                       V. Considering the Evidence for Global Climate Change | 377
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   Intended Audience: General public What are some indicators of climate change?
   The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has assembled an extensive website
providing information about various climate change indicators such as changes in the
oceans (see: https://www.epa.gov/climate-indicators/oceans ). One issue, for example,
is the extent to which land has been converted to open water as sea levels rise. The
state of Louisiana, for example, loses 25-35 square miles of its coast every year (See:
https://www.climate.gov/news-features/featured-images/underwater-land-loss-
coastal-louisiana-1932 ). As shown in Fig. 4.24, this also is occurring regularly along the US
Atlantic coast.

                 Fig. 4.24 Evidence of rising sea levels on the eastern US coast.
                 (https://www.epa.gov/climate-indicators/atlantic-coast)

378 | V. Considering the Evidence for Global Climate Change
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

NASA also provides an extensive website documenting evidence that the climate is
changing (see: https://climate.nasa.gov/evidence/).

Intended Audience: Policy makers: What should policy makers know about observed
global climate changes and their causes?

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (https://www.ipcc.ch/about) provides
policy makers with regular assessments of the scientific basis of climate change, its
impacts and future risks, and options for adaptation and mitigation. The IPCC 5th
Assessment Report, for example, included a Synthesis Report (see: https://www.ipcc.ch/
pdf/assessment-report/ar5/syr/AR5_SYR_FINAL_SPM.pdf (pp. 1-5).

   This summary for policy makers was based on detailed analyses developed by scientists
from around the world. The Physical Science Basis, for example, included 1409 pages
prepared by Working Group 1 (https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg1/). This
group included a team of 209 coordinating-lead authors and lead authors, 50 review
editors, and more than 600 contributing authors from all over the world. Their work
was reviewed by 1089 expert reviewers and 38 governments. The result was a detailed
presentation of the consensus about evidence that underlies claims made about climate
change by scientists from around the world.

   Based on the consensus supported by these analyses, the Synthesis Report included a
Summary for Policy Makers Statement (SPM):

SPM 1.1 Observed changes in the climate system

          Warming of the climate system is unequivocal, and since the 1950s, many of the
       observed changes are unprecedented over decades to millennia. The atmosphere and
       ocean have warmed, the amounts of snow and ice have diminished, and sea level has
       risen. (p. 2)

          Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Summary for Policy Makers
       https://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar5/syr/
       AR5_SYR_FINAL_SPM.pdf

                                      Exploration of Internet resources.

          To explore Internet resources for communicating information about global climate change, use for each

                                                                                                       V. Considering the Evidence for Global Climate Change | 379
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

       group: a large white board as well as a white board marker and eraser for each student.

  · Work with your group members to access the suggested URL(s) above or identify
      alternative relevant URLs yourselves.

  · Browse the websites to see what is there. Select one to explore in detail. Focus on an
      aspect or link of interest.

  · On a large white board, write a few statements that present the most useful or
      interesting information provided. Also include the source and URL.

  · Plan and briefly practice what each of you will say during your group's presentation.
  · Present your white board to the class, with each member of your group contributing

      something about what you learned from exploring this issue.
  · At home, briefly review and critique these websites:

          What do you find of interest?
          What seems likely to help or to hinder learning by the intended audience?
          What have you learned from this exploration of Internet resources about

            evidence that climate change is occurring?

  3. Examples of the international community of scientists presenting findings to
                                    policy makers

   This section considers the efforts of scientists from 195 countries to collaborate in
collecting and assessing evidence about the state of the Earth's climate system. This is the
issue that the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was set up to address
in 1988, by the World Meteorological Organization and the United Nations.

   Leading scientists from throughout the world prepare these assessments, based on
evidence published in scientific studies that have been peer-reviewed. The reports for the
fifth assessment are publicly available (see: https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/ ).

              The IPCC Fifth Assessment Report had four parts:
   Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/
wg1/

380 | V. Considering the Evidence for Global Climate Change
                 This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability https://www.ipcc.ch/

report/ar5/wg2/

Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/

wg3/

Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report  https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/

syr/

As indicated in Fig. 4.25, the part that focused upon the Physical Science Basis presents

the evidence for the claims being made that the global climate is changing, with average

global temperatures increasing.

      Fig. 4.25 IPCC Fifth Assessment Report: The Physical Science Basis. (https://www.ipcc.ch/
      report/ar5/wg1/)

                                                                                                  V. Considering the Evidence for Global Climate Change | 381
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Chapters included:
                Observations: Atmosphere and Surface
                Observations: Ocean
                Observations: Cryosphere (wherever frozen water is found on Earth)
                Information from Paleoclimate Archives
                Carbon and other Biogeochemical Cycles
                Clouds and Aerosols,
                Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
                Evaluation of Climate Models
                Detection and Attribution of Climate Change: from Global to Regional
                Near-term Climate Change: Projections and Predictability
                Long-term Climate Change: Projections, Commitments and Irreversibility
                Sea Level Change,
                Climate Phenomena and Their Relevance for Future Regional Climate
                  Change

As indicated in Fig. 4.26, the part that focused on Impacts, Adaptation, and
Vulnerability discussed how patterns of risks and potential benefits are shifting due to
climate change.

382 | V. Considering the Evidence for Global Climate Change
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

        Fig. 4.26 IPCC Fifth Assessment Report: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability.
        (https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg2/)

Chapters of this part included:
   Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects
  · Natural and Managed Resources and Systems, and Their Uses
  · Human Settlements, Industry, and Infrastructure
  · Human Health, Well-Being, and Security
  · Adaptation
  · Multi-Sector Impacts, Risks, Vulnerabilities, and Opportunities

Part B: Regional Aspects

                                                                                                      V. Considering the Evidence for Global Climate Change | 383
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

  · Africa
  · Europe
  · Asia
  · Australasia
  · North America
  · Central and South America
  · Polar Regions
  · Small Islands
  · The Ocean
As indicated in Fig. 4.27, the part that focused upon Mitigation of Climate Change assessed
literature on the scientific, technological, environmental, economic and social aspects of
mitigation of climate changes.

384 | V. Considering the Evidence for Global Climate Change
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

      Fig. 4.27 IPCC Fifth Assessment Report: Mitigation of Climate Change (https://www.ipcc.ch/
      report/ar5/wg3/)

Chapters of this part included:
  · Integrated Risk and Uncertainty Assessment of Climate Change Response Policies
  · Social, Economic, and Ethical Concepts and Methods
  · Sustainable Development and Equity
  · Drivers, Trends and Mitigation
  · Assessing Transformation Pathways
  · Energy Systems
  · Transport
  · Buildings
  · Industry

                                                                                                      V. Considering the Evidence for Global Climate Change | 385
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

  · Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use
  · Human Settlements, Infrastructure and Spatial Planning
  · International Cooperation: Agreements and Instruments
  · Regional Development and Cooperation
  · National and Sub-National Policies and Institutions
  · Cross-Cutting Investment and Finance Issues

The Synthesis Report for the entire fifth assessment report included a summary for policy
makers (see: https://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar5/syr/
AR5_SYR_FINAL_SPM.pdf , (pp. 1-5). For an overview see a video at
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6yiTZm0y1YA .
The Synthesis Report provided a series of Summary for Policy Makers (SPM) statements.
The first set of summary statements focused upon the evidence of changes and their
causes. (Some of these statements used the term anthropogenic, which refers to
something that is resulting from human activity.)

     SPM 1. Observed Changes and their Causes
        Human influence on the climate system is clear, and recent anthropogenic emissions

     of greenhouse bases are the highest in history. Recent climate changes have had
     widespread impacts on human and natural systems. (p. 2)

     SPM 1.1 Observed changes in the climate system
        Warming of the climate system is unequivocal, and since the 1950s, many of the

     observed changes are unprecedented over decades to millennia. The atmosphere and
     ocean have warmed, the amounts of snow and ice have diminished, and sea level has
     risen. (p. 2)

     SPM 1.2 Causes of climate change
        Anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions have increased since the pre-industrial era,

     driven largely by economic and population growth, and now are higher than ever. This
     has led to atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide that
     are unprecedented in at least the last 800,000 years. Their effects, together with those
     of other anthropogenic drivers, have been detected throughout the climate system and
     are extremely likely to have been the dominant cause of the observed warming since the
     mid-20th century. (emphasis in the original) (p. 4)

     SPM 1.3 Impacts of climate change

386 | V. Considering the Evidence for Global Climate Change
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

        In recent decades, changes in climate have caused impacts on natural and human
     systems on all continents and across the oceans. Impacts are due to observed climate
     change, irrespective of its cause, indicating the sensitivity of natural and human systems
     to changing climate. (p. 6)

     SPM 1.4 Extreme events
        Changes in many extreme weather and climate events have been observed since about

     1950. Some of these changes have been linked to human influences, including a decrease
     in cold temperature extremes, an increase in warm temperature extremes, an increase
     in extreme high sea levels and an increase in the number of heavy precipitation events
     in a number of regions. (p. 7)

Two additional sets of statements looked to the future:

     SPM 2. Future Climate Changes, Risks and Impacts (p. 8)
     SPM 3. Future Pathways for Adaptation, Mitigation and Sustainable Development
     (p. 17)
   Each Summary for Policy Makers statement was supported by a summary of relevant
evidence. Fig. 4.28-Fig. 4.30, for example, supported SPM 1.1 Observed changes in the
climate system by providing graphs representing observations of global changes in
temperature, sea level, and greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere. Fig. 4.31
supports SPM 1.2, causes related to carbon dioxide emissions from 1850 to 2012.

  · In small groups, discuss one of the following graphs in detail. How do you interpret
      the information provided by the various features of the graph?

The graph in Fig. 4.28 represents the globally averaged combined land and ocean surface
temperature anomaly from 1850 to 2012. The span of twenty years from 1986 to 2005 was
used to calculate an average global temperature (represented by 0 on the graph) with
which to compare the average temperature for each year (represented by the anomaly
from -1.0ºC to 0.4ºC).

  · What does the vertical axis represent?
  · What does the horizontal axis on the graph represent?
  · What do the lines represent?
  · What does the shape of the lines imply about combined land and ocean surface

      temperatures between 1850 and 2012?

                                                                                                       V. Considering the Evidence for Global Climate Change | 387
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                 FIG. 4.28. Observations: Annually and globally averaged combined land and
                 ocean surface temperature anomalies relative to the average over the period
                 1986 to 2005. Colours indicate different data sets. Source: IPCC Climate
                 Change 2014 Synthesis Report Summary for Policy Makers, Figure SPM.1, p. 3.
                 https://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar5/syr/
                 AR5_SYR_FINAL_SPM.pdf

The graph in Fig. 4.29 represents the globally averaged sea level change compared to the
average sea level change for 1850 to 2012. The span of twenty years from 1986-2005 was
used to calculate an average global sea level (represented by 0 on the graph) by which to
compare the average global sea level for a specific year (represented by an anomaly from
-0.2 meters to +0.1 meter) for several different data sets represented by the different
colors.

  · What does the vertical axis represent?
  · What does the horizontal axis on the graph represent?
  · What do the lines represent?
  · What does the shape of the lines imply about globally averaged sea level change?

388 | V. Considering the Evidence for Global Climate Change
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                 FIG. 4.29. Observations: Annually and globally averaged sea level change
                 relative to the average over the period 1986 to 2005 in the longest-running
                 dataset. Colours indicate different data sets. All datasets are aligned to have
                 the same value in 1993, the first year of satellite altimetry data (red). Where
                 assessed, uncertainties are indicated by coloured shading. Source: IPCC
                 Climate Change 2014 Synthesis Report Summary for Policy Makers, Figure
                 SPM.1, p. 3.
                 https://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar5/syr/
                 AR5_SYR_FINAL_SPM.pdf

   The graph in Fig. 4.30 represents the globally averaged greenhouse gas concentrations
from 1850 for carbon dioxide (green), methane (orange) and nitrous oxide (red).

  · What does the vertical axis represent?
  · What does the horizontal axis on the graph represent?
  · What do the lines represent?
  · What does the shape of the lines imply about globally averaged greenhouse gas

      concentrations?

                                                                                                      V. Considering the Evidence for Global Climate Change | 389
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                 FIG. 4.30. Observations: Atmospheric concentrations of the greenhouse gases
                 carbon dioxide (CO2, green), methane (CH4, orange), and nitrous oxide (N2O,
                 red) determined from ice core data (dots) and from direct atmospheric
                 measurements (lines). Source: IPCC Climate Change 2014 Synthesis Report
                 Summary for Policy Makers, Figure SPM.1, p.3.
                 https://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar5/syr/
                 AR5_SYR_FINAL_SPM.pdf

   The graph in Fig 4.31 represents the weight in gigatonnes per year of global emissions
of carbon dioxide due to human activity, particularly from the use of fossil fuels, cement,
and flaring (burning off gas at oil and gas fields), indicated by the gray portion of the graph
and from forestry and other land use, indicated by the brown portion of the graph.

  · What does the vertical axis represent?
  · What does the horizontal axis on the graph represent?
  · What do the lines represent?
  · What does the shape of the lines imply?

390 | V. Considering the Evidence for Global Climate Change
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                 FIG. 4.31. Indicators: Global anthropogenic CO2 emissions from forestry and
                 other land use as well as from burning fossil fuel, cement production and
                 flaring. Cumulative emissions of CO2 from these sources and their
                 uncertainties are shown as bars and whiskers, respectively, on the right hand
                 side. The global effects of the accumulation of CH4 and N2O emissions are
                 shown in panel c. Greenhouse gas emission data from 1970 to 2010 are shown
                 in Figure SPM2. Source: IPCC Climate Change 2014 Synthesis Report
                 Summary for Policy Makers, Figure SPM.1, p. 3.
                 https://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar5/syr/
                 AR5_SYR_FINAL_SPM.pdf

The details in these graphs can be perplexing. The International Panel on Climate Change's
Fifth Assessment Report and Summary for Policy Makers are complex documents prepared
by scientists for scientists and for others with a need for technical information. A general
impression from viewing these graphs, however, is that there has been a steady increase
recently in observations of the average global temperature, sea level, and greenhouse
gas concentration in the atmosphere as well as of emissions of carbon dioxide and other
greenhouse gases due to human activity.

         Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Sixth Assessment Report (AR6)
   The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change's Sixth Assessment Report (AR6) is
currently under development. The first installment, Climate Change 2021: The Physical
Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I was released on August 9, 2021 with the
headline Climate change widespread, rapid, and intensifying. See https://www.ipcc.ch/
2021/08/09/ar6-wg1-20210809-pr/
   The news release stated that:

        Many of the changes observed in the climate are unprecedented in thousands, if not
     hundreds of thousands of years, and some of the changes already set in motion - such as
     continued sea level rise - are irreversible over hundreds to thousands of years...Unless
     there are immediate, rapid and large-scale reductions in greenhouse gas emissions,

                                                                                                       V. Considering the Evidence for Global Climate Change | 391
     This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

     limiting warming to close to 1.5ºC or even 2ºC will be beyond reach...At 2ºC of global
     warming, heat extremes would often reach critical tolerance thresholds for agriculture
     and health...Climate change is bringing multiple changes...For example:

· Climate change is intensifying the water cycle. This brings more intense rainfall and
   associated flooding, as well as more intense drought in many regions.

· Climate change is affecting rainfall patterns. In high latitudes, precipitation is likely to
   increase, while it is projected to decrease over large parts of the subtropics. Changes to
   monsoon precipitation are expected, which will vary by region.

· Coastal areas will see continued sea level rise throughout the 21st century, contributing
   to more frequent and severe coastal flooding in low-lying areas and coastal erosion.
   Extreme sea level events that previously occurred once in 100 years could happen every
   year by the end of this century.

· Further warming will amplify permafrost thawing, and the loss of seasonal snow cover,
   melting of glaciers and ice sheets, and loss of summer Arctic sea ice.

· Changes to the ocean, including warming, more frequent marine heatwaves, ocean
   acidification, and reduced oxygen levels have been clearly linked to human influence.
   These changes affect both ocean ecosystems and the people that rely on them, and they
   will continue throughout at least the rest of this century.

· For cities, some aspects of climate change may be amplified, including heat (since urban
   areas are usually warmer than their surroundings), flooding from heavy precipitation
   events and sea level rise in coastal cities.

See  https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/downloads/report/

IPCC_AR6_WGI_SPM_final.pdf for the WG1 summary for policy makers.

The updated report on Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability by Working Group 2 was
completed in February 2022 by Working Group 2 (See: https://www.ipcc.ch/report/
sixth-assessment-report-working-group-ii/

The updated report on Mitigation of Climate Change was completed in April 2022 by
Working Group 3 (see: https://www.ipcc.ch/report/sixth-assessment-report-working-
group-3/

The Synthesis report for the complete sixth assessment is scheduled for release in late
2022 or 2023 (See: https://www.ipcc.ch/report/sixth-assessment-report-cycle/.)

392 | V. Considering the Evidence for Global Climate Change
                            This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

· Complete Table IV.2 and write a brief summary about the evidence for an increasing
   average global temperature.

                                                                                                  V. Considering the Evidence for Global Climate Change | 393
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

TABLE IV.2 Central ideas about evidence that the Earth's average global temperatures is
                                                       increasing

TABLE IV.2 Central ideas about evidence that the Earth's average global temperatures is
                                                       increasing

Sketch of set up                              Evidence       Central Ideas                Relevant
      or URL                                                                             Vocabulary

https://climate.nasa.gov/                                    Visual displays can be      Temperature
climate_resources/139/                                       compelling ways to          anomaly
graphic-global-warming-from-1880-to-2018/                    communicate complex
https://climate.nasa.gov/vital-signs/global-                 information                 Line graph
temperature/
                                                             Many agencies are
https://climatekids.nasa.gov/                                developing websites to
climate-change-evidence/                                     help children, teachers,
https://oceanservice.noaa.gov/education/                     and the general public
planet-stewards/talking-about.html                           learn about the evidence
                                                             that the Earth's climate
    https://www.epa.gov/climate-indicators/                  is changing
oceans
                                                             In 1988, scientists         Intergovernmental
    https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/                      formed a worldwide          Panel on Climate
2015-whats-warming-the-world/                                organization to collect,    Change (IPCC)
                                                             analyze, and
www.ipcc.ch                                                  communicate scientific
                                                             findings about climate
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg1                           change
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/sixth-
assessment-report-working-group-i/                           IPCC provides detailed
                                                             reports about :
    https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg2/                      I: The Physical Science
    https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg3/                      Basis;
    https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/syr/                      II: Impacts, Adaptation,
                                                             and Vulnerability;
                                                             III: Mitigation of Climate
                                                             Change;
                                                             and a Synthesis Report

394 | V. Considering the Evidence for Global Climate Change
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

https://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/        These reports include                    anthropogenic
assessment-report/ar5/syr/      information for
AR5_SYR_FINAL_SPM.pdf (page 3)  scientists and policy
                                makers about both
https://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/        natural and human
assessment-report/ar5/syr/      causes of climate change
AR5_SYR_FINAL_SPM.pdf (page 3)
                                Some graphs show                         anomaly
                                differences between a
                                particular measurement
                                and the average of a
                                collection of similar data

https://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/        There has been an
assessment-report/ar5/syr/      increase in the global
AR5_SYR_FINAL_SPM.pdf (page 3)  average temperature.

https://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/        There has been an
assessment-report/ar5/syr/      increase in the global
AR5_SYR_FINAL_SPM.pdf (page 3)  average sea level.

https://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/        There has been an
assessment-report/ar5/syr/      increase in the average
AR5_SYR_FINAL_SPM.pdf (page 3)  atmospheric
                                concentration of
https://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/        greenhouse gases
assessment-report/ar5/syr/      (carbon dioxide,
AR5_SYR_FINAL_SPM.pdf (page 3)  methane, and nitrous
                                oxide)

                                There has been an
                                increase in emissions of
                                carbon dioxide from
                                various human activities
                                since 1850

There are many ways in which scientists are investigating what is happening to the
Earth's climate. These illustrate many aspects of the nature of science such as that
scientific investigations use a variety of methods ; and that science investigations are
guided by a set of values to ensure accuracy of measurements, observations, and objectivity

                                                                                                      V. Considering the Evidence for Global Climate Change | 395
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

of findings (Next Generation Science Standards Lead States, 2013, Appendix H)
(https://www.nextgenscience.org/resources/ngss-appendices ).

396 | V. Considering the Evidence for Global Climate Change
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

VI. Using Central Ideas Based on
Evidence to Consider the Impact of
Global Climate Change

Evidence from multiple sources indicates that one impact of rising global temperatures is
that sea levels are increasing at a more rapid rate than in the past. Although this is a
global issue, there are many ways that individuals can reduce their own impact on global
climate change.

  A. Exploring the impact of global climate change on sea levels

What is the evidence that sea levels are rising? Why is this happening? In particular, what
happens when light from the Sun shines on snow and ice on land versus in open water?
What happens when light from the Sun shines on the oceans?

              Question 4.10 What evidence indicates that sea levels are rising?

The IPCC Fifth Assessment report on The Physical Science Basis devoted Chapter 13 to the
topic of sea level change (pp.1137-1216). Figure 4.32 presents a line graph from this report.
This graph represents past, recent, and predicted global average sea levels.

  · What does the vertical axis represent?
  · What does the horizontal axis represent?
  · What do the lines represent?
  · What does the shape of the lines imply about global average sea level?

                                                   VI. Using Central Ideas Based on Evidence to Consider the Impact of Global Climate Change | 397
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                 FIG. 4.32 Compilation of paleo sea level data, tide
                                 gauge data, altimeter data ( from Figure 13.3), and
                                 central estimates and likely ranges for projections of
                                 global mean sea level rise for RCP2.6 (blue) and RCP8.5
                                 (red) scenarios (Section 13.5.1), all relative to
                                 pre-industrial values. Source: IPCC Fifth Assessment,
                                 Working Group 1, Chapter 13, Figure. 13.27, page 1204.
                                 https://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar5/
                                 wg1/WG1AR5_Chapter13_FINAL.pdf

The vertical axis represents the mean sea level in meters.
   The horizontal axis represents time from 1700 to 2100.
   The jagged lines represent the mean sea level based on various data. The smooth red

and blue lines represent projections of mean sea level based on two different computer
models of predicted greenhouse gas emissions.

   The global mean sea level appears to have been relatively stable from about 1700 to
about 1800 according to interpretations of layers evident in vertical cores removed from
peat in salt marshes. The global mean sea level at about 1700 is taken to be the zero level
to which later global mean sea levels are compared.

   The global mean sea level appears to have begun rising slightly from about 1800 to about
1900 and continued rising at an increased rate from about 1900 to about 2000. The latter
yearly mean sea levels were based on several different tide gauge studies, represented by
different color lines, as well as from layers in cores of peat in salt marshes.

398 | VI. Using Central Ideas Based on Evidence to Consider the Impact of Global Climate Change
           This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

In  1993,  satellite       altimeter  radar  measurements                           began.

(https://www.star.nesdis.noaa.gov/sod/lsa/SeaLevelRise/). Such highly accurate data

can provide detailed information about the relative contributions by thermal expansion of

the oceans and by melting ice in Greenland, Antarctica, and mountain glaciers elsewhere

(https://sealevel.jpl.nasa.gov/documents/1596/?list=projects ). Dr. Anny Cazenave was a

lead author in such satellite altimeter radar studies (https://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/2020/

01/21/pioneer-in-spotting-modern-sea-level-rise-to-receive-2020-vetlesen-prize/).

The lines projecting mean sea level rise during the 21st century are based on two

computer models that differ in the predicted concentration of carbon dioxide. These

predictions depend upon actions taken, or not taken, to curb greenhouse gas emissions.

These models are called Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs). RCP2.6 (blue)

models a scenario that assumed reduced emissions with an increase in average global

temperature of less than 2ºC. RCP8.5 (red) models a scenario that assumed very high

greenhouse gas emissions.

  Question 4.11 What happens when light from the Sun shines on glacial ice and snow on
                                land or on icebergs in the ocean?

   When light from the Sun shines on the Earth, some of the light shines on snow and ice.
The light supplies energy needed to warm the Earth and to change these solid forms of
water into liquid water by melting. What impact does this have if the melting happens to
glaciers on land compared to if the melting happens to icebergs already floating in the
oceans?

  How can you model and compare what happens when ice melts on land with what
  happens when ice melts in water? One way to explore this issue uses the following
  equipment for each group:

· 2 trays or one large tray such as a cookie sheet
· 2 low containers such as identical frozen dinner trays
· 1 flat rock in one low container
· As many ice cubes as possible to put on the rock and an equal number in the other

   low container

           VI. Using Central Ideas Based on Evidence to Consider the Impact of Global Climate Change | 399
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

    · Enough water to fill both low containers to the brim

  · At the top of your physics notebook page, record the Topic of this exploration. Under
      Before, draw a picture of your set up and describe your plan for this exploration.
      What do you predict will happen? Why do you predict this will happen?

  · Place a container on a tray. Place an identical container on another identical tray or
      place both on a large tray like a cookie sheet.

  · Place a flat rock in one container; place some ice cubes on the rock;
  · Place the same number of ice cubes in the other container without rock;
  · Fill both containers up to the lip with water. Be sure the water level is all the way to

      the lip.
  · Predict what will happen when the ice melts. Careful! DON'T JIGGLE THE TABLE!
  · Observe the trays of melting ice every few minutes. What happens in each tray?
  · Under the During section of your physics notebook page, record your observations

      and interpret these results.
  · Discuss your findings and formulate relevant central ideas.
  · In the After section of the physics notebook page, report these central ideas and the

      evidence on which they are based.
  · Write a rationale that explains how the evidence supports the central ideas and why

      these are important.
  · Also reflect upon this exploration such as what connections can you make to other

      experiences? How might you use what you learned in your own classroom?
  · What are you still wondering?

         Question 4.12 What happens when light from the Sun shines on the oceans?

          To model what happens when light from the Sun shines on the oceans, provide for each student (or
       group), one regular thermometer with red liquid in a tube and bulb at the bottom .

  · How can you model what happens when light from the Sun shines on the oceans?

400 | VI. Using Central Ideas Based on Evidence to Consider the Impact of Global Climate Change
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

      One way uses a thermometer, the kind that has a narrow tube with a red liquid
      (alcohol) inside a bulb at the bottom of the thermometer.
  · At the top of your physics notebook page, record the Topic of this exploration. Under
      Before, draw a picture of your set up and describe your plan for this exploration.
      What do you predict will happen? Why do you predict this will happen?
  · Record the room temperature reading for a thermometer that has been sitting in a
      room for a long time.
  · Hold the bulb of the thermometer in your hand for a few minutes
  · Record the temperature reading of the thermometer now.
  · What do you observe? How do you interpret this observation?
  · Under the During section of your physics notebook page, record your observations
      and interpret these results.
  · Discuss your findings and formulate a relevant central idea.
  · In the After section of the physics notebook page, report this central idea and the
      evidence on which is based.
  · Reflect upon what you have learned and what you are still wondering.

   Finish documenting these explorations on your physics notebook pages and writing
summaries before looking at examples of student work about modeling what happens
when light shines on the snow, ice, and the oceans.

  1. Example of student work about modeling and comparing the impact of light
               from the Sun shining on ice on land and ice in the sea

           Modeling rising sea levels due to melting ice on land:

                 FIG. 4.33 Student drawing of ice cubes melting on rock and in liquid water.

                                                   VI. Using Central Ideas Based on Evidence to Consider the Impact of Global Climate Change | 401
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           In class we modeled the rising sea levels due to melting ice on land. We started off
           with two bowls, each with a clean tray under it. One bowl was empty and one had
           several rocks in it to act as land on Earth. We placed the same amount of ice cubes
           in each bowl. In the empty bowl, we placed the ice cubes on the bottom. In tray B
           we placed the ice on top of the rocks. We then filled each tray to the brim with room
           temperature water, then waited. My table predicted that the tray without the rocks
           in it would not overflow because the ice already displaced the water with enough
           room for it when it melted. We also predicted that the bowl with the ice on the rocks
           would overflow because the ice was not already in the water and wasn't able to
           displace enough room for it when it melted. After an ample amount of time for the
           ice to melt, we came over and made our final observations. As we predicted, the bowl
           containing rocks had overflowed, whereas the tray without rocks did not. If you had
           a glass of ice water, when the ice melts, the glass doesn't overflow, but if you add ice
           to an already full glass of water, it will overflow. This is the same for the melting
           land ice flowing into the ocean vs. the sea ice already floating in the ocean. This
           means that the melting sea ice does not contribute to the rising sea levels, whereas
           the melting land ice does.

                        National Geographic states some grim possible outcomes to rising sea
           levels. If we continue down the same path we are on, we could see the sea levels
           rise as much as 6.5 feet by the year 2100. It could be made even worse if we
           experience the complete melting of the Greenland ice sheet. This could push sea
           levels to rise to 23 feet, which is, horrifyingly, enough to submerge London:
           http://ocean.nationalgeographic.com/ocean/critical-issues-sea-level-rise/

                                                                                           Physics student, Fall 2016

                 FIG. 4.34 Tray on left overflowed when ice cubes on rock melted but tray on
                 right did not overflow when ice cubes in liquid water melted.

402 | VI. Using Central Ideas Based on Evidence to Consider the Impact of Global Climate Change
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Figure 4.34 shows the equipment used in this exploration. An improvement would be to
use food coloring in the water so that the overflow in the tray with the ice cubes on a rock
would be more visible.

   Students have periodically responded to a series of questions designed to elicit their
thoughts about what is working well and what might improve their learning experiences
in this course. A student wrote:

              I thought that the activity that had the most powerful impact on my learning
           experience of global climate change was the activity about how melting ice on land
           is affecting rising sea levels. I thought it was a very simple, and straightforward way
           to model what is happening on our earth.

              I also enjoyed talking with my friend about the material that we went over. She
           is getting her degree in environmental studies with a focus on atmospheric science
           so it was interesting to hear her thoughts on what we were learning. She also
           found the way we were going about understanding the material as a way to help
           adults understand it as well. Many people don't have basic knowledge of what global
           climate change is so she saw the activities and lecture material that we went over as
           a good way to help the general population who is unaware of current environmental
           issues become educated.

                                                                                     Physics student, Spring 2015
   In a conversation about the course, this student emphasized the importance of the
use of simple equipment with which people are familiar and are likely to have at home
that makes it easy to engage a friend or family member in thinking together about highly
politicized issues like climate change.

   2. Example of student work about modeling the impact of light from the Sun
                                shining on the oceans

              Modeling rising sea levels due to thermal expansion of oceans. In class we held
           thermometers in our hands to warm them and model the thermal expansion of
           oceans. The thermometers all began at room temperature, and then we heated them
           up by placing them in our hands. As our body temperature heated up the liquid
           inside, it caused the liquid to expand and rise up though the thermometer. This
           taught us that not only are oceans rising due to melting land ice, but also as the
           infrared radiation heats the ocean up more and more, it is beginning to expand. As

                                                  VI. Using Central Ideas Based on Evidence to Consider the Impact of Global Climate Change | 403
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           the water in the oceans expands it rises, contributing to the rising sea level issue.
           BitsofScience.org discusses more scientific findings about the expansion of oceans
           in contribution to the rising sea levels. They also mention how the expansion of the
           water is easier to observe and predicate as it has less uncertainty than the melting
           ice caps: http://www.bitsofscience.org/sea-level-rise-thermal-expansion-7256/

                                      FIG. 4.35 Student drawing of modeling the
                                      expansion of water in warming oceans.

The warming of oceans directly from sunlight varies with the seasons, particularly in
the Arctic region (https://nsidc.org/cryosphere/quickfacts/seaice.html ). Arctic ice that
forms on the water in the fall and winter reflects sunlight well whereas open water during
the spring and summer is much less reflective. How well a surface reflects sunlight is
called its albedo (https://nsidc.org/cryosphere/seaice/processes/albedo.html ). Sea ice
has a high albedo; open water a low albedo. The Arctic ocean absorbs more energy from
the sun if sea ice forms later in the fall and melts earlier in the spring. This increased
energy absorption further warms the ocean, which decreases the thickness and extent of
the ice formed in the fall and winter, which increases the ocean's absorption of energy
in the spring and summer, an unfortunate positive feedback loop (see
https://oceanservice.noaa.gov/facts/sea-ice-climate.html ). Ice melting on land or in the
sea contributes to changes in density of salt water, which may change ocean currents
which in turn may influence changes in regional climates (see
https://www.theenergymix.com/2015/07/02/global-warming-threatens-colder-
climate-for-europe/.

Scientists are developing computer models to predict rising sea levels and other aspects

404 | VI. Using Central Ideas Based on Evidence to Consider the Impact of Global Climate Change
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

of climate change. Such websites as http://sealevel.climatecentral.org/ offer a "Risk
Zone Map" that allow the public to see potential risks of their coastal areas. Some areas
are less affected by the rising sea levels, whereas some cities will be lost to the ocean if
the current rate of increasing global temperatures continues.

                            FIG. 4.36 Computer model for predicted flooding in northwest
                            Oregon if sea levels rise 8 feet according to Surging Seas Risk
                            Zone Map.
                            Source: Climate Central https://ss2.climatecentral.org/#10/
                            45.8365/-123.3202?show=sovi&projections=0-RCP85-SLR&lev
                            el=8&unit=feet&pois=hide

   Another example of predictions for flooding during various scenarios of increasing sea
levels is for New York City and New Jersey as shown in Fig. 4.37.

                                                  VI. Using Central Ideas Based on Evidence to Consider the Impact of Global Climate Change | 405
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                            FIG. 4.37 Computer model for predicted flooding in New York
                            City and New Jersey if sea levels rise 8 feet according to
                            Surging Seas Risk Zone Map. Source: Climate Central
                            https://ss2.climatecentral.org/#12/
                            40.7283/-74.0777?show=satellite&projections=0-K14_RCP85-S
                            LR&level=8&unit=feet&pois=hide

A news story about a storm, Hurricane Sandy, illustrates the conditions that may occur if
surges from higher sea levels increase areas that become flooded:
http://www.nj.com/hudson/index.ssf/2012/10/chaos_in_jersey_city_as_flood.html
Some New York City subways flooded with millions of gallons of water during this storm.
Repairs took five years: https://www.usnews.com/news/best-states/new-york/
articles/2017-06-27/nyc-subway-station-reopens-after-being-flooded-by-sandy
Predictions include a repeat of such storms every 25 years: https://www.theatlantic.com/
science/archive/2017/10/climate-change-nyc-floods/543708/

   Such experiences and predictions of repeats of such storms underlie the concerns being
expressed that individuals, communities, and governments must to do whatever possible
to reduce the causes of climate change.

   Complete Table IV.3 to document what you have learned about the impact of global
climate change on rising sea levels.

406 | VI. Using Central Ideas Based on Evidence to Consider the Impact of Global Climate Change
               This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                     TABLE IV.3. Central ideas about rising sea levels
                     TABLE IV.3. Central ideas about rising sea levels

Sketch of set  Evidence                                             Central Ideas Relevant Vocabulary
up modeling

  causes of
  rising sea

     levels

               http://oceanservice.noaa.gov/facts/sealevel.html     A variety of
               https://www.nasa.gov/goddard/risingseas              evidence
                                                                    indicates that
                                                                    global sea levels
                                                                    are rising

               https://climate.nasa.gov/vital-signs/land-ice/       Ice melting on
                                                                    land contributes
               https://nsidc.org/cryosphere/                        to rising sea
               quickfacts/seaice.html                               levels

               https://sealevel.nasa.gov/understanding-sea-level/   Ice melting in
               global-sea-level/thermal-expansion                   the sea does not
                                                                    contribute to
               https://www.theenergymix.com/2015/07/02/             rising sea levels
               global-warming-threatens-colder-climate-for-europe/
                                                                    Thermal             Albedo
               http://nsidc.org/cryosphere/                         expansion of
               seaice/processes/albedo.html                         liquid water
                                                                    contributes to
                                                                    rising sea levels

                                                                    Ice melting on
                                                                    land or in the
                                                                    sea contributes
                                                                    to changes in
                                                                    density of salt
                                                                    water, which
                                                                    may change
                                                                    ocean currents

                                                                    Ice is more
                                                                    reflective than
                                                                    liquid water so
                                                                    melting
                                                                    increases
                                                                    energy
                                                                    absorbed from
                                                                    the Sun

               VI. Using Central Ideas Based on Evidence to Consider the Impact of Global Climate Change | 407
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

http://sealevel.climatecentral.org/                            Computer
                                                               models make
                                                               predictions of
                                                               flooded areas
                                                               feasible

https://ss2.climatecentral.org/#12/40.7298                     Storm surges
/-74.0070?show=satellite&projections=0                         can be very
-K14_RCP85-SLR&level=5&unit=feet&pois=hide;http://www.nj.com/  destructive
hudson/index.ssf/2012/10/
chaos_in_jersey_city_as_flood.html ;https://www.usnews.com/
news/best-states/new-york/articles/2017-
06-27/nyc-subway-station-reopens
-after-being-flooded-by-sandy ;https://www.theatlantic.com/
science/archive
/2017/10/climate-change-nyc-floods/543708/

                                                                                                  *

                                                                                                  *

                                                                                                  *

* Include one or more central ideas about rising sea levels that you learn from exploring
other resources on the Internet with a friend or family member.

408 | VI. Using Central Ideas Based on Evidence to Consider the Impact of Global Climate Change
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

 B. Exploring ways to reduce one's own impact on global climate
                                   change

      Question 4.13 What can you do to reduce your impact on global climate change?

   Many of us are unaware of the connection between what seems like a small act on
our part and its consequences on the amount of greenhouse gases emitted into the
atmosphere.

   Going on an errand when the need arises, for example, seems like a reasonable thing to
do in order to make progress on the endeavor for which the need has become apparent.
One sometimes makes a judgment, however: Is the time and effort to make a special trip
worth it? If the trip involves driving a car, also consider: How much gasoline will the
car use? According to the Energy Policy Initiatives Center of the University of San Diego
School of Law, each gallon of gasoline releases about 19 pounds of carbon dioxide when
burned. Each carbon atom in the gasoline combines with two atoms of oxygen in the air,
so the product, a molecule of carbon dioxide, is much heavier than the carbon atom alone.
If a typical fill-up is 18 gallons, then every fill-up of the tank is pumping about 340 pounds
of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere! (https://epicenergyblog.com/2013/05/24/how-
many-pounds-of-carbon-dioxide-co2-does-a-gallon-of-gasoline-produce/).

   The University of Michigan Center for Sustainable Systems provides a comprehensive
fact sheet about sources of greenhouse gas emissions due to everyday activities involving
food, household appliances, and personal transportation. This fact sheet also provides
suggestions for shifting to more sustainable actions (http://css.umich.edu/factsheets/
carbon-footprint-factsheet):

   Each mile driven by the typical passenger car, for example, puts 0.8 pounds of carbon
dioxide into the atmosphere so walk, bike, carpool, or use mass transit whenever possible.

   Washing laundry in cold rather than hot water can reduce carbon dioxide emissions by
up to almost 15 pounds per load, depending upon the source of energy, temperature of the
hot water, and type of washing machine.

   As shown in Fig. 4.38, choosing what to eat for dinner can make a difference in the
amount of carbon dioxide emitted in producing the different types of food eaten.

                                                  VI. Using Central Ideas Based on Evidence to Consider the Impact of Global Climate Change | 409
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Fig. 4.38 Comparison of Global Warming Potential (GWP) for various food groups.
(https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Clune2016_food_lca.svg) (CC BY-SA 4.0)
Stephen Clune, Enda Crossin, Karli Verghese: Systematic review of greenhouse gas emissions for
different fresh food categories. Journal of Cleaner Production. 2016. DOI: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.04.082,
Table 4.

Such comparisons are complex. Clune, Crossin, and Verghese (2016) have compared the
mass of carbon-dioxide emitted from producing a given amount of various foods.
Producing a kilogram of vegetables, fruit, or cereals, for example, results in much smaller
emissions of carbon dioxide compared with producing a kilogram of lamb or beef meat.

   Related information from a recent news item provides a vivid comparison of the number
of people an acre of land can feed depending upon the kind of food that is grown
there: Willie Riggs, director of Oregon State University Klamath Basin Research and
Extension Center, told commissioners that an acre of wheat feeds 44 people per year;

410 | VI. Using Central Ideas Based on Evidence to Consider the Impact of Global Climate Change
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

an acre of potatoes feeds 1,355 people per year; an acre feeding dairy cows provides
enough milk for around 40,000 half-pint servings; and an acre feeding cows raised for
meat feeds around eight people per year. https://www.heraldandnews.com/klamath/
preparing-for-drought-commissioners-declare-drought-emergency/
article_67c92bd1-0443-5520-931e-cb2428a1fc0d.html
(February 21, 2018 Harold and News, Klamath County)

   If the increase in carbon dioxide emissions is causing the increase in global temperature
and you want to try to decrease your own carbon footprint, how can you do that? There
are several online carbon footprint calculators that can help estimate how many Earths
would be needed if everyone lived like you do.

  · Work on one or more of these carbon footprint calculators on your computer,
      discuss your findings with group members, and present some thoughts about these
      findings on a white board to discuss with the whole group.

Exploring Internet Resources for Calculating One's Carbon Footprint
      What can you do to reduce your ecological / carbon footprint?

Environmental Protection Agency  https://www3.epa.gov/carbon-footprint-calculator/
(EPA)

Carbon Footprint LTD (UK)        https://www.carbonfootprint.com/calculator.aspx

Nature Conservatory:             https://www.nature.org/greenliving/carboncalculator/
                                 index.htm

World Wildlife Fund (now World   http://footprint.wwf.org.uk
Wide Fund for Nature)

General information:

Carbon Footprint Factsheet       http://css.umich.edu/factsheets/
                                 carbon-footprint-factsheet

Details about energy use in the United States

Annual Energy Outlook            https://www.eia.gov/outlooks/aeo/index.php

1. Examples of student work reflecting upon engaging a friend or family member in
learning about living in more sustainable ways

A student chose to discuss with her mother some personal changes one can make:

                                                    VI. Using Central Ideas Based on Evidence to Consider the Impact of Global Climate Change | 411
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           For this assignment I decided to talk to my mom about global climate change. She
           remains the most skeptical person in my life when it comes to climate instability
           so I decided that she would be the most effective person to talk to. She is always
           asking "Okay so this is a problem but what the heck am I supposed to do about it?"
           We went to the website https://www.nrdc.org/stories/how-you-can-stop-global-
           warming and read through the article together and I wrote down all of the ideas
           about how to slow global warming that were provided. After we looked through all
           of the ideas, I asked her what she thought she could do in her life. She said that she
           could reduce the waste with groceries, unplug devices, buy better light bulbs, and
           reduce water waste. She said that she was amazed because she thought that in order
           to help reduce global warming she would have to raise millions of dollars or buy a
           new house. She had no idea that she could make small changes in her life. During
           this conversation she was able to "evaluate and communicate information" which
           is one of the NGSS Science and Engineering Practices. She was presented with this
           information and then she communicated to me how she believes that she will be able
           to make a change in her life. She also touched on the NGSS Crosscutting concept of
           "cause and effect" because we talked about how little changes that we make can have
           a combined positive effect on the environment.

Another student was able to use a carbon footprint website with a middle school friend:

           https://www.earthday.org/take-action/footprint-calculator/

           I chose to use this footprint calculator to engage my mom's friend's daughter, S. She
           is in middle school and knows all about carbon footprints and CO2emissions. I chose
           this website because I thought it was a fun activity and it shows how individuals are
           impacting the Earth. I asked S all of the questions on the survey. Since she does not
           drive or travel often, most of her impact came from the food she ate which she was
           very surprised at. She asked, "But I don't have a car, and I recycle, and always turn
           off the lights. Why does it still say there would have to be 3 Earths [if everyone lived
           the same way]?" We then researched about the huge impacts that the food industry
           has on the environment. Especially the meat industry. I then told her about "Meatless
           Mondays" which we talked about in class and she was still so surprised at the fact
           that meat and packaged food had such a negative effect on the Earth. The footprint
           calculator was a really fun activity and gives you a lot of scary information, such as
           an "Earth Overshoot Date." But it does not really show you ways you can reduce your

412 | VI. Using Central Ideas Based on Evidence to Consider the Impact of Global Climate Change
                  This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

impact on the Earth. I think users would benefit much more if there were a few tips
at the end of the test.
I would say the NGSS Science and Engineering Practice that best fits this website is
Analyzing and Interpreting Data. The footprint calculator asks for the data on your
life, like how far you drive or use public transportation. It then uses that data to
tell you how much of Earth's resources you are using as an individual. The NGSS
Crosscutting Concept that fits this site is definitely Cause and Effect. You enter in all
of the ways you use the Earth's resources and see how it directly affects the Earth's
productivity.
After looking at the footprint calculator with S, I started to wonder how I could teach
my students about their ecological footprint without making them feel bad about the
way they live. I know I felt really guilty when I took this test the first time.

                                  VI. Using Central Ideas Based on Evidence to Consider the Impact of Global Climate Change | 413
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

VII. Developing Mathematical
Representations of Changing
Quantities

   The world is full of changing quantities. Key to becoming aware of what is happening
is measuring how much a quantity is changing. That knowledge can provide the basis for
thinking about what might be happening next and perhaps for perceiving ways to increase
positive outcomes or at least minimize negative ones.

   This section develops a mathematical way of representing changing quantities. The
first activity explores changing quantities in an everyday context, a tossed ball. The
next presents evidence for a changing quantity relevant to global climate change and its
impact, estimates of how fast glaciers are melting. Development of an analogy between
motion and melting graphs guides making projections for how fast glacial ice may be
melting in the future.

  A. Developing familiarity with motion graphs for a tossed ball

   Rolling, kicking, throwing, and catching a ball are familiar activities for most people. To
describe mathematically what is happening to the ball, however, one needs some technical
skills: ways to label where the ball is, its position, to describe how that position is changing,
the ball's velocity, and to think about how that velocity is changing, its acceleration. By
looking at graphs of how a ball's position, velocity, and acceleration are changing with
time, one can learn a lot about a ball's motion - is it at rest? Moving with constant speed?
Speeding up? Slowing down? Similarly, one can learn a lot about how a quantity of interest
is changing by looking at analogous graphs for that quantity, such as how fast are the
world's glaciers melting?

414 | VII. Developing Mathematical Representations of Changing Quantities
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Question 4.14 How do position, velocity, and acceleration of a tossed ball change with time?

 To explore this question, use:

    · whiteboard,
    · basketball,
    · motion detector connected to a computer or graphing calculator
    · If a motion detector is not available, use:
    · Basketball
    · Stopwatch,
    · Flat board,
    · Meter stick or yard stick
    · Book or wood block to incline the flat board

A motion detector works by emitting ultrasound waves that are reflected from an object
back to the detector. The detector reports how far away the object is and makes a
graph of position (where the object is) versus time (the instant it was there). We use a
Go Motion! detector that connects directly to a computer (https://www.vernier.com/
products/sensors/motion-detectors/).

  · Start by exploring what a motion looks like on a position versus time graph (x vs t)
      with the vertical axis representing where the object is (x, its position with respect to
      the motion detector's position), and the horizontal axis representing the time the
      object was there (t, a clock reading). What can you find out about position vs. time
      graphs by standing still as well as by moving back and forth in front of the motion
      detector?
          What does the position versus time graph look like if you stand still in front of
            the motion detector? (If you do not have access to a motion detector, lay a meter
            or yard stick along a flat board, place the ball next to a numbered mark, and note
            its position there for multiple instants of time read on the stopwatch. Plot that
            position on a position vs. time graph.)
          What does the position versus time graph look like if you also stand farther away
            from the motion detector (or place the ball farther away from the end of the
            meter stick)?

                                                                                  VII. Developing Mathematical Representations of Changing Quantities | 415
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

          What does the height of a point on a position versus time graph represent?

                                             FIG. 4.39 Create position versus time
                                             graphs by standing still at different
                                             distances in front of the motion
                                             detector.

          What does the position versus time graph look like if you hold a large white
            board in front of you in front of the motion detector and move back and forth?
            The large white board makes it easier for the motion detector to `see' you. If you
            do not have a motion detector, design a way to measure positions and
            associated clock readings to create a position vs time graph by rolling the ball
            along the board when the board is flat and also when the board is inclined.

          What does the position versus time graph look like if you (or the ball) move away
            from the motion detector at a constant velocity? Move away at a higher
            constant velocity?

          Move toward the detector at a constant velocity? Toward at a higher constant
            velocity?

          What does the position versus time graph look like if you move away from the
            detector while speeding up? Move away from the detector while slowing down?

          Move toward the motion detector while speeding up? Move toward the detector
            while slowing down?

          What does the slope at a point on a position versus time graph represent?
          What does the position versus time graph look like if you turn around (change

            direction)?
          If you are looking at a position versus time graph for a motion in which someone

            turns around, how can you tell which point on the graph represents the turn
            around?

416 | VII. Developing Mathematical Representations of Changing Quantities
                            This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

       Take pictures or make accurate drawings of the resulting graphs.

                                          FIG. 4.40 Create position versus
                                          time graphs by standing still and by
                                          moving back and forth in front of
                                          the motion detector with constant
                                          and changing velocities.

· Click on "insert graph" in the menu bar of the computer screen and choose velocity
   to add a velocity versus time graph to the computer screen. Adjust the size of the x
   vs t and v vs t graphs until both fit on the screen, with the velocity graph underneath
   the position graph. Line up the origins of these graphs so that an event, such as a
   turn around, that is represented as happening on the position graph is also
   represented as happening right underneath on the velocity graph. Change the
   vertical axis of the velocity graph to go from -2 meters to +2 meters.

· Explore what a motion looks like on a velocity versus time graph (v vs t) with the
   vertical axis representing how fast the object is moving toward or away from the
   motion detector (v, its velocity), and the horizontal axis representing the instant the
   object was passing a point (t, a clock reading). What can you find out about velocity
   vs. time graphs by standing still as well as by moving back and forth in front of the
   motion detector?
       What does the velocity versus time graph look like if you stand still at various
         positions in front of the motion detector?
       What does the velocity versus time graph look like if you move back and forth in
         front of the motion detector? (Or you place the meter stick along the flat board,
         roll the ball along the board, and record the board's position at particular times,
         both one way and then the other on the board; then incline the board and roll

                                                                              VII. Developing Mathematical Representations of Changing Quantities | 417
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

            the ball up the incline so that it turns around and rolls back down. Use your data
            to calculate the average velocity x/t between each set of positions.)
          What does the velocity versus time graph look like if you (or the ball) move away
            from the motion detector at a constant velocity? Move away at a higher
            constant velocity?
          Move toward the detector at a constant velocity? Toward at a higher constant
            velocity?
          What does a positive velocity represent? What does a negative velocity
            represent?
          What does the height of a point on a velocity versus time graph represent?
          What does the velocity versus time graph look like if you move away from the
            detector while speeding up? Move away from the detector while slowing down?
          If you move toward the detector while speeding up? Move toward while slowing
            down?
          What does the slope at a point on a velocity versus time graph represent?
          What does the velocity versus time graph look like if you turn around (change
            direction)?
          Take pictures or make accurate drawings of the resulting graphs.

                                               FIG. 4.41 Create velocity versus
                                               time graphs by standing still and
                                               moving back and forth in front of
                                               the motion detector with constant
                                               and changing velocities.

  · What are some connections between the position vs time and velocity vs time

418 | VII. Developing Mathematical Representations of Changing Quantities
                            This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   graphs?
       How is a turn around (changing direction) represented on a position vs time
         graph? On a velocity vs time graph?
       How is speeding up represented on a position vs time graph? a velocity vs time
         graph?
       How is slowing down represented on a position vs time graph? a velocity vs time
         graph?

                                        FIG. 4.42 Identify connections among
                                        position versus time and velocity
                                        versus time graphs.

     To explore the connections among position vs time, velocity vs time, and
     acceleration vs time graphs, use: motion detector connected to a computer or
     calculator and a basketball.
· Click on "insert graph" in the menu bar of the computer screen and choose
   acceleration to add an acceleration versus time graph to the computer screen.
   Adjust the size of the x vs t, v vs t, and a vs t graphs until all fit on the screen, with

                                                                             VII. Developing Mathematical Representations of Changing Quantities | 419
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

      the acceleration graph underneath the velocity graph, which is underneath the
      position graph. Line up the origins so that an event, such as a turn around, that is
      happening on the position graph is also happening right underneath on the velocity
      graph and underneath on the acceleration graph. Change the vertical axis of the
      acceleration graph to read from +12 m/s2 to -12 m/s2 .
  · Explore what a motion looks like on position versus time, velocity versus time, and
      acceleration versus time graphs with the vertical axis representing where the ball is
      (x vs t), how fast and in what direction it is moving (v vs t), and how its velocity is
      changing (a vs t) while moving away from or toward the motion detector, with the
      horizontal axis representing the instant the object was passing a point (t, a clock
      reading).
  · What can you find out about the connections among these graphs by tossing a ball
      directly up vertically and then catching it as it falls down within the view of a motion
      detector?

          Place the motion detector flat on the floor or a table. Hold the ball over the
            motion detector. Click on the computer to start the graph.

          Toss the ball straight up above the motion detector so it stays in the detector's
            view.

          Catch the ball before it falls all the way back down onto the motion detector!
          Make multiple tosses until the computer stops drawing the graph.
          Look at the position vs time, velocity vs time, and acceleration vs time graphs for

            each toss. Select the best example from a set of the multiple graphs of the
            tosses.
          (If you do not have a motion detector, look at the graphs shown in Fig. 4.44.)

          Draw the x vs t, v vs t, and a vs t graphs vertically aligned on a white board
          As you draw, talk with one another about what each feature of each graph

            means:
            What does the height of a point on each graph represent? The slope? How do
            these three types of graphs represent an `event' such as the ball's turning around
            at the top of a toss?

420 | VII. Developing Mathematical Representations of Changing Quantities
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                                    FIG. 4.43 Identify
                                                    connections among
                                                    position versus time,
                                                    velocity versus time
                                                    graphs, and acceleration
                                                    versus time graphs.

  · How is the ball toss represented on the position versus time graph? the v vs t graph?
      the a vs t graph?
          What is the shape of each kind of graph?
          What does the height at a point represent on each graph? The slope?
          How is a turn around (change direction) represented on each kind of graph?
          What are some connections among these graphs?

  · Sketch a set of vertically aligned position, velocity, and acceleration graphs for a
      tossed ball.

  · Summarize your understandings by "telling the story" for each graph.

   The designers of the Logger Lite computer program chose to use the convention that
a toss vertically "up" is in the positive direction and that a fall "down" is in the negative

                                                                                  VII. Developing Mathematical Representations of Changing Quantities | 421
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

direction. Figure 4.44 shows a set of position, velocity, and acceleration graphs for a ball
that was tossed vertically, then caught and tossed vertically again, for four tosses.

                         FIG. 4.44 Position, velocity, and acceleration graphs for a
                         vertically tossed ball. ©Vernier Software & Technology-used with
                         permission.

The analysis below focuses on the tosses, that is, the time periods during which the ball
was in the air after the ball left the hand and before it was caught. These tosses are
represented by the parabolas in the position versus time graph, the straight diagonal lines
in the velocity versus time graph, and the flat portions of the acceleration versus time
graph.

   What story is the x vs t graph telling about where the ball is, its position, during a
toss?

   Height: The height of a point on the position versus time graph represents the ball's
position, how far it is from the motion detector. During the toss, the curved line is
a parabola whose height is changing, increasing to a maximum, then decreasing. The
parabola represents the changing position of the ball as the ball moves up, away from the
motion detector, to a maximum height, turns around (but does NOT stop at the top), and
falls back down toward the motion detector until caught. The flat regions of the position
versus time graph represent the time during which the ball is held in the person's hand in
the same low position above the motion detector between tosses.

   Slope: The slope at a point on the position versus time graph represents the rate at
which the ball's position is changing, its velocity at that point: During the toss, the slope is

422 | VII. Developing Mathematical Representations of Changing Quantities
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

changing, the ball is moving a different distance during each unit of time. On the trip "up,"
the slope is getting less and less steep; the ball is moving shorter and shorter distances
during each unit of time. While still moving in the positive direction, "up," the magnitude
of the ball's velocity is decreasing, that is, the ball is slowing down while moving "up" in
the positive direction. On the trip "down," the slope is getting steeper and steeper; the ball
is moving longer and longer distances during each unit of time. While now moving in the
negative direction, "down," the magnitude of the ball's velocity is increasing, that is, the
ball is speeding up while falling "down" in the negative direction.

   What story is the v vs t graph telling about how fast the ball is moving and in what
direction, its velocity, during a toss?

   Height: The height at a point on the velocity versus time graph represents the ball's
velocity: During the toss, the line is a straight diagonal with negative slope: when thrown
"up," the ball starts out at a high velocity in the positive direction, slows down in a regular
way while still moving "up" in the positive direction, turns around (v = 0), and speeds up in
a regular way while falling "down" in the negative direction until caught.

   A positive velocity means that the ball is moving in the positive direction, "up" in this
case. As the ball moves "up," however, it slows down so the initially large positive velocity
from the throw gets smaller and smaller until the ball turns around (v=0) and starts falling
"down".

   Note that there is no extended time period during which the velocity is zero during the
toss; the ball does not "stop" at the top during the turn around. This contrasts with the
short time period when the line representing the velocity remains on the horizontal axis,
at zero, while the ball is being caught and briefly held before being tossed again.

   A negative velocity means that the ball is moving in the negative direction, back toward
the motion detector. Although -8 on a number line represents less than -1 on a number
line, a velocity of -8 meters/second is much faster than a velocity of -1 meters/second.
The minus sign only indicates the direction the ball is going, "down" in this case; the
number indicates the magnitude of the velocity, how fast the ball is moving.

   In physics, the word speed refers to the magnitude of how fast the ball is moving; the
word velocity refers to both the magnitude and direction of motion. If the ball's velocity is
-8 meters/second, its speed is 8 meters/second while the ball is moving in the negative
direction.

   Slope: The slope at a point on the velocity versus time graph represents the rate at
which the ball's velocity is changing, its acceleration at that point: If the slope is constant,
the ball's velocity is changing by the same amount during each unit of time. If the slope is
constant and negative, the ball's positive velocity is getting slower and slower in a regular

                                                                                 VII. Developing Mathematical Representations of Changing Quantities | 423
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

way during the "up" portion of the toss; the ball's negative velocity is getting faster and
faster in a regular way during the "down" portion of the toss.

What story is the a vs t graph telling about how fast the ball's velocity is changing, its
acceleration, during the toss?

   Height: The height of a point on the acceleration versus time graph represents the
ball's acceleration: During the toss, the line is flat, a straight horizontal line, below the
horizontal axis: the ball's acceleration is negative and constant (about -10 meters/second,
every second) throughout the motion, whether the ball is going up or down. This means
that during the toss, the velocity of the ball decreased by about 10 meters/second during
each second of the trip "up" and increased by about 10/second during each second of
the trip "down." Thus interpreting this graph provides an estimate of the quantity known
as the acceleration of gravity, which is often referred to as -9.8 meters/second2, where
the minus sign indicates that the direction of the acceleration is toward the center of the
Earth.

   Slope: The slope at a point on the acceleration versus time graph represents the ball's
change in acceleration. During the toss, the slope is zero, the ball's acceleration is not
changing, its velocity changes by the same negative amount for each unit of time during
the entire toss. In accordance with Newton's second law, F=ma, the force on the ball is
constant, the Earth is pulling on the ball in the same way, with the same gravitational
force, in the negative direction toward the center of the Earth, during the entire trip,
both up and down. (The jagged peaks on this acceleration versus time graph represent
the varying acceleration caused by upward forces exerted on the ball by the thrower in
catching the ball, holding it briefly, and then tossing it again.)

   One connection among these graphs is that the `event' of the ball turning around is
represented by the maximum height of the curved line on the position versus time graph
and by the straight diagonal line crossing the horizontal axis at zero on the velocity versus
time graph but is not represented at all on the acceleration versus time graph.

   These graphs are very powerful tools for understanding what is happening when change
is occurring. In particular, is something happening slower and slower or faster and faster?

   Whenever you see a curve like the tossed ball (downward curved parabola) something
is happening either slower and slower, if the curve is like the first half of the toss ("up"),
or faster and faster if the curve is like the second half of the toss ("down")! Seeing a
graph with this shape is an alert that not only is change happening but the rate of change
is changing, accelerating. It may be hard to detect a pattern when provided columns of

424 | VII. Developing Mathematical Representations of Changing Quantities
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

numbers; asking for a graph of the data may make visually salient the need for taking
informed action.

                  B. Becoming aware of melting glaciers

          One challenge scientists face is communicating to the public what seems to be
       happening to the global climate and its impacts. One approach is to develop and
       provide visual images that vividly convey the changes that are occurring.

                   Question 4.15 What is the evidence that glaciers are melting?

   An example of a change occurring in nature is the melting of glaciers on land. According
to the National Snow and Ice Data Center, glacial ice currently covers about 10 percent of
the land on Earth. If all the ice on Earth melted, sea levels would rise about 70 meters (230
feet) (see https://nsidc.org/cryosphere/glaciers/quickfacts.html).

   When ice melts within a glacier, liquid water flows as streams into the ocean. Glaciers
also flow like rivers of ice very slowly toward the ocean. Calving occurs when large chunks
of ice break off the edge of a glacier. Some glaciers have retreated substantially during
the past century, as shown by photographs taken in roughly the same place many years
apart. Figure 4.45, for example, shows photographs of Muir Glacier, Alaska, taken in
1941 and 2004 from roughly the same place. These photos were included in the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Climate 365 project to inform the public
about evidence of climate change ( https://climate365.tumblr.com/ )

                                                                                 VII. Developing Mathematical Representations of Changing Quantities | 425
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                        FIG. 4.45 Photographs of Muir Glacier, Alaska, in 1941 and 2004.
                        https://climate.nasa.gov/climate_resources/4/
                        graphic-dramatic-glacier-melt/

According to the National Snow and Ice Data Center, this glacier retreated about seven
miles during the 63 years between these photographs. The NASA Climate 365 project is a
collaboration of the NASA Earth Science News Team, NASA Goddard and Jet Propulsion
Laboratory communications teams, and NASA websites Earth Observatory and Global
Climate Change. These photographs were taken by William O. Field on Aug. 13, 1941 (left)
and by Bruce F. Molnia on Aug. 31, 2004 (right) and are from the Glacier Photograph
Collection. Boulder, Colorado USA: National Snow and Ice Data Center/World Data Center
for Glaciology.

   Glacier National Park in Montana also has had major losses of glacial ice. There were
about 150 glaciers larger than 25 acres there a century ago; now there are only 26
of at least that size (https://www.usgs.gov/news/glaciers-rapidly-shrinking-and-
disappearing-50-years-glacier-change-montana). Decreases in the extent of glacial ice
are most evident at the time of maximum melt before new snow and ice form during late
fall and winter. Fig. 4.46, for example, shows an aerial photograph of Sperry Glacier in late
summer with outlines of its perimeter at similar times in 1966, 1998, 2005, and 2015.

426 | VII. Developing Mathematical Representations of Changing Quantities
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   · What impact might the decline in the number and extent of glaciers have on water
resources in the region?

                                  Fig. 4.46 Aerial photograph with outlines showing
                                  changes over 50 years in the perimeter of Sperry
                                  Glacier in Glacier National Park during late summer
                                  in 1966, 1998, 2005, and 2015. US Geological Survey
                                  (https://www.usgs.gov/news/
                                  glaciers-rapidly-shrinking-and-disappearing-50-ye
                                  ars-glacier-change-montana)

Data from satellite images have greatly enhanced scientists' ability to document changes
in the forming and melting of sea ice on the oceans as well as glacial ice on land. The
National Snow and Ice Data Center (NSIDC) uses satellite data, for example, to monitor
daily, monthly, and yearly the extent to which sea ice covers the Arctic Ocean (See:
https://nsidc.org/arcticseaicenews/.

   Figure 4.47, for example, compares how much sea ice covered the Arctic Ocean during
October in 1981 (left) and during October in 2012 (right). Blue represents regions where
sea ice covered more area than normal during October, where normal was defined as

                                                                                 VII. Developing Mathematical Representations of Changing Quantities | 427
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

the average sea ice coverage during the month of October for the period from 1979
to 2015. Red represents regions where sea ice covered less area than normal for the
month of October, that is, areas with more open sea water than in the past. Click on
http://nsidc.org/soac/sea-ice.html#seaice and the triangle to watch a graphic display of
changes from October 1981 to October 2016.

   · What impact would more open sea water have on the Arctic Ocean?

Fig. 4.47 Mean Arctic sea ice concentration anomalies during October 1981 (left) and during October
2012 (right). (The gray central area was not visible to these satellite instruments.) National Snow & Ice
Data Center, Satellite Observations of Arctic Change (http://nsidc.org/soac/sea-ice.html#seaice)

Ice reflects up to 70% of incoming solar radiation; open water, however, reflects less than
10%. Therefore, changes in how much sea ice covers Arctic waters, particularly during
the summer, have a big impact on how much energy is reflected back out to space or
absorbed. Energy absorbed increases both sea surface and atmospheric temperatures. See
http://nsidc.org/arcticseaicenews/ for the latest Arctic Sea Ice News and Analysis.

   Satellite data also have enabled scientists to document recent acceleration of the
movement of glaciers on land toward the Antarctic Ocean due to winds and warm water
currents (See: https://climate.nasa.gov/news/2631/wind-warm-water-revved-up-

428 | VII. Developing Mathematical Representations of Changing Quantities
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

melting-antarctic-glaciers/.) Figure 4.48, for example, represents the velocity of glaciers
varying from zero to 4000 meters per year. The area represented by the small black box
on the left is shown in detail on the right, with ocean depth (Bathymetry in meters) and
arrows representing Antarctic Circumpolar Currents (ACC) bringing warmer ocean water
into Marguerite Bay.

   · What impact would accelerating glacial ice flow in Antarctica have on global sea levels?

Fig. 4.48 Velocity of glaciers flowing toward the Antarctic Ocean. Credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech.
(https://climate.nasa.gov/news/2631/wind-warm-water-revved-up-melting-antarctic-glaciers/)

At the interface where glaciers meet open water, large ice chucks can break off and fall
into the water as shown in Fig. 4.49. The Oceans Melting Greenland mission explores
the role of warm salty Atlantic Ocean in melting Greenland's glaciers from below
(https://omg.jpl.nasa.gov/portal/).

                                                                                 VII. Developing Mathematical Representations of Changing Quantities | 429
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Fig. 4.49 Calving of a glacier in Greenland. Image credit: NASA's Oceans Melting Greenland mission.
(https://sealevel.nasa.gov/news/74/glaciers-on-the-edge)

The film, Chasing Ice, ( https://earthvisioninstitute.org/extreme-ice-survey/ ) presents
the efforts by James Balog and colleagues at the Earth Vision Institute to document the
calving of glaciers in Greenland.

  · Watch the trailer for the film at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eIZTMVNBjc4
      (2.15 minutes). You may be able to watch the complete one-hour Chasing Ice
      documentary on a streaming service on the Internet. Additional information is
      available at http://extremeicesurvey.org .

  · Also watch part of a TED (Technology, Entertainment, and Design) talk from 14.24 to
      18.27 (4 minutes) at http://ed.ted.com/lessons/james-balog-time-lapse-proof-of-
      extreme-ice-loss . In this Ted talk, Time-lapse Proof of Extreme Ice Loss, James Balog
      presents and interprets the extent of melting ice observed at the Ilulissat Glacier,

430 | VII. Developing Mathematical Representations of Changing Quantities
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

      Greenland from 1851 to 2008. What did he and his colleagues find out about this
      glacier?

A video update showing additional ice loss by this glacier in Greenland, from June 2007
to August 2017, is at https://vimeo.com/168243534. In closing the TED talk, James Balog
said, "I believe we have an opportunity right now...to face the greatest challenge of our
generation, of our century,...to do the right thing for ourselves and for the future, and I
hope we have the wisdom to...rise to the occasion and do what needs to be done."

C. Making an analogy between falling balls and melting
                            glaciers

A big question in the 1990s and early 2000s was whether the glaciers on Greenland

were growing or shrinking. See a story about scientists' attempts to resolve this issue at

https://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Features/Greenland/greenland.php . New data from

the GRACE (Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment) satellite project were interpreted

by Isabella Velicogna (see https://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Features/Greenland/

greenland3.php     and  https://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Features/Greenland/

greenland4.php ).

The graph in FIG. 4.50 presents data derived from the GRACE satellite from 2002 to

2014. The red stars represent June values of the mass of ice.

· What do the downward black lines starting at a red star represent?
· What do the upward black lines ending in the red stars represent?
· In which cycles was more ice formed during the cold season than melted during the

   warm season?
· In which cycles was more ice melted during the warm season than formed during

   the cold season?
· The blue curve fits the overall trend of these data. Was the slope of the trend getting

   steeper? About the same? Getting less steep?
   What does that imply about the rate of melting during this time period?
   Melting faster and faster? Melting about the same? Melting slower and slower?

                        VII. Developing Mathematical Representations of Changing Quantities | 431
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                              FIG. 4.50 Graph representing the forming and melting of
                              ice on Greenland, 2002 to 2014. Khan et al., "Greenland
                              Ice sheet balance: a review.," Reports on Progress in
                              Physics 78(4), 046801 (2015)

   Note that the vertical axis of Fig. 4.50 represents the cumulative mass anomaly in
gigatons of ice. An anomaly is a difference with respect to a reference, often an average
value over an extended time period. This graph represents the difference between the
total mass of ice on a particular date and a reference total mass represented by the 0 on
the vertical axis.

   By looking at the graph, for example, one can estimate that the mass of ice in June 2002
was about 1300 gigatons more than the reference mass whereas the mass of ice in June
2013 was about 1500 gigatons less than the reference mass of ice. Between 2002 and 2013,
about 2800 gigatons of ice on Greenland melted. The absolute mass of ice in gigatons that
is the reference is not provided here.

   For a discussion of why changing amounts often are analyzed via anomalies rather
than changes in absolute amounts, see http://www.realclimate.org/index.php/archives/
2014/12/absolute-temperatures-and-relative-anomalies/ . Note also that something
interesting happened during the ice melts for 2012 and 2014, which raises the interesting
issue of what might happen next!

   Analysis of ice melting in Greenland is one case. What is happening to glaciers world

432 | VII. Developing Mathematical Representations of Changing Quantities
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

wide? As shown in Fig. 4.51, the World Glacier Monitoring Service (WGMS) produced
similarly shaped graphs representing cumulative mass change for glaciers based on
measurements from 1950 to 2018, compared to their masses in 1976 (https://wgms.ch/
global-glacier-state/).

   Interpret Fig. 4.51:
  · What does the vertical axis represent?
  · What does the horizontal axis represent?
  · What do the lines represent?
  · What does the shape of the lines imply about world-wide changes in the mass of

      glaciers?

      FIG. 4.51 Cumulative mass relative to 1976 for regional and global means based on data
      from reference glaciers. World Glacier Monitoring Service (https://wgms.ch/
      global-glacier-state/)[Reference: WGMS (2017, updated, and earlier reports): Global Glacier
      Change Bulletin No. 2 (2014-2015). Zemp, M., Nussbaumer, S. U., Gärtner-Roer, I., Huber, J.,
      Machguth, H., Paul, F., and Hoelzle, M. (eds.), ICSU(WDS)/IUGG(IACS)/UNEP/UNESCO/
      WMO, World Glacier Monitoring Service, Zurich, Switzerland, 244 pp., based on database
      version: doi:10.5904/wgms-fog-2018-11}\]

                                                                                 VII. Developing Mathematical Representations of Changing Quantities | 433
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

The colored line graphs represent data from reference glaciers in ten regions world
wide. The dashed black line represents the average cumulative mass change for all
ten regions. During 2015-2016, the World Glacier Monitoring Service collected data
from more than 130 glaciers around the world (http://wgms.ch/
latest-glacier-mass-balance-data/). Of these, 40 were "reference" glaciers for which
they had continuous data for more than 30 years.

The difference between the mass of ice gained during the cold season and the mass
of ice that melted during the warm season is the annual net mass balance. The plots
are cumulative, increasing or decreasing the reference total by how much mass of ice
has been added or lost each year since 1950.

· In which parts of the world are the glaciers melting the fastest? The slowest?

  Question 4.16 How can familiarity with motion graphs guide making projections for the
                 way glaciers likely will be melting over the next decade(s)?

  · Figures 4.50 and 4.51 present data about the amount of glacial ice melt over more
      than a decade. What do you think will happen in the next decade(s)?

  · Compare the position versus time graph for a tossed ball in Fig. 4.44 and the graph
      representing the mass of forming and melting ice on Greenland in Fig. 4.50.

  · Draw the axes for a mass versus time graph as shown in Fig. 4.52. Draw a line on the
      mass of ice versus time graph to show what has been happening and your projection
      of what is likely to happen in the next decade(s) based on this analogy with the
      position versus time graph for a falling ball.

  · Below your mass of ice versus time graph, draw the axes for a velocity of melting
      versus time graph as shown in Fig. 4.52.

  · Draw a line on the velocity of melting graph that is analogous to the shape of the
      graph of velocity versus time graph for a falling ball to make a projection for how the
      velocity of melting will change in the next decade(s).

  · Below your velocity of melting versus time graph, draw the axes for an acceleration
      of melting versus time graph as shown in Fig. 4.52.

  · Draw a line on the acceleration of melting graph that is analogous to the acceleration
      versus time graph for a falling ball to make a projection for how the acceleration of

434 | VII. Developing Mathematical Representations of Changing Quantities
                            This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   melting will change in the next decade(s). Assume that melting ice is a natural
   process like that of the gravitational pull by the earth on a falling object. It may be or
   it may not be; the acceleration of the rate of melting ice may decrease OR increase if
   the people who on live on this Earth do or do not change their ways.

                                         FIG. 4.52 Projection for graphs
                                         representing how glaciers worldwide
                                         may be melting during the next
                                         decade.

· Use Table IV.4a to summarize the analogy between moving and melting phenomena:
   Draw each graph observed for a tossed ball as well as each graph projected for the
   melting ice in Greenland.

· What does the height represent for each graph? The slope?

                                                                             VII. Developing Mathematical Representations of Changing Quantities | 435
              This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

       TABLE IV.4a Summary of analogy between moving and melting phenomena

TABLE IV.4a Summary of analogy between moving and melting phenomena

Falling Ball Observations         Melting Ice Observation and Projections

Graph         Height       Slope  Graph          Height                                Slope

Position vs                       Mass of
time                              ice vs
                                  time*

Velocity vs                       Velocity of
time                              melting vs
                                  time

Acceleration                      Acceleration
vs time                           of melting vs
                                  time

        · Khan et al., "Greenland Ice sheet balance: a review.," Reports on Progress in Physics 78(4),
        046801 (2015).
        * See also: http://wgms.ch/latest-glacier-mass-balance-data/

     1. Example of student work making an analogy between moving and melting
     phenomena

              Developing and using mathematical model of changing phenomena. By watching
           the trailer and the TED talk we are able to learn about the changes that are
           happening in Greenland. The glaciers are melting and falling off into the ocean,
           through the trailer you could see actual images of this happening and it was unlike
           anything I had ever seen before. These live images really put climate change into
           perspective for me and make me realize how quickly it is changing.
      A position versus time graph represents where a tossed ball is during a time interval.

436 | VII. Developing Mathematical Representations of Changing Quantities
                  This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                       FIG. 4.53 Student graph of
                                       observed position versus
                                       time for tossed ball.

The shape of this graph is a parabola, which looks like an upside down U. The
position of the ball after it leaves the person's hand goes up so the line on the graph
has an upward slope and at the point of turnaround it comes back down to the
person's hand and the graph goes into a downward motion.

   A velocity versus time graph represents how quickly the position of a tossed ball
is changing during a time interval.

                                         FIG. 4.54 Student graph
                                         of observed velocity
                                         versus time for tossed
                                         ball.

Velocity is how quickly the position the ball is in is changing. Velocity started at a
high point but as the ball is being thrown in an upward direction, the velocity is
decreasing. When the ball hits the point of turnaround the velocity is zero. When the
ball starts going in a downward direction the velocity is increasing in the negative
direction.

                                                                VII. Developing Mathematical Representations of Changing Quantities | 437
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

      An acceleration versus time graph represents how quickly the velocity of a tossed ball
   is changing during a time interval.

                                                      FIG. 4.55 Student
                                                      graph of observed
                                                      acceleration versus
                                                      time for tossed ball.

           The force of Earth is always pulling the ball down, which is why the line is in the
           negative position on the graph. It doesn't change because Earth is always pulling
           down on the ball during any point of the ball's flight. The "loggerlite" program
           represents this constant downward pull by having the line be in the negative
           position.
      A mass of ice versus time graph represents how much mass of ice there is during a time
   interval.

                                                     FIG. 4.56 Student
                                                     drawing of projected
                                                     mass of ice versus time
                                                     graph for melting
                                                     glacier.

438 | VII. Developing Mathematical Representations of Changing Quantities
                           This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

       This graph starts half way because this is when they just started taking data from
       2002-2014. The slope is increasing. The height of the peak is the winter months
       because once it is frozen again the mass increases. The low point represents more
       of the ice melt because there is less ice during the warm summer months. Based on
       the data that has been collected, showing that there is increasingly more ice melting
       I can predict that by 2024 the graph will continue in the downward slope as I have
       shown above...
   A velocity of ice melting versus time graph represents how quickly the mass of ice is
changing during a time interval.

                                               FIG. 4.57 Student drawing
                                               of projected velocity of
                                               melting ice versus time
                                               graph for melting glaciers.

       The slope (on the mass vs time graph) is increasing when you compare the years
       2002-2004 and 2012-2014. The magnitude of the velocity (of ice melting) in this case
       is increasing, which in return means that the mass is decreasing. This graph shows
       that every year there is becoming less mass of ice.

          Acceleration of the melting ice melting versus time graph represents how quickly
       the velocity of ice melting is changing during a time interval.

                                                                           VII. Developing Mathematical Representations of Changing Quantities | 439
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                                      FIG. 4.58 Student
                                                      drawing of projected
                                                      acceleration of melting
                                                      ice versus time graph
                                                      for melting glaciers.

           The shape of this graph is a straight line in the negative region of the graph. The
           acceleration is constant, the line does not have any changes to it. Something is
           causing the ice to melt but in this case we can change it, unlike the force of gravity
           pulling down the ball.

              Making an analogy to a known process can help one predict a similar process in
           a different context. Using the information we have gathered from these graphs, we
           can predict other trends as well. In the business world predicting graphs is used all
           the time to predict the success of businesses or stocks.

                                                                                      Physics student, Spring 2017

       2. Summary of the analogy between moving and melting phenomena

Table IV.4b provides a summary of the analogy between moving and melting phenomena.
The position versus time, velocity versus time, and acceleration versus time graphs on the
left represent the motion of a ball tossed vertically in the air from the instant that the ball
starts falling back down until the instant that it is caught before hitting the ground. The
heights and slopes of these graphs provide information about this motion as described in
the left columns. The ball speeds up as it falls, accelerating at a constant rate because the
Earth is pulling on the ball in the same way throughout the toss.

   The mass of ice versus time graph on the right represents the observed decrease in the

440 | VII. Developing Mathematical Representations of Changing Quantities
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

mass of the Greenland ice sheet as observed from 2002 to 2014 (Khan et al., 2015). The
dotted line represents a projection for how this ice sheet might continue melting in the
future. The heights and slopes of the melting ice graphs provide projections for increasing
rate and acceleration of this melting phenomena as described in the right columns. If
the shape of the line representing the rate of ice melting is similar to the rate of the ball
falling, the rate of ice melting will speed up, accelerating as time goes by. Although the
acceleration of the ball is constant, due to the natural process of the Earth pulling on the
ball in the same way throughout its fall, the acceleration of the loss of mass due to melting
may be modified by human actions, to reduce (or increase) the amount of greenhouse
gases in the atmosphere.

   The purpose of this section has been to illustrate the power of mathematics. One can
use mathematics to represent something one understands, such as motion phenomena,
and then by analogy make projections for interesting phenomena that seem to be
behaving in a similar way.

   The above projections were for increasing loss of ice in Greenland during the next
decade. The graph in Fig. 4.50, however, showed an apparent "lull" in the accelerating loss
of ice in Greenland when the mass of freezing of ice during the 2014 winter appeared to

                                                                                  VII. Developing Mathematical Representations of Changing Quantities | 441
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

have matched the mass of melting ice during the summer of 2013. What has happened
since then? See https://www.euronews.com/2019/08/06/before-and-after-pictures-
show-greenland-s-rapid-ice-melt-from-space for a news cast during August 2019. See
http://nsidc.org/greenland-today/ to find out what is happening "now" when you are
reading about this topic. See https://www.nasa.gov/feature/jpl/greenland-antarctica-
melting-six-times-faster-than-in-the-1990s for a comparison of melting of ice in
Greenland and Antarctica over several decades.

3. Example of student work reflecting upon engaging a friend or family member in
         learning about global climate change's impact on melting glaciers.

              For this activity, I had my friend watch Chasing Ice so that they could see the
           drastic effects that are happening to ice shelves. She first asked me where this was
           and I told her that it was in Greenland. She then made a statement and said, "so
           this doesn't really matter for us then since it is so far away?" I asked her if she really
           thinks that if the Earth is warming up so much that it is melting this ice, that it is
           not going to affect us and she said, "well when you put it that way I guess it will."
           She was very surprised that she didn't already know about this because it seems like
           an important thing. I told her it is important and many countries are taking steps
           to stop the effects of global warming because many scientists have said that it is
           because of human's effects on the Earth. She then asked what she could do and I took
           her to the website that talked about ways that she could reduce her carbon footprint.
           She liked the idea of biking places instead of driving. She told me that she couldn't
           believe how big her carbon footprint was.

              The NGSS standard that goes with this is engaging in argument from evidence
           and we did a little bit of this because at first, she didn't think that the melting of
           the ice would be affecting her and through my argument from evidence of warming,
           I was able to teach her that it wasn't true. I also used cause and effect because we
           could see the effect that our carbon footprint and global warming was causing these
           huge ice shelves to melt in Greenland.

                                                                                      Physics student, Spring 2017

442 | VII. Developing Mathematical Representations of Changing Quantities
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

VIII. Exploring Internet Resources
about Taking Action to Address
Climate Change Issues

   Becoming aware of what seems to be happening world wide with respect to the impacts
of global climate change can be quite sobering. It is helpful also to become aware of what
individuals, communities, universities, states, the military, national government agencies,
and international organizations can do and are doing to address climate change issues.

                      Question 4.17 What are some ways to take action?

Explore Internet Resources about what ways to take action:

  · What can individuals do to study global climate change and take action?

          The Extreme Ice Survey organization, headed by James Balog, has suggestions
            for individuals interested in taking action:
            http://extremeicesurvey.org/take-action/

          The California Air Resources Board offers many ways to take action:
            https://www.arb.ca.gov/cc/public/public.htm

          Environmental Protection Agency provides some examples:
            https://www.epa.gov/climate-change/what-you-can-do-about-climate-
            change (An earlier version of this with the same name for a
            link, https://www.epa.gov/climatechange/what-you-can-do-about-climate-
            change , had a message that suggested "we want to help you find what you are
            looking for." An even earlier version said "Thank you for your interest in this
            topic. We are currently updating our website to reflect EPA's priorities under the
            leadership of President Trump and Administrator Pruitt. If you're looking for an
            archived version of this page, you can find it on the January 19 snapshot." To
            view this page go to https://19january2017snapshot.epa.gov/climatechange/
            what-you-can-do-about-climate-change_.html ). For a comment on this

                                                      VIII. Exploring Internet Resources about Taking Action to Address Climate Change Issues | 443
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

            situation see: https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2018/nov/01/epa-
            website-climate-change-trump-administration ).

  · What can communities do to study global climate change and take action?
          U.S. agency: https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2016-09/
            documents/community-based-adaptation_handout.pdf
          Small town: https://www.npr.org/2018/06/11/616944110/more-rain-more-
            development-spell-disaster-for-some-u-s-cities

  · What is a university doing to study climate change and take action?
          OSU Oregon Sea Grant : OSU researchers to help coastal towns cope with
            natural hazard http://blogs.oregonstate.edu/breakingwaves/2018/08/16/osu-
            researchers-to-help-coastal-towns-cope-with-natural-hazards/
          Oregon Climate Change Research Institute: https://blogs.oregonstate.edu/
            occri/

  · What is a state doing to study climate change and take action?
          Explore the Oregon Department of Energy website about Climate Change in
            Oregon at http://www.oregon.gov/energy/energy-oregon/Pages/Climate-
            Change.aspx

  · What is the US military doing to study global climate change and take action?
          Go to https://www.cna.org/cna_files/pdf/MAB_5-8-14.pdf
            (You may have to cut and paste this URL into a browser to get it to work or put
            CNA Military Advisory Board National Security and Accelerating Risks of Climate
            Change in your browser.) Get an overview of this report by scrolling through the
            pages and reading highlighted sentences to see what is there. Note the military
            credentials of the authors on page iii and pages 30-35 as well as the experts they
            consulted on page vi. Select an aspect of the report that is of interest and report
            briefly on the information provided.

  · What is the US government doing to study climate change and take action?
          The US Global Change Research Program was established by Presidential
            Initiative in 1989 and mandated by Congress in the Global Change Research Act

444 | VIII. Exploring Internet Resources about Taking Action to Address Climate Change Issues
                            This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

         of 1990 to "assist the Nation and the world to understand, assess, predict, and
         respond to human-induced and natural processes of global change."
         http://www.globalchange.gov
       See Fourth National Climate Assessment, http://nca2018.globalchange.gov/ the
         authoritative and comprehensive report on climate change and its impacts in
         the United States.
       Regional impacts are discussed separately; see impacts on the northwest, for
         example, at http://nca2014.globalchange.gov/chapter/24

· How are countries collaborating to study climate change and take action?
       Explore the website of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) at
         http://www.ipcc.ch/
       In particular, look at https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/index.shtml (you may
         need to cut and paste URL into your browser) "The Fifth Assessment
         Report (AR5) provides a clear and up to date view of the current state of
         scientific knowledge relevant to climate change.
         Click on: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis
         Scroll down under Report by Chapters to and click on 13. Sea Level Change
         Scroll to Table of Contents, (page 1138) to see what is there.
         Then explore a section or sections that seem of interest to you. For example,
         information about contributions to sea level rise can be found on page 1161 and a
         chart of projected sea level rises for various coastal cities can be found on page
         1198. Coordinating Lead Author of this chapter was Prof. Peter U. Clark, OSU
         College of Earth, Ocean and Atmospheric Sciences:
         http://ceoas.oregonstate.edu/profile/clark/
       Or explore the latest version available: https://www.ipcc.ch/assessment-
         report/ar6/
       For information about the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
         Change, 2015 in Paris, see: https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/the-paris-
         agreement/the-paris-agreement

                                                  VIII. Exploring Internet Resources about Taking Action to Address Climate Change Issues | 445
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

1. Example of student work in reflecting upon exploring Internet resources in class
and with a friend or family member

     Exploring Internet resources about global climate change:

  · Individuals: http://extremeicesurvey.org/take-action/

           This information was provided by the Extreme Ice Survey. I thought the
           information was interesting because it talked about having a voice and getting the
           word out about climate change. I found the facts he provided would be helpful in
           talking to someone who doesn't believe in climate change and may aid someone in
           that discussion. I also found the facts to be helpful in my learning about climate
           change because they were short, easy to read facts that made a big statement, for
           example: Worldwide, hundreds of thousands of people die each year from climate-
           related stressors. In a short amount of words they present a scary statistic that
           people shouldn't ignore.

  · Individuals: https://www.arb.ca.gov/cc/public/public.htm

           The agency presenting this information is the California Air Resources Board. This
           website was very interesting because it suggested many ways as an individual you
           can help with climate change by doing things you wouldn't really think of as
           helping. One that was somewhat surprising to me was washing your clothes in cold
           water, which is something I usually do anyways to prevent my clothes from
           shrinking or stretching out. A point it talked about that I found interesting was that
           these small changes quickly become habit, even though at some point it seemed like
           it would too much work. The example it used for this was recycling products at
           your house. When I was younger, we usually threw cans away, and now we always
           put them in a separate garbage can for recycling and it's just habit. I think this
           helped my learning because it used very real life examples that are definitely
           possible for almost everyone, so it was easy to understand how small changes by
           everyone can make a big difference.

  · Individuals: https://www.epa.gov/climatechange/what-you-can-do-about-climate-
      change (To view this go to https://19january2017snapshot.epa.gov/climatechange/
      what-you-can-do-about-climate-change_.html )

446 | VIII. Exploring Internet Resources about Taking Action to Address Climate Change Issues
                            This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

             This resource from the EPA, which offers tips on what you can change to
        improve your global impact, is really well organized and super easy to find good
        information from. In particular, you can choose to see what things you can do at
        home, at work, on the road, and at school to help climate change. Also, the options
        to which you can use to change are really simple and helpful options.

· Communities: https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2016-09/documents/
   community-based-adaptation_handout.pdf

        I really liked how organized this document was, and how it showed images and had
        many highlighted and bullet pointed sections. They stated ways to have cleaner air
        in cities, which included reducing vehicle emissions by creating areas where people
        can work, live and play within a walkable area, and upgrading municipal fleets to
        reduce air pollutants. I really like their idea about making a living space where
        everything is in walking distance--it got me thinking of ways that entire
        communities could live in the future where work and home and greenspace were all
        condensed into a small area. This could solve a lot of problems and leave more
        space for trees and wildlife- trees are important for reducing carbon emissions as
        well.

· Oregon State University: https://seagrant.oregonstate.edu/sites/
   seagrant.oregonstate.edu/files/sgpubs/onlinepubs/w10001.pdf

        The university helps support climate change research while also finding ways to
        use that research to help people find ways to live and work in their everyday lives. I
        think this is important to making a difference because not everyone will go out of
        their way to support the issue, but they will be more likely to do small things at
        home in their everyday lives if they know it will make a difference.

· The State of Oregon: http://www.oregon.gov/energy/energy-oregon/Pages/Climate-
   Change.aspx

        The state of Oregon partners with multiple agencies to track things like greenhouse
        gas emissions and how we can reduce them in order to reduce climate change.
        Oregon also promotes creating electricity with renewable energy instead of
        materials like coal, which was very interesting to me. By supporting research and

                                                  VIII. Exploring Internet Resources about Taking Action to Address Climate Change Issues | 447
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           trends, Oregon is active in trying to more efficiently create resources for the state
           in ways that do not harm our atmosphere.

  · Military:https://www.cna.org/cna_files/pdf/MAB_5-8-14.pdf

           The military discusses climate change as it relates to foreign affairs. They want to
           work to end climate change as it is a threat to stability of other countries as an
           aggravated stressor, enabling violence and terrorist activity. Additionally, it is
           important that the military is protecting our national security rather than
           responding to human caused natural disasters.

  · US Government: http://www.globalchange.gov

           This website includes multiple different kinds of resources and forms of
           information. I really liked that it included a tab about understanding climate
           change because I think understanding the issue is the first step in actually taking
           action. Overall, this website is very organized and leads me to believe that the US
           government is taking part in lessoning the effects of climate change not only on our
           country but on the world as well. This piece of information was specifically
           surprising to me: "U.S. average temperature has increased by 1.3°F to 1.9°F since
           1895, and most of this increase has occurred since 1970. The most recent decade was
           the Nation's and the world's hottest ever recorded, and 2012 was the hottest year on
           record in the continental United States. Temperatures are projected to rise another
           2°F to 4°F in most areas of the U.S. over the next few decades."

  · Collaboration of Countries: http://www.ipcc.ch/

           "Each IPCC Member country has a Focal Point which has been identified by the
           relevant authorities in the country. IPCC Focal Points prepare and update the list of
           national experts to help implement the IPCC work programme. The Focal Points
           also arrange for the provision of integrated comments on the accuracy and
           completeness of the scientific and/or technical content and the overall scientific
           and/or technical balance of drafts of reports." I found this piece of information
           from the website discussing how countries interact with one another. By giving
           leaders of each country a specific role, those tasks are more likely to be completed
           than if there was no communication or designated roles.

448 | VIII. Exploring Internet Resources about Taking Action to Address Climate Change Issues
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                                                                     Physics students, Winter 2018

  · Engaging friend(s) and/or family member(s) in learning about the science underlying
      claims about global climate change.

              I engaged my roommate in learning about the underlying claims of global climate
           change. I started by asking her what she knew about climate change in general. She
           admitted that she had heard a lot of kind of jokes about climate change and the
           occasional tweet here and there, but had never taken the time to actually look into
           the issue.

               I explained to her a couple of the things we had learned in class so far such as
           greenhouse gas emissions, rising sea levels, and rising temperatures and why each
           of these are important. I then asked her about each one of the topics such as what
           do you think OSU, the state of Oregon, the US government, and the nation as a
           whole does to prevent climate change? We explored the sites I mentioned above
           together. She specifically thought the one focused on the efforts of the U.S.
           government was interesting because it gave her a lot of definitions, general
           information, news reports and many more resources, which provides multiple
           different perspectives. By reviewing this website she was also convinced that the
           issue is indeed important and is worth taking the time to research and do small
           things at home such as save energy and travel efficiently.

              I liked discussing this because I felt like I was teaching someone about something
           that really does matter and is important. This makes me believe that putting the
           time and effort into science lessons can have not only a positive impact on the
           learner but on the world. I think this connects with the NGSS science and
           engineering practice constructing explanations and designing solutions because by
           doing research, we are able to understand and explain the phenomena to some
           extent and then come up with a solution based off of the knowledge previously
           gained. This also correlates to the cross cutting concept of cause and effect because
           the way we live and use energy causes the greenhouse gasses that affect the
           atmosphere.

                                                                                      Physics student, Winter 2018

Critical in addressing global climate change issues is the process of engineering design
in which people, as individuals as well as participants in institutions, define problems
and then develop and optimize solutions. (See Appendix I of the Next Generation Science

                                                      VIII. Exploring Internet Resources about Taking Action to Address Climate Change Issues | 449
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Standards (NGSS Lead States, 2013) at https://www.nextgenscience.org/resources/ngss-
appendices .) Such focused efforts are necessary both in developing improved ways
of documenting what is happening as well as in designing better ways to reduce the
causes and impact of increasing global temperatures. Also relevant is understanding the
interdependence of science, engineering and technology as well as the influence of
engineering, technology and science on society and the natural world. (See Appendix J).

450 | VIII. Exploring Internet Resources about Taking Action to Address Climate Change Issues
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

IX. Making Connections to Educational
Policies

Scientists all over the world are working hard to understand the causes of changes in the
world's climate that are occurring more rapidly than in the past. They also are studying
the impacts of those changes and ways to address those issues. In addition, scientists are
working hard to communicate their findings and interpretations of these findings to
others. Individuals as well as policy makers need to be aware of and active in addressing
climate change issues because all will affect what happens in the years to come. This unit
closes by making connections to educational policies such as expecting students to learn
about relevant disciplinary core ideas articulated in the US Next Generation Science
Standards (NGSS Lead States, 2013)..

A. Learning more about disciplinary core ideas articulated in the
                 US Next Generation Science Standards

The US Next Generation Standards (NGSS Lead States, 2013) includes disciplinary core
ideas about global climate change that students should learn by the end of middle school:
Human activities affect global warming. Decisions to reduce the impact of global warming
depend on understanding climate science, engineering capabilities, and social dynamics.

      Question 4.18 What relevant US NGSS disciplinary core ideas have you used in
    considering the influence of light and thermal phenomena on global climate change?

    The US Next Generation Science Standards suggests disciplinary core ideas for teaching

science topics in grades K-2, 3-5, 6-8, and 9-12. These learning progressions suggest ways

to  build  disciplinary  knowledge   throughout  schooling.                   (See:

https://www.nextgenscience.org/sites/default/files/resource/files/AppendixE-

ProgressionswithinNGSS-061617.pdf )

    Table IV.5 presents the learning progressions articulated for teaching about disciplinary

                                     IX. Making Connections to Educational Policies | 451
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

core ideas related to global climate change. Relevant topics in physical science include
electromagnetic radiation, conservation of energy and energy transfer. Relevant topics in
earth and space sciences include weather and climate, and global climate change. This
course addresses the bolded disciplinary core ideas stated in each grade band.

452 | IX. Making Connections to Educational Policies
                 This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

          TABLE IV.5 NGSS disciplinary core ideas relevant to teaching about global climate change
TABLE IV.5 NGSS disciplinary core ideas relevant to teaching about global climate change

                 K-2                 3-5                   6-8               9-12

PS4.B            Objects can be      Objects can be        The construct     Both an electromagnetic
Electromagnetic  seen only when      seen when light       of a wave is      wave model and a photon
radiation        light is available  reflected from        used to model     model explain features of
                 to illuminate       their surface         how light         electromagnetic radiation
                 them.               enters our eyes.      interacts with    broadly and describe
                                                           objects.          common applications of
                                                                             electromagnetic radiation.

PS3.A                                Moving objects        Kinetic energy    The total energy within a
Definitions of                       contain energy.       can be            system is conserved.
energy                               The faster the        distinguished     Energy transfer within and
                                     object moves, the     from the various  between systems can be
PS3.B            Sunlight warms      more energy it        forms of          described and predicted in
Conservation of  Earth's surface.    has. Energy can       potential         terms of energy associated
energy and                           be moved from         energy. Energy    with the motion or
energy transfer                      place to place by     changes to and    configuration of particles
                                     moving objects, or    from each type    (objects).
                                     through sound,        can be tracked    Systems move toward
                                     light, or electrical  through           stable states.
                                     currents. Energy      physical or
                                     can be converted      chemical
                                     from one form to      interactions.
                                     another form.         The
                                                           relationship
                                                           between the
                                                           temperature
                                                           and the total
                                                           energy of a
                                                           system depends
                                                           on the types,
                                                           states, and
                                                           amounts of
                                                           matter.

Learning Progressions for Earth and Space Science

ESS2.D Weather   Weather is the      Climate describes     Complex           The role of radiation from
and climate      combination of      patterns of           interactions      the sun and its
                 sunlight, wind,     typical weather       determine local   interactions with the
                 snow or rain, and   conditions over       weather           atmosphere, ocean, and
                 temperature in a    different scales      patterns and      land are the foundation
                 particular region   and variations.       influence         for the global climate
                 and time. People    Historical            climate,          system. Global climate
                 record weather      weather patterns      including the     models are used to predict
                 patterns over       can be analyzed.      role of the       future changes, including
                 time.                                     ocean.            changes influenced by
                                                                             human behavior and
                                                                             natural factors.

                                                           IX. Making Connections to Educational Policies | 453
                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

ESS3.D Global   See PS3.B:       See PS3.B: Energy      Human              Global climate models
climate change  Sunlight warms   can be moved           activities affect  used to predict changes
                Earth's surface  from place to          global warming.    continue to be improved,
                                 place by ... light...  Decisions to       although discoveries about
                                 Energy can be          reduce the         the global climate system
                                 converted from         impact of global   are ongoing and
                                 one form to            warming            continually needed
                                 another form.          depend on
                                                        understanding
                                                        climate science,
                                                        engineering
                                                        capabilities, and
                                                        social dynamics.

· Bolded statements are addressed in this course.

· Discuss with your group members ways in which you have used some aspects of the
   disciplinary core ideas that are relevant to teaching about global climate change.

· Select one of these disciplinary core ideas that has been the most interesting for you
   during this course and discuss how and what you have learned. Also include in your
   discussion at least one NGSS science and engineering practice and at least one
   crosscutting concept that you used while learning about this disciplinary core idea.

· [As discussed in NGSS Appendix F, science and engineering practices include asking
   questions (for science) and defining problems (engineering), developing and using
   models, planning and carrying out investigations, analyzing and interpreting data,
   using mathematics and computational thinking, constructing explanations (for
   science) and designing solutions (for engineering), engaging in argument from
   evidence, and obtaining, evaluating, and communicating information. As discussed in
   NGSS Appendix G, cross cutting concepts include patterns, cause and effect:
   mechanism and explanation, scale, proportion, and quantity, systems and system
   models, energy and matter: flows, cycles, and conservation, structure and function,
   and stability and change ( https://www.nextgenscience.org/resources/ngss-
   appendices ).]

   B. Reflecting upon this exploration of the science underlying
                    claims of global climate change

This unit began by developing understandings about the nature of light from the Sun,
both of the colorful spectrum we can see and of a much larger electromagnetic spectrum
not visible to our eyes. Students learned about infrared radiation and its role in the

454 | IX. Making Connections to Educational Policies
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

greenhouse effect, which is a natural phenomenon that generates the warm atmosphere
surrounding the surface of the Earth. Students also examined evidence for the recent
increase in the average global temperature of that atmosphere, the impact of that increase
in average global temperature on rising sea levels, and ways that individuals, communities,
states, nations, and international organizations are taking action to address global climate
change issues.

   Scientists base claims about global climate change on evidence. They report their
studies in peer-reviewed articles that describe in detail the questions they are asking,
why these questions are of interest, what already is known about these issues, how they
design their investigations, what results they obtain, and what the implications are of
those findings. Since 1988, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has
provided a way for scientists all over the world to collaborate in assembling and assessing
such evidence in order to provide the public and policy makers with the best information
possible on which to base decisions.

    C. Making connections to NGSS understandings about the
                             nature of science

The Next Generation Science Standards articulates eight understandings that students
should learn about the nature of science in Appendix H
( https://www.nextgenscience.org/resources/ngss-appendices ).

   Scientific investigations use a variety of methods. As discussed in section IV.B, for
example, studies of glaciers have ranged from `on the ground' vivid video recordings of
glacial calving events in Greenland, such as the Chasing Ice documentary, to complex
analyses of data from satellites monitoring the acceleration of Antarctica's glaciers flowing
toward the ocean.

   Scientific knowledge is based on empirical evidence. As discussed in section V.A.3, for
example, scientists collaborating through the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
have provided policy makers with a series of graphs showing the increase in mean global
temperature, increase in sea levels, increase in concentrations of greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere, and increase in emissions of carbon dioxide from human activities from 1850
to recent times.

   Scientific knowledge is open to revision in light of new evidence. As discussed in sections
III.A, 2 and 3, development of knowledge about light from the Sun is a good example

                                                                                                                 IX. Making Connections to Educational Policies | 455
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

of this aspect of the nature of science. When Isaac Newton was exploring the nature of
light from the Sun in the late 1600's and early 1700's, he used a prism to disperse light
into its component colors and developed an explanation of rainbows. His knowledge
and explorations about light were limited to light that human eyes can detect. William
Herschel started with that perspective, exploring the heating effects of different colors of
the spectrum produced by shining sunlight through a prism. In 1800, he reported that a
thermometer placed outside the red end of the spectrum also warmed; he attributed this
to "invisible rays from the sun" that were "invested with a high power of heating bodies,
but with none of illuminating objects." Scientists have now observed that energy coming
to Earth from the Sun in this form of infrared radiation is almost as much as the energy
in light visible to human eyes. In 1801, Wilhem Ritter discovered ultraviolet radiation from
the Sun, invisible radiation beyond the violet part of the spectrum. Over the next 100
years, scientists from many different countries contributed to new knowledge about these
invisible forms of light. The spectrum now ranges from very large radio waves to tiny
gamma rays with "visible light that human eyes can see" being only a very small region of
the entire electromagnetic spectrum.

   Science models, laws, mechanisms and theories explain natural phenomena. As discussed
in section IV.B, for example, the natural greenhouse effect is an explanatory model of what
happens when light from the Sun shines on the Earth. As shown in Fig. 4.15, some of the
light from the Sun is immediately reflected back to space; some is absorbed and warms the
surface of the Earth; some gets emitted back out into the atmosphere as infrared radiation
and travels on out to space; some, however, is absorbed by greenhouse gases instead and
then re-emitted, with some of that infrared radiation traveling back toward the surface
of the Earth. The greenhouse effect explains a natural phenomenon, the warming of our
atmosphere. If more energy from the Sun enters than leaves the Earth, however, the global
mean temperature will continue to increase.

   Science is a way of knowing. As discussed in section V.A.3, the reports produced by
the many scientists participating in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) are examples that science knowledge is cumulative and many people from many
generations and nations have contributed to science knowledge. As noted above, the IPCC
Fifth Assessment's section on The Physical Science Basis included 1409 pages prepared by
Working Group 1 (https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg1/). This working group included a
team of 209 coordinating-lead authors and lead authors, 50 review editors, and more
than 600 contributing authors from all over the world. Their work was reviewed by 1089
expert reviewers and 38 governments. The result was a detailed presentation of the
consensus about evidence that underlies claims made about climate change by scientists

456 | IX. Making Connections to Educational Policies
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

from around the world. Scientists are now working on the IPCC Sixth Assessment, with
updated information published in 2021 about the physical science basis of claims about
global climate change ( https://www.ipcc.ch/assessment-report/ar6/ ).

   Scientific knowledge assumes an order and consistency in natural systems. In particular,
by the end of middle school, students should understand that science assumes that objects
and events in natural systems occur in coherent patterns that are understandable through
measurement and observation. As shown in Fig. 4.20, for example, observation of local
mean temperatures all over the world have been combined to show global patterns in
the changes in temperature from 1880 to the present, with the past five years being
the warmest of the last 140 years. As shown in Fig. 4.51, for example, the World Glacier
Monitoring Service is comparing the cumulative mass of ice change in glaciers all over the
world based on measurements from 1950 to the present in an effort to identify patterns in
what is happening to melting glaciers as the mean global temperature rises.

   Science is a human endeavor. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change is an
example of the way that scientists all over the world are collaborating with one another
to collect and analyze data that provide evidence on which to base understandings about
what is happening to the Earth's climate. The IPCC reports demonstrate that men and
women from different social, cultural, and ethnic backgrounds work as scientists and
engineers as well as that scientists and engineers rely on human qualities such as
persistence, precision, reasoning, logic, imagination and creativity.

   Science addresses questions about the natural and material world. By the end of middle
school, students should understand that science limits its explanations to systems that lend
themselves to observation and empirical evidence. As implied in section VIII, other aspects
of human endeavor also are necessary for individuals, communities, states, nations, and
international organizations to take action to address the climate change already underway
and predicted for the future. Examples include individuals committing to live more
sustainably based on analyzing their own carbon footprints, military experts publicly
advocating for ways to prepare for a crisis denied by many, and government officials
undertaking unpopular measures to reduce emissions. Such actions embodying the
human qualities of commitment and courage as well as curiosity can inspire hope for the
future of our planet.

                                                                                                                  IX. Making Connections to Educational Policies | 457
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

X. Exploring Physical Phenomena:
Summary of Equipment and Supplies
for Unit 4

458 | X. Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 4
           This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 4

When used                For instructor and      For each group of 3       For each student
                          demonstrations

Unit 4                                                                     U4H2 Diagnostic
Question 4.1                                                               question about
Diagnostic Questions                                                       climate change
about climate change

Question 4.4.                                    Thermal camera or         For each
Exploring "seeing"                               simulation of one via     pair of students:
with infrared                                    computer such as          Slinky to model wave
radiation                                        Mac Photo Booth:          motion (reviewing
                                                 Thermal                   Unit 3)

Question 4.7             2 plastic bins (shoe
Modeling the             size)
greenhouse effect:       2 rulers,
                         2 lamps,
                         2 moist towels,         If feasible, provide
                         2 thermometers          demo equipment for
                         (regular, liquid or     each group instead of
                         digital probes),        doing a demo
                         plastic wrap (to cover
                         1 bin)

Question 4.11                                    2 trays or one large
Modeling effect on                               tray like a cookie
rising sea levels of                             sheet,
melting ice on land                              2 frozen dinner trays,
vs in water                                      1 flat rock,
                                                 (If feasiable, blue) ice
                                                 cubes to put on rock
                                                 in 1 dinner tray,
                                                 (If feasible, blue)
                                                 water to fill trays to
                                                 the brim,
                                                 Paper towels if
                                                 needed

Question 4.14                                    Motion detector           U4H10 Graph
Modeling changing                                connected to laptop       Analogy:Tossed Ball
processes: falling ball                          (for example,
and melting glaciers                                                       U4H12a Table IV.4a
                                                 https://www.vernier.com/  Analogy between
                                                                           Moving and Melting
                                                 products/sens ors/        Phenomena Blank

                                                 motion-detectors/go-mot/    U4H12b Table IV.4b
                                                                           with Axes
                                                 ($119)
                                                                             U4H12c Table IV.4b
                                                 Basketball                Analogy between
                                                                           Moving and Melting
                                                                           Phenomena
                                                                           Completed

                         X. Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 4 | 459
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

460 | X. Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 4
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

UNIT 5: EXPLORING THE NATURE
OF ASTRONOMICAL PHENOMENA
IN THE CONTEXT OF THE SUN/
EARTH/MOON SYSTEM

Exploring the Nature of Astronomical Phenomena in the Context of the Sun/Earth/Moon
System
[latexpage]

                            Table of Contents

     I. Introduction ............................................................................................................................475
        II. Identifying Student Resources ...................................................................................... 477
              A. Documenting initial knowledge about the Sun, Moon, and stars ................. 477
                     Question 5.1 What do you already know about the Sun, Moon, and
                 stars? .............................................................................................................................. 477
              B. Noticing the sky .........................................................................................................479
                     Question 5.2 What do you remember about experiences when you have seen
                 the Sun, Moon, and/or stars? ................................................................................... 477
                     Question 5.3 How have people noticed and represented the Sun, Moon, and
                 stars in cultural stories, art and poetry? ...............................................................479
                    1. The Sun, Moon, and stars as represented in cultural stories ................... 480
                    2. The Sun, Moon, and stars represented in art ............................................. 485
                    3. The Sun, Moon, and stars represented in poetry ....................................... 486
                     Question 5.4 How early in life does a child start noticing the sky? .......... 488
                    4. A young child's observations of the Moon in the sky: Joseph's Moon ..... 488
                     Question 5.5 How do people talk together about the Moon? ........................ 489
                    5. Ways of speaking about the Moon in a first grade bilingual classroom 490
        III. Central Powerful Ideas Based on Evidence .............................................................. 491
              A. Observing the shape and location of the Sun and the Moon in the sky ..... 491

                                 Unit 5: Exploring the Nature of Astronomical Phenomena in the Context of the Sun/Earth/Moon System | 461
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                     Question 5.6 Where is the Sun in the sky right now? .................................... 491
                     Question 5.7 Where is the Moon in the sky right now? ................................ 493
                    1. Example of a student's initial observation of the sky ................................ 495
                    2. Nuances about observing the sky .................................................................. 496
              B. Observing the Sun ...................................................................................................497
                     Question 5.8 How does the Sun seem to move across the sky? ....................497
                    1. Observing where and when the Sun appears to rise and set. .................. 498
                    2. Observing a student gnomon's shadow during a field trip outside during a
                 sunny class session ..................................................................................................... 498
                    3. Observing a post gnomon's shadow outside during a sunny day ........... 502
                    4. Observing a paper clip or nail gnomon's shadow on a sunny day. ........ 502
                    5. Example of student work about how the Sun seems to move across the
                 sky. .................................................................................................................................. 504
                     Question 5.9 How big is the Sun? ...................................................................... 506
              C. Generating a question about the Moon and designing ways to explore this
           question .................................................................................................................................507
                     Question 5.10 What question about the Moon do you want to explore? How
                 will you do that? ..........................................................................................................507
                    1. Examples of a group's initial questions and findings about the Moon .. 508
                    2. Nuances about asking questions, making observations, and reporting
                 findings ............................................................................................................................ 511
                     Question 5.11 What does the Moon look like today? What will the Moon look
                 like over the next few days? ....................................................................................... 513
                     Question 5.12 What new question do you and your group members have
                 about the Moon? ........................................................................................................... 513
                     Question 5.13 How does the Moon seem to move across the sky during several
                 hours? during several days? ...................................................................................... 514
              D. Reviewing observations so far, making predictions, and generating
           questions ............................................................................................................................... 515
                     Question 5.14 What have you learned about the Moon from your
                 observations so far? ..................................................................................................... 515
                    1. Example of student work summarizing initial findings about the Sun and
                 the Moon ........................................................................................................................ 516
                    2. Nuances about observing the Moon ............................................................... 519
              E. Identifying patterns based on evidence .............................................................. 519

462 | Unit 5: Exploring the Nature of Astronomical Phenomena in the Context of the Sun/Earth/Moon System
                         This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

               Question 5.15 What pattern have you observed in the changing shape of the
           Moon? ............................................................................................................................. 519

               Question 5.16 What pattern have you observed in the angle formed by
           pointing arms at the Sun and Moon when both are visible? ............................ 520

               Question 5.17 How are the changing shape of the Moon and the changing
           angle related? ............................................................................................................... 520

               Question 5.18 What pattern have you observed in the relation of the lit side
           of the Moon and the location of the Sun? .............................................................. 520
        F. Making predictions for when a phase of the Moon will rise and set ............ 521

               Question 5.19 How can you predict when a phase of the Moon will rise,
           transit, and set? ........................................................................................................... 521

              1. Creating a Sun clock and using it to predict when the Moon will rise,
           transit, and set .............................................................................................................. 521

              2. Example of student work illustrating how to predict rising, transiting, and
           setting times for a first quarter Moon. ................................................................... 528

              3. Example of student work summarizing powerful ideas about the
           Moon .............................................................................................................................. 528

               Question 5.20 What is the duration of each phase of the Moon? ............... 535
               Question 5.21 What aspects of the nature of science have students
           experienced so far? ..................................................................................................... 535
   IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop Two Explanatory Models For Day And Night 537
               Question 5.22 Why does it get dark at night? ..................................................537
        A. Developing the fixed Earth, revolving Sun explanatory model for day and
     night .......................................................................................................................................537
        B. Developing the fixed Sun, rotating Earth explanatory model for day and
     night ...................................................................................................................................... 540
              1. Example of student work about developing two explanatory models for day
           and night ........................................................................................................................545
              2. Interpreting two different models for the same phenomenon .................545
   V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the
Moon ............................................................................................................................................. 550
               Question 5.23 Why does the Moon seem to have different shapes at different
           times? ............................................................................................................................ 550
        A. Reviewing central ideas about the relationship between the Sun and the
     Moon ...................................................................................................................................... 551
        B. Reading about a child's insights about the phases of the Moon ................... 551

                       Unit 5: Exploring the Nature of Astronomical Phenomena in the Context of the Sun/Earth/Moon System | 463
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

              C. Developing an explanatory model for the phases of the Moon ....................552
                    1. Examples of student work developing an explanatory model of the phases

                 of the Moon ................................................................................................................... 556
              D. Explaining a paradox based on detailed observations of the Moon ........... 559

                     Question 5.24 Why does the Moon seem to move east to west over several
                 hours but west to east over several days? ............................................................. 559

                    1. Example of student work resolving the paradox about the apparent
                 movements of the Moon ............................................................................................. 560

                    2. Acting out explanation of this paradox ........................................................ 563
              E. Considering other aspects of the Moon's motion .............................................567

                     Question 5.25 Does the Moon rotate while it revolves around the Earth? 567
                     Question 5.26 What do the phases of the Moon look like from other places on
                 the Earth? ..................................................................................................................... 568
              F. Developing representations of the Sun/Earth/Moon system as seen from
           space .......................................................................................................................................572
                     Question 5.27 How are the Sun, Earth, and Moon arranged in space? ......573
                    1. A child's spontaneous wonderings ..................................................................573
                    2. Exploring the arrangement of the Sun, Earth, and Moon in space ........573
                     Question 5.28 What are the relative sizes of the Sun and the Moon? ........575
                    3. Example of student work discussing the arrangement and relative sizes of
                 the Sun, and Moon. ......................................................................................................576
                     Question 5.29 How does the view of the phases of the Moon from Earth
                 compare with the view from above the solar system? ......................................... 577
                    4. Example of student work about views of the Moon from Earth and above
                 the solar system. ...........................................................................................................579
                    5. Nuances about viewing the phases of the Moon from above the solar
                 system ............................................................................................................................ 582
                     Question 5.30 Does the Moon revolve around the Earth in the clockwise or
                 counter-clockwise direction? ................................................................................... 586
              G. Considering what happens when the Sun, Earth, and Moon are arranged in a
           line. .........................................................................................................................................587
                     Question 5.31 What causes solar and lunar eclipses? ....................................587
                    1. Example of student work about the causes of lunar and solar eclipses . 589
              H. Exploring Internet resources about the Moon with a friend or family
           member ................................................................................................................................ 590

464 | Unit 5: Exploring the Nature of Astronomical Phenomena in the Context of the Sun/Earth/Moon System
                         This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

               Question 5.32 What Internet resources are available for teaching and
           learning about the Moon? ......................................................................................... 590

              1. Example of student work about engaging a friend or family member in
           learning about the phases of the Moon .................................................................... 591
        I. Pausing to review before taking the next step .................................................. 592

              1. Reviewing two explanatory models for day and night ............................. 592
              2. Reviewing an explanatory model for the phases of the Moon ................. 592
   VI. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence about the Sun, Earth,
and Stars ...................................................................................................................................... 595
        A. Noticing seasonal patterns evident in the night sky ....................................... 595
               Question 5.32 What seasonal patterns are evident in the constellations
           visible at night? ........................................................................................................... 595
        B. Noticing seasonal patterns in sunlight and shadows ..................................... 602
               Question 5.34 What seasonal patterns are evident in how the Sun seems to
           move across the sky? .................................................................................................. 602
              1. Interpreting changes in the Sun's maximum angular altitude ................ 603
              2. Interpreting data obtained from Internet resources .................................. 607
              3. Example of interpreting Internet data about changes in the Sun's apparent
           daily motion ................................................................................................................. 608
              4. Cultural examples of noticing changes in the Sun's maximum angular
           altitude ....................................................................................................................... 613
        C. Interpreting connections between seasonal differences in the Sun's apparent
     angular altitude and regional climates .......................................................................... 617
               Question 5.35 What is the connection between seasonal differences in the
           Sun's apparent angular altitude and seasonal temperatures and precipitation?
             .......................................................................................................................................... 617
   VII. Using Centrall Ideas Based on Evidence to Develop Two Explanatory Models for
Seasonal Patterns in the Constellations Visible at Night ................................................ 622
               Question 5.36 Why are there seasonal patterns in the constellations visible
           at night? ........................................................................................................................ 622
        A. Using a geocentric model to explain the seasonal patterns of constellations
     visible at night ..................................................................................................................... 622
        B. Using a heliocentric model to explain the seasonal patterns of the
     constellations visible at night ......................................................................................... 624
   VIII. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Earth's
Seasons ..........................................................................................................................................627

                       Unit 5: Exploring the Nature of Astronomical Phenomena in the Context of the Sun/Earth/Moon System | 465
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

     A. Explaining the Earth's seasons with a heliocentric model .............................627
            Question 5.37 Why is it hot in the summer and cold in the winter? ..........627

IX. Estimating the Tilt of the Earth .................................................................................. 633
     A. Developing and using mathematical representations to estimate the tilt of

  the Earth's axis of rotation ............................................................................................... 633
            Question 5.38 How can one estimate the tilt of the Earth's axis of

        rotation? ....................................................................................................................... 633
           1. Envisioning the tilt of the Earth's axis of rotation ..................................... 634
           2. Estimating the tilt of the Earth's axis of rotation ..................................... 635
           3. Nuances in developing and using mathematical representations to

        estimate the Earth's axis of rotation ....................................................................... 639
           4. Estimating latitude and maximum angular altitude of the Sun during an

        equinox ........................................................................................................................... 641
            Question 5.39 Why does a location's latitude, angle = 90° - angle e? 641
           5. Deriving the tilt of the Earth in terms of the difference between the

        maximum angular altitudes of the Sun during the summer solstice, s, and
        equinox,e ..................................................................................................................... 642

            Question 5.40 Why does the tilt, angle  = angle s at summer solstice - angle
        e at equinox? .............................................................................................................. 642

           6. Discussing the effect of the tilt of the Earth at several latitudes .............647
            Question 5.41 What are the Tropic of Cancer, Arctic Circle, and Antarctic
        Circle? .............................................................................................................................647
           7. Deriving the tilt of the Earth in terms of the difference between the
        maximum angular altitudes of the Sun during an equinox, e, and during the
        winter solstice, w ...................................................................................................... 649
            Question 5.42 Why does the tilt, angle  = angle e at equinox - angle w at
        winter solstice? ........................................................................................................... 649
           8. Developing and using a mathematical representation to estimate the
        Earth's tilt if a location's latitude is not known ..................................................... 651

Question 5.43 Why does the tilt,                                                                          ? ..... 651

   9. Discussing additional effects of the tilt of the Earth's axis on several
latitudes ......................................................................................................................... 652

   Question 5.44 What happens at the Tropic of Capricorn, Antarctic Circle,
and Arctic Circle? ....................................................................................................... 652

466 | Unit 5: Exploring the Nature of Astronomical Phenomena in the Context of the Sun/Earth/Moon System
                         This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   X. Developing and Using a Mathematical Representation to Estimate an Intriguing
Quantity ....................................................................................................................................... 654

        A. Visualizing relationships among the Sun, Earth, and Moon through
     actions ................................................................................................................................... 654

               Question 5.45 How are the motions of the Moon revolving around the
           Earth related to the motions of the Earth revolving around the Sun? ........... 654

              1. Acting out the simultaneous motions of the Earth and the Moon .......... 654
              2. Nuances in acting out the simultaneous motions of the Earth and the
           Moon .............................................................................................................................. 655
        B. Visualizing by drawing a diagram and thinking conceptually about the
     situation ................................................................................................................................ 658
               Question 5.46 When you are seeing a third quarter Moon, you are looking at
           the "place in space" where you and everyone else on Earth will soon "be"! How
           soon will you get "there"? ......................................................................................... 658
              1. Drawing a diagram that represents the situation and considering relevant
           powerful ideas .............................................................................................................. 659
              2. Example of student work about the simultaneous motions of the Earth and
           Moon ............................................................................................................................... 661
              3. Nuances about working on this question .................................................... 666
   XI. Pondering Additional Issues ........................................................................................ 669
        A. Reviewing understandings about the Sun, Earth, Moon, and Stars ............ 669
        B. Understanding motion ............................................................................................ 671
               Question 5.47 How are the Moon and the Earth moving? ............................. 671
        C. Exploring forces .......................................................................................................673
               Question 5.48 What keeps the Moon and the Earth revolving in their
           orbits? .............................................................................................................................673
               Question 5.49 If the Earth pulls on the Moon, does the Moon pull on the
           Earth? .............................................................................................................................675
        D. Developing and using mathematical representations of gravitational
     forces ......................................................................................................................................678
               Question 5.50 What quantities determine the magnitude of gravitational
           forces? .............................................................................................................................678
        E. Explaining the ocean's tides ...................................................................................679
               Question 5.51 What effect does the gravitational force by the Moon have on
           the Earth? ......................................................................................................................679

                        Unit 5: Exploring the Nature of Astronomical Phenomena in the Context of the Sun/Earth/Moon System | 467
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                     Question 5.52 How do gravitational forces by the Moon and by the Sun on
                 the Earth's oceans affect the tides? ........................................................................ 686
              F. Exploring falling objects .......................................................................................... 688

                     Question 5.53 What happens when heavy and light objects are dropped from
                 the same height at the same time? .......................................................................... 688

                    1. Documenting initial knowledge about falling objects ................................ 688
                    2. Role playing Galileo's dialogue about falling objects .................................. 688
                    3. Modeling Galileo's exploration of falling objects .......................................... 691
                     Question 5.54 Why do light and heavy objects fall the way they do? ........ 692
                     Question 5.55 What happens when heavy and light objects drop from the
                 same height at the same time on the moon? ..............................................................0
                    4. Interpreting first grade students' thoughts about falling objects ............ 696
                     Question 5.56 What ideas do first grade students have about falling
                 objects? .......................................................................................................................... 696
        XII. Making Connections to Educational Policies ...................................................... 698
                     Question 5.57 What are the current standards for teaching science at
                 various grade levels where you live? ...................................................................... 698
                     Question 5.58 How would you use your community's standards for teaching
                 science to engage children in learning about astronomical phenomena within
                 the Sun/Earth/Moon system? .....................................................................................0
               A. Learning more about the US Next Generation Science Standards ............... 698
              B. Reflecting upon watching the sky ........................................................................ 698
              C. Making connections to the NGSS understandings about the nature of
           science .................................................................................................................................. 698
                     Question 5.59 What have you learned about science learning and teaching
                 from your explorations in this unit? .......................................................................705
         XIII. Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit
     5 ...................................................................................................................................................... 706

                                  Figures

          FIG. 5.1 Big Dipper, Little Dipper, and Polaris in the night sky. ..................................0
          FIG. 5.2 Ursa Major (Great Bear) and Ursa Minor (Little Bear) constellations. .......0

468 | Unit 5: Exploring the Nature of Astronomical Phenomena in the Context of the Sun/Earth/Moon System
                     This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

FIG. 5.3 O jibwe constellations of the Fisher and the Loon. .........................................0
FIG. 5.4 The Sower at Sunset by Vincent van Gogh, 1888..............................................0
FIG. 5.5 The Starry Night by Vincent van Gogh, 1889. .....................................................0
FIG. 5.6 Format for recording an observation of the sky......................................... 493
FIG. 5.7 Student's first observation of the sky with predictions for later in the
day............................................................................................................................................. 496
FIG. 5.8 Students drawing a group member's shadow on the pavement. ................0
FIG. 5.9 Right triangle formed by gnomon, its shadow, and rays from the
Sun. ............................................................................................................................................ 501
FIG. 5.10 Children marking tip of a pole's shadow on the playground. .....................0
FIG. 5.11 Children marking the tip of a nail's shadow on a shadow board. ...............0
FIG. 5.12 Student's sketch of shadow plot with a paper clip gnomon. ................. 504
FIG. 5.13 Sketch of group member's shadow on pavement near beginning and end
of class. .................................................................................................................................... 505
FIG. 5.14 Two sky journal observations of the Moon separated by several
days........................................................................................................................................... 509
FIG. 5.15 Another set of two sky journal observations of the Moon separated by
several days. ................................................................................................................................0
FIG. 5.16 Calendar template for keeping track of the next set of Sun and Moon
observations. ........................................................................................................................... 516
FIG. 5.17 A student's observations for April 17-23, 2016. .............................................517
FIG. 5.18 Model of a Sun Clock with rising, transiting, and setting positions. ....522
FIG. 5.19 Model of a Sun clock with times associated with the Sun's position in
the sky. ......................................................................................................................................523
FIG. 5.20 Predicting rising, transiting, and setting times for a 1st quarter
Moon. ....................................................................................................................................... 528
FIG. 5.21. Student's observations of the Moon, April 17-28, 2016. ........................... 529
FIG. 5.22 Student's entries into a table summarizing findings about the phases of
the Moon. ................................................................................................................................ 530
FIG. 5.23 Student's sketch for a sun clock. .................................................................. 532
FIG. 5.24 Fixed Earth, revolving Sun explanatory model for day and night........ 538
FIG. 5.25 Fixed Sun, rotating Earth explanatory model for day and night.......... 540
FIG. 5.26 Foucault pendulum. ..........................................................................................542
FIG. 5.27 Example wind patterns in the northern and southern hemispheres...544
FIG. 5.28 Student's entries in a table about developing explanatory models for
day and night.......................................................................................................................... 546

                  Unit 5: Exploring the Nature of Astronomical Phenomena in the Context of the Sun/Earth/Moon System | 469
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

          FIG. 5.29 Student using a ball on a stick to model the waxing phases of the
         Moon. ........................................................................................................................................557
          FIG. 5.30 Student using a ball on a stick to model the waning phases of the
         Moon. ....................................................................................................................................... 558
          FIG. 5.31 Student sketch of 1st quarter moon appearing to move east to west
         during several hours.............................................................................................................. 561
          FIG. 5.32 Student sketch of subsequent phases appearing to move west to east
         over many days. ...................................................................................................................... 561
          FIG. 5.33 Modeling a first quarter moon (as seen in the northern
         hemisphere)............................................................................................................................ 563
          FIG. 5.34 Modeling the apparent east to west motion of the Moon due to the
         rotation of the Earth ............................................................................................................ 564
          FIG. 5.35 Globes of the Earth showing Australia and the United States. .................0
          FIG. 5.36 Observations of the waxing crescent moon in Australia ........................570
          FIG. 5.37 Observations of the waxing crescent moon in Seattle ............................570
          FIG. 5.38 Three possible arrangements of the Sun, Moon, and Earth in space..574
          FIG. 5.39 Student holding arms at a right angle while holding out ball in one hand
         and touching lamp with other hand.................................................................................. 185
          FIG. 5.40 Creating the boxes for Table V.4 by folding a sheet of paper in half four
         times.......................................................................................................................................... 577
          FIG. 5.41 Format for comparing view from Earth with view from above the solar
         system. ..........................................................................................................................................0
          FIG. 5.42 Student table presenting views of waxing phases from Earth and above
         solar system............................................................................................................................ 580
          FIG. 5.43 Student table presenting views of waning phases from Earth and from
         above solar System ................................................................................................................ 581
          FIG. 5.44 Moon orbit from above the solar system with adjacent table showing
         phases on Earth. .................................................................................................................... 583
          FIG. 5.45 Confusing combined diagram of the Moon's phases viewed from Earth
         and from above the solar system. ..................................................................................... 584
          FIG. 5.46 View of phases of the moon from Earth and above the solar system that
         illustrates how much of the lit side of the Moon can be seen from Earth. ............ 584
          FIG. 5.47 Tilted orbit of the Moon around the Earth ................................................ 588
          FIG. 5.48 Student diagram for a lunar eclipse ............................................................ 589
          FIG. 5.49 Student diagram for a solar eclipse............................................................. 590
          FIG. 5.50 Seasonal constellations as viewed from the northern hemisphere on

470 | Unit 5: Exploring the Nature of Astronomical Phenomena in the Context of the Sun/Earth/Moon System
                     This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Earth. .............................................................................................................................................0
FIG. 5.51 Stars forming the constellations Leo the Lion and Mishi Bizhiw, the
Great Panther..............................................................................................................................0
FIG. 5.52 Stars forming the constellations Corona Borealis and Hercules as well
as Madoodiswan and Noodeshin Bemaadizid.......................................................................0
FIG. 5.53 Stars forming the constellations Cygnus and Pegasus and Ajiljaak and
Mooz...............................................................................................................................................0
FIG. 5.54 Stars forming the constellations Orion, the hunter, and
Biboonkeonini. .............................................................................................................................0
FIG. 5.55 Angular altitude of the Sun in the sky......................................................... 604
FIG. 5.9 Right triangle formed by gnomon, its shadow, and rays from the Sun.
(repeated) ................................................................................................................................ 605
FIG. 5.56 Predictions for rising, transiting, and setting of the Sun on the spring
equinox in Corvallis. ............................................................................................................. 609
FIG. 5.57 Predictions for rising, transiting, and setting of the Sun on the summer
solstice in Corvallis................................................................................................................610
FIG. 5.58 Prediction for rising, transiting, and setting of the Sun on the autumn
equinox in Corvallis ...............................................................................................................610
FIG. 5.59 Predictions for rising, transiting, and setting of the Sun on winter
solstice in Corvallis.................................................................................................................611
FIG. 5.60 Differences in maximum angular altitude  of the Sun and lengths of
shortest shadows during the seasons............................................................................... 612
FIG. 5.61 Standing stone circle at the University of Massachusetts Amherst. ........0
FIG. 5.62 Standing stone circle in an astronomical park near Spanish Peaks,
Colorado .......................................................................................................................................0
FIG. 5.63 One hour exposure to Polaris and the apparent movement of stars
around the Earth. ................................................................................................................... 616
FIG. 5.64 Six month exposure to the apparent daily path of the Sun across the sky
from the winter to summer solstices via a pinhole camera at Keppel Henge,
Ontario Canada....................................................................................................................... 617
FIG. 5.65 Average monthly temperature and precipitation for Corvallis,
Oregon ...................................................................................................................................... 618
FIG. 5.66 Model of a celestial sphere centered on the Earth ......................................0
FIG. 5.67 Illustration of the zodiac on a celestial sphere in Epitome of the
Almagest, 1496 ........................................................................................................................ 624
FIG. 5.68 Drawings of the orbit of the Earth around the Sun from two

                   Unit 5: Exploring the Nature of Astronomical Phenomena in the Context of the Sun/Earth/Moon System | 471
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

         perspectives ........................................................................................................................... 626
          FIG. 5.69 Model of the Earth tilted on its axis while revolving counter-clockwise
         around the Sun with seasons designated for the northern hemisphere.................627
          FIG. 5.70 Tilt of the Earth's axis of rotation with respect to the vertical to the
         plane of its orbit. ................................................................................................................... 634
          FIG. 5.71 Maximum angular altitudes of the Sun formed by a gnomon's shadows
         and rays of light from the Sun during the solstices and equinox ............................. 635
          FIG. 5.72 Geometrical relationships among the tilt of the Earth  and the
         maximum angular altitude of the Sun at the summer solstice, s, equinox, e, and
         winter solstice, w. ............................................................................................................... 638
          FIG. 5.73 Left: Earth in its orbit around the Sun as viewed from above, with tilt to
         the left
         Right: Earth in its orbit around the Sun as viewed from the side, with tilt to the
         right. ..............................................................................................................................................0
          Fig. 5.74 Diagram representing the Sun's rays shining on the Earth during the
         spring equinox. ....................................................................................................................... 641
          FIG 5.75 Cross-section of orbiting Earth with vertical and horizontal axes. ..... 643
          Fig. 5.76 Cross-section of a spherical Earth whose axis of rotation is tilted at
         angle  (epsilon) with respect to the vertical to the plane of the Earth's orbit around
         the Sun..................................................................................................................................... 644
          FIG. 5.77 Angle  (phi) represents the latitude of a point with respect to a point
         on the equator........................................................................................................................ 645
          FIG. 5.78 Rays from the Sun and the gnomon create its shortest shadow at noon
         during the summer solstice in the northern hemisphere. ......................................... 646
          FIG. 5.79 Tropic of Cancer, Arctic Circle and Antarctic Circle during the June
         solstice. .........................................................................................................................................0
          FIG. 5.80 Diagram for the winter solstice at latitude  in the northern
         hemisphere. ............................................................................................................................ 650
          FIG. 5.81 Tropic of Capricorn, Antarctic Circle and the Arctic Circle during the
         December solstice. ............................................................................................................... 653
          FIG. 5.82 Initial arrangements for students modeling the simultaneous motions
         of the Moon and Earth......................................................................................................... 656
          FIG. 5.83 Final arrangement in the northern hemisphere for students modeling
         the simultaneous motions of the Moon and Earth....................................................... 656
          FIG. 5.84 Final arrangement in the southern hemisphere for students modeling
         the simultaneous motions of the Moon and Earth....................................................... 658

472 | Unit 5: Exploring the Nature of Astronomical Phenomena in the Context of the Sun/Earth/Moon System
                     This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

FIG. 5.85 Student sketches of view of 3rd quarter Moon from Earth and from
space.......................................................................................................................................... 661
FIG. 5.86 Student's estimate of time needed for the Earth to move to the "place in
space" where a third quarter Moon "is" now. ................................................................ 663
FIG. 5.87 Student's check on the reasonableness of the calculated answer. ...... 665
FIG. 5.88 Another student's sketches for a third quarter moon as seen from Earth
and space. ............................................................................................................................... 666
FIG. 5.89 Front piece of Newton's Principia. ...............................................................672
FIG. 5.90 Two types of spring scales. ................................................................................0
FIG. 5.91 Two spring scales are hooked together and pulled apart horizontally....0
FIG. 5.92 Predictions for tides at Yaquina Coast Guard Station in Newport for
March 2019.............................................................................................................................. 680
Fig. 5.93 Phases of the Moon predicted for March 2019 in Oregon in the northern
hemisphere. .................................................................................................................................0
Fig. 5.94 Arrangements of Sun, Earth, and Moon associated with maximum high
and low tides. ......................................................................................................................... 686
Fig. 5.95 Arrangements of Sun, Earth, and Moon associated with somewhat high
and low tides. ..........................................................................................................................687
Fig. 5.96 Possible paths of a "falling object" shot out of a canon at various
velocities. ................................................................................................................................ 693

                             Tables

Table V.1 Summarizing findings about the phases of the Moon ............................525
Table V.2 Central Ideas about the Sun and the Moon ...............................................527
Table V.3 Developing two explanatory models for day and night ..........................545
Table V.4 Developing an explanatory model for the Phases of the Moon .......... 555
Table V.5 Explaining a paradox based on detailed observations of the Moon .. 560
Table V.6 Comparison of Views from Earth and Space .................................................0
Table V.7 Additional insights about the phases of the Moon ...................................579
Table V.8 Explaining eclipses of the Sun and Moon.................................................. 589
Table V.9 Seasonal differences in Visible Stars .......................................................... 602
Table V.10 Seasonal differences in Shadow Plots ...................................................... 606
Table V.11 Solar data for Corvallis, Oregon, during March 2019 equinoxes and

                   Unit 5: Exploring the Nature of Astronomical Phenomena in the Context of the Sun/Earth/Moon System | 473
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

         solstices .................................................................................................................................... 612
          Table V.12 Developing central ideas about seasonal differences in the details of
         the Sun's apparent daily motion and in regional climates.......................................... 620
          Table V.13 Developing an Explanatory Model for the Earth's Seasons.................. 631
          Table V.14 Predicted high and low tides during the predicted dates of new, 1st
         quarter, full, and third quarter phases of the Moon during March 2019 at the
         Yaquina Coast Guard Station, in Newport, Oregon ..........................................................0
          Table V.15 Average predicted high and low tides during the predicted new, 1st
         quarter, full, and third quarter phases of the Moon during March 2019 at the
         Yaquina Coast Guard Station, in Newport, Oregon ..........................................................0
          Table V.16 Developing additional central ideas about the Sun/Earth/Moon
         system ...................................................................................................................................... 700
          Table V.17 Dimensions of Next Generation Science Standards Relevant to
         Exploration of Moon Phases....................................................................................................0

474 | Unit 5: Exploring the Nature of Astronomical Phenomena in the Context of the Sun/Earth/Moon System
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

I. Introduction

   The theme for this course is what happens when light from the Sun shines on the Earth?
Although labeled the fifth unit, these explorations extend throughout the course rather
than occurring only near the end. While exploring these phenomena, you will be:

  · identifying resources such as what you already may have seen in the sky, heard in
      songs, and studied in school

  · developing central ideas based on evidence that you record in systematic observations
      of the sky

  · explaining intriguing phenomena such as why the moon seems to change shape and
      size

  · developing mathematical representations of the arrangement of the Sun/Earth/
      Moon system

  · using mathematical representations to estimate a quantity of interest such as how
      soon Earth will be where you are seeing the third quarter Moon `is' right now in
      space and

  · making connections to educational policy, such as the Next Generation Science
      Standards (NGSS Lead States, 2013), the science standards adopted by many US
      departments of education.

   While learning about the Sun and the Moon, you also will be learning about learning
processes as you summarize and reflect upon your explorations. Discussions in class
and assignments at home will include integrating science and literacy learning, such as
speaking clearly, listening closely, writing coherently, reading with comprehension, and
creating and critiquing media.

   The main sections present questions with suggestions for exploring topics and for
writing reflections about your findings. Text in gray font indicates that these are
suggestions; you may think of other ways to explore the topic. Asking your own questions
as well as those posed here will enhance learning both about physics and about learning.
Check with your instructor if you choose to devise an alternative approach.

   Keeping track of what one is doing and thinking is important. In this course, use a
template for a physics notebook page on which to record your notes during class. The
physics notebook page can help you remember your thoughts before, during, and after an

                                                                                                                                                               I. Introduction | 475
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

exploration. An experienced elementary teacher, Adam Devittt, designed this notebook
page to mirror the structure of before, during, and after reading strategies:

   Before starting your exploration, think about and discuss with your group members
what you know already about the topic, how you plan to conduct the exploration, and
what you think you might find out.

   During your exploration, record what is happening, what you are observing, and what
you are thinking about what you are observing. Include sketches of equipment and
observations. Note any words that are new and their definitions.

   After your exploration, record any central ideas that have emerged from your
observations and discussions. Also note the evidence on which you have based these ideas.
State explicitly how the evidence is relevant and supports the claims you are making in
stating the ideas. Also explain why this result is important. Then write a reflection about
whatever you want to remember about this experience. In addition, briefly state what you
are still wondering in this context.

   After class, use your physics notebook pages and any handouts to write a summary of
your exploration and findings. Writing such a summary after every class is a good way to
prepare for the midterm and final examinations.

   Next, to be sure you have understood the physics involved, read this text and some
examples of student work. The student authors first wrote drafts, received feedback for
ways to enhance content and clarity, and submitted these final versions. Also read about
some nuances to be aware of in these contexts.

   You may also find helpful students' reflections about teaching friends and/or family
members about what they had just learned in class, historical information about ways
knowledge about the topic developed, and some relevant aspects of the nature of science
in the context of the topic explored. These sections of the text may broaden your
understanding of science and of science learning and teaching.

476 | I. Introduction
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

II. Identifying Student Resources

   You already know a lot about the Sun, Moon, and the stars from everyday experiences
being outside and going to school. You also likely have absorbed information informally
from songs, newspapers, books, and the Internet. These are resources on which to build a
deeper understanding through systematic explorations in this class.

A. Documenting initial knowledge about the Sun, Moon, and
stars

         Question 5.1 What do you already know about the Sun, Moon, and stars?

   Document your initial knowledge about the Sun, Moon, and stars by responding to the
following diagnostic questions. Your responses will not be graded. You will answer the
same questions again near the end of the unit, compare initial and current responses,
and write a reflection about changes in your understandings and about the ways these
occurred.

   Name_____________________________ Date___________
                          Diagnostic Questions about the Sun, Moon, and Stars

   Why does it get dark at night?

   Why is it cold in the winter and hot in the summer?

   Why does the moon seem to have different shapes at different times?

                                                                                                                                      II. Identifying Student Resources | 477
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

What do you already know about the Sun?

What questions do you have about the Sun?

What do you already know about the Moon?

What questions do you have about the Moon?

What do you already know about the stars?

What questions do you have about the stars?

                          Diagnostic Questions: Science & Science Learning
How would you define a "scientific explanation"?

How would you define "inquiry approaches to learning and teaching"?

To what extent are you interested in learning science?

Not interested in  1                     2  3  4  5     Interested in
                                                        learning science
learning science

478 | II. Identifying Student Resources
          This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Comment:

To what extent are you interested in teaching science?

Not interested in  1  2  3  4  5                        Interested in
                                                        teaching science
teaching science

Comment:

B. Noticing the sky

   The key to learning about the sky is to look up whenever outside! Frequently! You can
draw on resources from your own experiences, from those interpreted in cultural stories,
art, and poetry, and from observations you and companions make, even young children,
when noticing and talking about the Moon.

   Question 5.2 What do you remember about experiences when you have seen the Sun,
                                      Moon, and/or stars?

  · Talk with your group members about some of your experiences in watching a sunrise
      or sunset, seeing the Moon, and/or noticing the stars.

  · What did you learn from these experiences?
  · How might you increase how often you notice the sky during this course?

Question 5.3 How have people noticed and represented the Sun, Moon, and stars in cultural
                                    stories, art, and poetry?

   Story-tellers from many cultures as well as artists and poets have offered intriguing
interpretations of what they were seeing.

                                                                                                                                      II. Identifying Student Resources | 479
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

1. The Sun, Moon, and stars as represented in cultural stories

People from many cultures around the world have told stories about the Sun, Moon,
and stars (see: http://solar-center.stanford.edu/folklore/Solar-Folklore.pdf). They have
observed and pondered changes in where the Sun seems to rise and set, how high
the Sun seems to arc across the sky, and how long daylight or darkness lasts. They
also have wondered why the Moon seems to change its shape as well as when and
where one sees the Moon with respect to the Sun. Also puzzling has been why the stars
seem to be arranged the way they are and how they seem to move. People all over
the Earth have watched and wondered about such questions (https://www.lpi.usra.edu/
planetary_news/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/
Multicultural_Astronomy_2013_v7.1.pdf ).

   People also have "seen" a variety of creatures residing on the full Moon. These have
included a human face, a man collecting firewood, a woman and child, a rabbit, a princess,
a toad and a tree (see: https://www.theatlantic.com/science/archive/2018/07/the-
man-in-the-moon-or-the-rabbit-or-toad-or-or-or/563450/ ).

   In addition, people have envisioned many objects and creatures outlined by the stars
(See: https://www.aavso.org/sites/default/files/education/vsa/Chapter3.pdf). Where
we live in the northern hemisphere, for example, stars that seem to outline the shape of
ladles, the Big Dipper and the Little Dipper, are often visible even in a city sky. As shown
in Fig. 5.1, two stars forming part of the cup of the Big Dipper seem to point to a star at the
end of the handle in the Little Dipper. This star, known as the North Star, does not seem
to move whereas other stars seem to revolve around it during the night.

480 | II. Identifying Student Resources
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                            Fig. 5.1 Big Dipper, Little Dipper, and the North Star in the
                            northern sky. Modified from https://commons.wikimedia.org/
                            wiki/File:Constellation_(PSF).png Archives of Pearson Scott
                            Foresman [CC 0]

The stars forming the dippers are contained within the constellations known as Ursa
Major (Great Bear) and Ursa Minor (Little Bear) as shown in Fig. 5.2. Ursa is the Latin
word for bear. People of many cultures have associated various animals with these visual
patterns of stars and told stories about them (see: https://www.constellation-guide.com/
constellation-list/ursa-major-constellation/ ).

   The North Star also is called Polaris, from the Latin Stella Polaris or Pole Star
(https://www.lpi.usra.edu/education/skytellers/polaris/). As seen from Earth, this star
lies almost directly above the Earth's north pole and appears to be motionless as the other
stars seem to revolve around it during the night.

                                                                                                                                      II. Identifying Student Resources | 481
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                      FIG. 5.2 Ursa Major (Great Bear) and Ursa Minor (Little Bear)
                      constellations. Modified from https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
                      File:Dipper_constellations_(PSF).png Archives of Pearson Scott
                      Foresman [CC 0]

These star patterns also appear in Native American constellations such as those shown in
the O jibwe Sky Star Map at https://web.stcloudstate.edu/aslee/OJIBWEMAP/
home.html. The stars that look like the Big Dipper and Little Dipper in Fig. 5.1 and part of
Ursa Major and Ursa Minor in Fig. 5.2 form part of the O jibwe constellations Ojiig, the
Fisher, and Manng, the Loon (See: https://web.stcloudstate.edu/aslee/OJIBWEMAP/
O jibweConstellationGuide.pdf).
The big star in the tail of Maang represents Giwedin'anung, a star around which the other
constellations appear to revolve. The O jibwe constellations shown in the O jibwe Sky Star
Map are superimposed on constellations based on myths from ancient Greek and Roman
times such as those shown in Fig. 5.3.

482 | II. Identifying Student Resources
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Fig. 5.3 Star chart with constellations based on Greek and Roman myths. Ursa Major and Ursa Minor
are shown near the middle of this star chart. A dotted line from the pointer stars in Ursa Major points
toward Polaris. From A Beginner's Star Book by Kelvin McKready (G. P. Putnam's Sons, New York, 1912,
p. 68). www.flickr.com/photos/internetarchivebookimages/14775905211

If you live in the northern hemisphere, on a clear night see if you can find the Big Dipper,
Little Dipper and the North Star. Can you also see Ursa Major, follow this Great Bear's
pointer stars to Polaris, and recognize the Little Bear, Ursa Minor? If you can watch for
several hours, you can see the other stars appear to revolve around a star that seems to
be motionless as shown in Fig. 5.4.

                                                                                                                                     II. Identifying Student Resources | 483
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                 FIG. 5.4 The stars appear to revolve around a star that seems to be motionless
                 in the northern sky. Modified from photograph by Steve Ryan, Groveland, CA.
                 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
                 File:Steve_Ryan_-_Stars_around_Polaris_-_Day_62_(by-sa).jpg [CC 2.0]

If you live in the southern hemisphere, there is no star in the sky that seems motionless
during the night. You can infer where such a point would be, however, by using two bright
stars to envision the location of the third apex of an equilateral triangle as shown in
https://centralaustralianbushwalkers.files.wordpress.com/2014/12/skymap-south-by-
stars-pdf.jpg. You can see the apparent motion of constellations around a point in the sky
if you can watch over several hours. On a clear night, also see if you can find the
Southern Cross, Centaurus the Centaur with Alpha Centauri, a star system just 4.37 light
years away as well as Omega Centauri, a globular cluster, and other celestial sights.
(See; https://www.skyandtelescope.com/observing/beginners-guide-to-the-southern-
hemisphere-sky/).

484 | II. Identifying Student Resources
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

2. The Sun, Moon, and stars represented in art

Many artists have noticed and portrayed the Sun, Moon, and stars. The Dutch artist
Vincent Van Gogh, for example, included them in many paintings such as The Sower at
Sunset in 1888 and The Starry Night in 1889 as shown in Fig. 5.5 and Fig. 5.6.

                                      Fig 5.5 The Sower by Vincent van Gogh, 1888.
                                      [Public domain]
                                      https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
                                      File:The_Sower.jpg

                                                                                                                                     II. Identifying Student Resources | 485
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                      Fig 5.6 The Starry Night by Vincent van Gogh,
                                      1889. [Public domain]
                                      https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
                                      File:Vincent_van_Gogh_Starry_Night.jpg

The dominant "star" to the lower right of the cypress tree in Fig. 5.6 has been identified as
in an appropriate location to represent the planet Venus at the time the artist was making
this painting.

3. The Sun, Moon, and stars represented in poetry

   Many poems about the Sun, Moon, and stars reflect primarily upon the writer's
emotions, situation, and surroundings. Several poets, however, have described physical
aspects of ways that the Sun, Moon, and stars appear to move and/or look.

   Robert Louis Stevenson, for example, described the Sun's apparent motion around the
Earth as it seems to create on-going experiences of morning after morning. Children on
one side of the Earth are getting up and playing while those on the other side of the Earth
are going to bed.

                                  The Sun Travels By Robert Louis Stevenson
                                            The Sun is not a-bed, when I
                                           At night upon my pillow lie;

                                    Still round the earth his way he takes,
                                      And morning after morning makes.
                                       While here at home, in shining day,

486 | II. Identifying Student Resources
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                       We round the sunny garden play,
                                         Each little Indian sleepy-head
                                         Is being kissed and put to bed.
                                          And when at eve I rise from tea,

                                     Day dawns beyond the Atlantic Sea;
                                        And all the children in the West
                                       Are getting up and being dressed.

                        A Child's Garden of Verses, New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1905, p. 35.
              http://www.gutenberg.org/files/25609/25609-h/25609-h.htm#THE_SUN_TRAVELS/

   In a three-line poem, Winter Moon, Langston Hughes commented briefly upon the
shape of a crescent moon (see: https://www.worldcat.org/title/dream-keeper-and-
other-poems/oclc/36310693/viewport), in The Dream Keepers and Other
Poems published by Alfred A. Knopf, Inc. in 1932, page 3). In the poem Invention, Billy
Collins offered a whimsical description of the Moon's changing phases. (see:
https://www.theatlantic.com/past/docs/unbound/poetry/antholog/collins/
invent.htm, published in the Atlantic Monthly in December, 1998, Volume 282, No. 6, page
92).

   A poem by Jane Taylor, set to the French tune Ah! vous dirai-je, maman, has been sung
as a lullaby for more than two centuries.

                                                          The Star
                                                    By Jane Taylor
                                             Twinkle, twinkle little star,
                                           How I wonder what you are!
                                           Up above the world so high,
                                            Like a diamond in the sky.
                                           When this blazing sun is gone,
                                         When he nothing shines upon,
                                        Then you show your little light,
                                     Twinkle, twinkle, through the night.
                                            Then the traveler in the dark
                                         Thanks you for your tiny spark;
                                         He could not see where to go,
                                             If you did not twinkle so.
                                           In the dark blue sky you keep,

                                                                                                                                      II. Identifying Student Resources | 487
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                    And often through my curtains peep,
                                          For you never shut your eye,
                                              Till the sun is in the sky.
                                           As your bright and tiny spark,
                                         Lights the traveler in the dark,

                                       Though I know not what you are,
                                           Twinkle, twinkle, little star.

                                    Rhymes for the Nursery, London: Darton and Harvey, 1806
              https://www.bl.uk/collection-items/first-publication-of-twinkle-twinkle-little-star/

   This lullaby can be thought of as introducing nascent scientific processes: noticing a
phenomenon of interest (twinkle, twinkle, little star), questioning (how I wonder what you
are), observing (up above the world so high) and starting to think about what one is seeing
by making an analogy (like a diamond in the sky). The poem also correlates occurrences
(when this blazing sun is gone...then you show your little light...; for you never shut your
eye, till the sun is in the sky), and ponders what is not yet understood (though I know not
what you are) while celebrating again the phenomenon observed (twinkle, twinkle, little
star).

              Question 5.4 How early in life does a child start noticing the sky?

4. A young child's observations of the Moon in the sky: Joseph's Moon

   Young children often notice what is happening in the sky, as described by a graduate
student below:

              Joseph is my nephew. At the time of this story, he was about 17 months old...My
           father often takes care of Joseph and I think I was talking about our moon
           assignments. My father said that he had recently taken Joseph to the nearby park
           one afternoon and that Joseph had pointed and said, "Moo." My father said he was
           looking for a cow (not a likely event for this suburban park!)...

              My father finally realized that Joseph was pointing at the sky and that yes indeed
           there was a moon in the daytime sky. (When referring to the moon at this time,
           Joseph would point and say, "Moo.") [Hey! Could this be a relationship between the
           moon and the cow who jumped over it??]

488 | II. Identifying Student Resources
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

              At this point, my sister told a similar story. When Joseph pointed into the daytime
           sky and said, "Moo," my sister said something like, "There's no moon in the sky, it's
           daytime." Joseph was persistent though (not that he could necessarily understand his
           mother yet) and finally brought my sister to realize that there was a moon in the
           sky during daylight hours. [I'm not sure if Joseph is ready for Grad school yet, but I
           think that during the fall semester, he made more moon observations than some of
           the students in our class!]

              Some Reflections on the Moon [Isn't this what causes the phases?] and Joseph:
              I suppose what impresses me most is the awareness of a one-and-a-half-year-old
           child of the moon. At this point in time there seemed to be almost a fascination with
           the moon. We could say that this is due to it's being a brightly lit object in a dark sky,
           but the moon is much less obvious in the daytime sky. In fact, I often have to search
           for the moon in the daytime sky; it usually doesn't just jump out at you...
              So adults with all their "experience" may take things for granted; things that might
           not really be true. Joseph's mother and grandfather both, by their comments, indicate
           that they were operating under the rule "The moon only appears at night." Joseph
           seems to have straightened them out on this point.
              I believe that it is a good exercise for students to go back to the basics of
           observation, to become like a child who has no preconceived rules as to how the
           world works. All too often in the lab we manage to get what we expect by writing off
           the "bad" points. In many cases in science history those "bad" points weren't so bad
           after all and led to advances in science.

                                                                           Science education graduate student

                 Question 5.5 How do people talk together about the Moon?

   People all over the world see and talk about the moon. For the word for moon in
more than eighty languages see https://www.indifferentlanguages.com/words/moon .
Watching the moon together can provide common ground for students from different
cultures to enjoy talking with and learning from one another. For information about
a global moon watching project, see http://www.worldmoonproject.org or contact
Professor Walter Smith at walter.smith@ttu.edu .

                                                                                                                                     II. Identifying Student Resources | 489
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

5. Ways of speaking about the Moon in a first-grade bilingual classroom

   A first-grade teacher, Deborah Roberts, described what happened when she engaged
her students in watching the moon:

              More than half of my class is enrolled in a bilingual program that is part of
           the English for Speakers of Other Languages (ESOL) program in our school; many
           students wrote their moon journals in Spanish. Parents helped with spelling, and
           some wrote what their child dictated. Parents felt successful in helping their children
           in their native language whether it was English or Spanish, and children felt
           successful in observing the moon. Spanish-speaking students felt confident when
           sharing their journal with the class. The English speakers were also learning some
           Spanish; everyone knew luna meant moon and noche meant night. So when someone
           shared their picture and their entry, anoche yo vi la luna así (last night I saw the
           moon like this), many non-Spanish speakers understood part of the entry before they
           saw the picture. Sometimes a Spanish-speaking child would teach the class how to
           say what he or she wrote.

                Deborah Roberts. "The sky's the limit: Parents and first-grade students observe the sky." Science
             and Children, 31(1), 33-37. (September, 1999).

   Some schools choose a theme each year for which all classes in all grades contribute.
Watching the moon sometimes has served this role as a context within which students of
all ages can participate.

490 | II. Identifying Student Resources
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

III. Developing Central Ideas Based on
Evidence

   Ongoing observations of the Sun and the Moon can provide evidence on which to
base development of a set of central ideas about the Sun/Earth/Moon system. This
process starts with looking up and making observations of the sky on a regular basis. Also
important is recording those observations systematically in a sky journal.

A. Observing the shape and location of the Sun and the Moon in
the sky

   During this course, try to look up whenever you are outside and check out what is
happening in the sky.

Question 5.6 Where is the Sun in the sky right now? How does the Sun seem to move across
                                             the sky?

  · Make a sky journal in which to keep track of what you see.

  Equipment: We use sky journals made by cutting four pieces of paper (8.5" x 11") in half
  to make eight sheets (8.5" x 5.5"), folding those sheets together in half to make pages
  (4.25" x 5.5") and stapling the folded pages along the edge.

  · The best way to start observing the sky is to go outside and have a look!
      DO NOT LOOK DIRECTLY AT THE SUN! A direct stare at the Sun can damage eyes.

  · What do you expect to see in the sky?
  · Orient yourself with the cardinal directions: Where is North? East? South? West?

          If not sure, where does the Sun seem to rise? That's East.
          Where does the Sun seem to be high in the sky in the middle of the day?

                                                                                                                 III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 491
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

            (Where we live, that's South.)
          Where does the Sun seem to set? That's West.
          What's left? (Where we live, that's North.)

           You also can use a compass or think about how you get from where you are
           to somewhere else that is in a known direction. Where we live, for example, a
           freeway goes many miles directly north or directly south. One can think about
           North as being the direction one would drive on this freeway toward a major
           city north of us and about South as being the direction one would drive on this
           freeway toward a smaller city south of us.

  · Face North. Point East
      (Where we live, use your right arm, horizontal to the ground, to point East)
      Point West
      (Where we live, use your left arm, horizontal to the ground, to point West)

  · Look up at the sky. What do you see?
      (Where we live, maybe some clouds, airplanes, birds)

  · Keep your arms pointing horizontally away from your body.
      Turn around to face South.
          Where is your right arm pointing horizontally now?
            (Where we live, right arm is now pointing West)
          Where is your left arm pointing horizontally now?
            (Where we live, left arm is now pointing East)
          Notice that these directions are the opposite used on many maps. On maps for
            which North points "UP", East is to the right, West to the left.

  · While facing South, look up at the sky. What do you see?
      (Where we live, maybe some clouds, airplanes, birds and during the day usually the
      Sun and sometimes the Moon!) DO NOT LOOK DIRECTLY AT THE SUN! This can
      damage eyes.

  · WITHOUT LOOKING DIRECTLY AT THE SUN, where is the Sun?
          Low, middle, high in the sky?

492 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

          North? Northeast? East? Southeast? South? Southwest? West? Northwest?
  · To create a template for recording your observation:

          Near the bottom of the page in your sky journal, draw a horizontal line.
          Label the left end East, the middle South, and the right end West.
          In the middle, draw a stick figure as shown in Fig. 5.7.

              FIG. 5.7 Format for recording an observation of the sky.

(If you live in the Southern hemisphere, label the line (West North East)
  · To record what you are seeing, WITHOUT LOOKING DIRECTLY AT THE SUN, point
      an arm at the Sun and try to estimate the angle your arm is making with the ground.
  · Add an arm to your stick figure at an angle that matches the angle of the arm you
      pointed at the Sun. Also add a sketch of the Sun to your observation.
  · Add another sketch of the Sun on your journal page to predict where the Sun will be
      in the sky at a later time such as an hour or more later in the day.
  · Check at that later time that day and record again!
  · How does the Sun seem to move across the sky?

  Question 5.7 Where is the Moon in the sky right now? How does the Moon seem to move
                                         across the sky?

  · Keep checking the sky for the Moon. When the Moon is visible, where in the sky is it?
          Low, middle, high in the sky?

                                                                                                                 III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 493
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

          North? Northeast? East? Southeast? South? Southwest? West? Northwest?
  · What does the Moon look like? Describe in words.
  · If you are observing the Moon at night, draw a template for recording your

      observation in your sky journal as shown in Fig. 5.7. If you are observing the Moon
      during the day, also record where the Sun is in the sky as discussed above.
  · To record where the Moon is in the sky, point an arm at the Moon and try to
      estimate the angle your arm is making with the ground.
  · Add an arm to your stick figure at an angle that matches the angle of the arm you
      pointed at the Moon.

     If the Sun is also visible, add the stick-figure arm pointing at the Moon so that it
     connects to a stick-figure-arm pointing at the Sun. DO NOT LOOK DIRECTLY AT
     THE SUN! The angle formed by the stick-arm pointing at the Sun and the stick-arm
     pointing at the Moon should match the angle formed by your arms when pointing at
     the Sun and the Moon in the sky.

  · What kind of angle do your arms make when pointing at the Moon and the Sun?
      (Acute, less than 90°? Right, 90°? Obtuse, more than 90° but less than 180°? Straight,
      180°?)

     What kind of angle do the stick-figure arms make? The angle the stick-figure arms
     make should match the angle your arms make when pointing at the Moon and the Sun.

  · Add a sketch of the Moon to where the stick-arm is pointing. Outline the shape of
      the lit side of the Moon that you see and let the white of the page inside the outline
      represent the lit portion of the Moon.

  · Hold your sky journal up so that your drawing of the Moon seems to be next to the
      Moon in the sky. Compare your sketch of the Moon with the Moon in the sky:
          Is the lit side of your Moon sketch the same as the lit side of the Moon in the
            sky?
          Is the curve of the lit edge of your sketch of the Moon the same as the curve of
            the lit edge of the Moon in the sky?
          Is the size of the lit portion of your sketch of the Moon the same as the size of
            the lit portion of the Moon in the sky?
          Revise as necessary to make your sketch of the Moon more accurate.

  · Record the date and time on the same page as your observation. Include a.m. or p.m.

494 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

  · If both the Sun and Moon are visible, the two stick-figure-arms should make an
      angle that matches the angle your arms are making when pointing at the Sun and
      Moon. Do they? If not, revise the stick-figure arms to match the angle your arms are
      making.

  · Sketch on your journal page where you predict the Moon will be in the sky at a later
      time. Do you think the Moon's shape will be the same or different then?

  · Check your prediction at that later time. Record what you see.
  · How does the Moon seem to move across the sky?

Complete your first observations of the Sun and the Moon before looking at an example of
student work and reading about nuances to consider in observing the sky.

               1. Example of a student's initial observation of the sky

   Figure 5.8 shows a student's first observation, made in class during a morning field trip
outside to look up at the sky. This sky journal observation includes:

           Line across the bottom of the page that represents the horizon,
           Label E for east on the left, S for south in the middle, and W for west on the right
           Sketch of the Sun in the southeastern sky
           Sketch of the Moon, shown as about half lit on the left, in the southwestern sky
           Stick figure with one arm pointing at the Sun and the other arm pointing at the
           Moon
           Angle formed by the arms labeled, as 90º
           Time, hour : minute, with a.m. noted
           Date, with month, day, and year included
           Sketch of prediction for where the Sun would be later at the end of class, about
           noon
           Sketch of prediction for where the Moon would be later at the end of class, about
           noon.

                                                                                                                 III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 495
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                      FIG. 5.8 Student's first observation of the sky
                                      with predictions for later in the day.

                                                                                          Physics student, Fall 2016

                         2. Nuances about observing the sky

   Although the weather is often cloudy and rainy where we live, we have clear skies during
class time occasionally in the term. When this occurs, we go outside, orient ourselves with
respect to North, East, South, and West, and make the first sky observation together, at
least of the Sun, and if we are fortunate, of the Moon as well. We think it is important
to model going on short field trips outside the classroom as a normal part of learning
experiences. Although it is best to do the first observation outside as a class, one can
discuss inside how to use the sky journal if going outside is not feasible.

   On the first sunny class day, we go outside to make an observation together while
looking at the sky. We act out estimating the angle that an arm pointing at the Sun makes
with the ground, without looking directly at the Sun! and discuss placing a sketch of the

496 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Sun in the appropriate area of the page with respect to its location in the sky. The student
who made the observation shown in Fig. 5.8 has not quite drawn the stick-figure-arm
pointing directly at the drawn Sun but is close. The arm pointing at the Moon also is
not shown pointing directly at the Moon. The student has labeled the angle formed by
pointing arms at the Sun and the Moon as 90 degrees, a right angle, although the angle
drawn is slightly bigger; if the arms had been drawn pointing directly at the Sun and the
Moon, the angle would have been closer to 90 degrees. Although the sketch of the half-
lit Moon looks a bit more than half lit, all the necessary information is there. Students'
accuracy in making sketches usually improves considerably with practice.

   We start right away having students use this somewhat complex format for recording
observations in a systematic way. With a 15-week semester, one can afford to say simply
`look for the Moon and record what you see.' With this very general instruction, students
likely will experience the bewilderment of not finding the Moon very easily for a month
before starting a more systematic observation process. With only a 10-week quarter term,
however, we have shifted to this more structured approach immediately. We also provide
explicit suggestions for a good time to look at the sky so that the students can start
assembling a series of observations of the Sun and the Moon within the first month of the
term.

   If poor weather interferes, we sometimes use a computer program to simulate what
would be seen if we could see beyond clouds and/or rain. (see: http://stellarium.org for
an open source version.) It is important for students to become aware of changes in the
shape of the moon on at least a weekly basis.

B. Observing the Sun

This section introduces several methods for documenting the Sun's apparent motions and
estimating its size.

                Question 5.8 How does the Sun seem to move across the sky?

   There are several ways to document how the Sun seems to move across the sky. As
noted above, one can make multiple observations of the Sun's position in the sky during
the same day on a sky journal page. Be sure, however, to avoid looking directly at the Sun!

                                                                                                                 III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 497
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

If feasible, observing where the Sun seems to rise and set documents the beginning and
end of the Sun's apparent daily journey across the sky. There also are several ways, based
upon observing how the tip of the shadow of a vertical gnomon changes during the day.
The gnomon, such as a person, post, vertical long leg of a paper clip or nail, should be
perpendicular to flat ground in an area likely to be sunny during the middle of the day.

1. Observing where and when the Sun appears to rise and set.

To the extent possible, begin noticing where the Sun seems to be rising and setting where
you live:

             Equipment: Use a pencil and piece of paper on a clipboard or cardboard.

   Try to observe sunrise at least once a week. Face east and draw a profile of trees and
      buildings. For each observation at this location, indicate on the sunrise profile where
      and when the Sun seems to be rising along that profile.

   Also try to observe sunset at least once a week. Face west and draw a similar profile
      of trees and buildings. For each observation at this location, indicate on the sunset
      profile where and when the Sun seems to be setting along that profile. Record the
      date and time for each observation.

   How do rising and setting positions on the profile change over a week? Over several
      weeks? Months?

   How do the times of sunrise and sunset change over a week? Over several weeks?
      Months?

2. Observing a student gnomon's shadow during a field trip outside during a sunny
class session

Go outside twice during a class session on a sunny day to document how the sun seems
to move across the sky. If possible, include an observation at solar noon, when the Sun
appears to be at its highest angular altitude in the sky. DO NOT LOOK AT THE SUN!

  Equipment: Use chalk, meter stick, protractor, and a video camera to document a
  student's shadow and your group's thinking.

498 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                     This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

 Early in the session, choose one member of your group to stand so that the
   student's shadow falls upon the pavement. The student serves as the gnomon for
   this observation. A gnomon is a vertical object (stick, post, person) perpendicular
   to the ground whose shadow can be interpreted in terms of its length and the
   direction to which it is pointing. Other group members use chalk to draw the
   outline of this gnomon's shadow on the pavement.

 Draw an outline of the student's feet so that the student can stand in the same
   way in the same spot near the end of class as shown in Fig. 5.9.

 Measure the height H of the student gnomon and the length L of the shadow.
   Record the date and time of these measurements.

 How do you think the student's shadow will change by the end of class?
       Shorter or longer or the same length?
       Pointing further to the right? left? or in the same direction?
       Why do you think that?

 Mark on the pavement where you think the tip of the person's shadow head will
   fall by the end of class.

 Why do you think the tip of the shadow will fall there by the end of class? Use
   the video function of a camera or cell phone to record a group member briefly
   explaining the reasoning for the group's prediction for where the tip of the
   shadow's head will be on the pavement by the end of class.

                                                                                                   III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 499
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                  Fig. 5.9 Documenting changes in a group member's shadow on
                                  a sunny day near the beginning and end of class.

  · When back inside the classroom, make a sketch showing the Sun, student gnomon,
      shadow, and sunlight.

  · Also draw a careful ray diagram with straight lines representing the student gnomon,
      shadow, and ray of light from the Sun. Be sure to draw the lines representing the
      gnomon and shadow at right angles as shown in Fig. 5.10.

  · What was the angular altitude of the Sun, Angle  (alpha), at the moment that you
      measured the height of the student gnomon and length of the shadow?
           Use a protractor to measure the Sun's angular altitude, Angle  (alpha), on the ray
           diagram.
              Calculate the tangent (H/L) of Angle , then find Angle  in a trigonometry
           table or use a calculator that has trig functions such as arctan or tan-1 (the angle
           for which the tangent is the number calculated by dividing H by L). Compare

500 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                            This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

        this estimate for Angle  with the estimate made with the protractor on the ray
        diagram. Which is the better method for estimating Angle ? Why?

                        Fig. 5.10 Right triangle formed by gnomon, shadow, and ray of
                        light from Sun.

· Near the end of class, go outside again to observe where the tip of the student
   gnomon's shadow head is now. Mark the tip of the shadow and measure the shadow's
   new length. Record the new shadow length and time.

· Make a sketch or take a photo of the gnomon and marked tips of the shadows of the
   gnomon's head.

· Interpret the change in position of the tip of the student's shadow head in terms of
   how the Sun appears to have moved across the sky during the time period between
   observations. DO NOT LOOK DIRECTLY AT THE SUN!

· During the next class session: how did the Sun's angular altitude, Angle , change
   during these observations?

· What is the connection between how long the student's shadow is and how high the
   Sun seems to be in the sky?

· If it was possible to measure the length of the gnomon's shadow at solar noon, what
   was the Sun's maximum angular altitude, Angle , on this date?

· Discuss as a whole group, each small group's observations and interpretations.
· Formulate a central idea that articulates findings from this exploration of how the

   Sun seems to move across the sky during the day.

                                                                                                             III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 501
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

3. Observing a post gnomon's shadow outside during a sunny day

Go on a field trip outside early in a class session on a sunny day to observe the tip of a
shadow cast by a post. DO NOT LOOK DIRECTLY AT THE SUN!

  Equipment: Another option is to use chalk to mark the tip of a shadow of a nearby
  vertical post on the pavement.

  · Mark the tip regularly throughout the class session, perhaps every 15 minutes, and if
      feasible throughout the day.

  · Interpret the change in position of the tip of the shadow in terms of how the Sun
      appears to have moved across the sky during the time period between observations.
      DO NOT LOOK DIRECTLY AT THE SUN!

  · Discuss the observations and possible interpretations.
  · Formulate a central idea that articulates findings from this exploration of how the

      Sun seems to move across the sky during the day.

4. Observing a paper clip or nail gnomon's shadow on a sunny day.

Another option is to make an apparatus for a portable shadow plot for each group as
shown in Fig. 5.11.

  Equipment: Tape the four edges of a piece of paper to the outside of a manila folder or
  cardboard. Bend a large paper clip so that a long leg is bent perpendicular to the rest
  of the clip. The long leg is the gnomon. Slip the paper clip on to the middle back edge
  of the manila folder or cardboard so that the bent long leg is vertical. Tape the clip in
  place.

     Or pound a nail through a thick piece of cardboard or board so that it is
  perpendicular to the plane of the board.

502 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                            This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

             Fig. 5.11 Apparatus for documenting a paper clip's shadow during a sunny day.

· If feasible, instructor starts shadow plot observations for each group as early in a
   sunny day as feasible.

· On a fieldtrip outside, students gather around a suitable sidewalk crack or wall that
   forms an East/West line. DO NOT LOOK DIRECTLY AT THE SUN! The instructor
   demonstrates what to do:
       Line up a shadow plot apparatus with the east/west crack in sidewalk or on the
         wall
       Invite a student to mark the tip of the shadow of the gnomon and label it with
         the date and time

· Each small group:
       A member from each group marks the tip of the gnomon's shadow on the group's
         shadow plot and labels with the time.
       Other members of each group mark the tip of the gnomon's shadow on the
         group's shadow plot in given time intervals (such as 15 minutes) and just before
         all go back inside
       Members of each group decide when each will briefly leave class and take their

                                                                                                            III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 503
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

            portable gnomon outside to mark the tip of the shadow at given time intervals
            until the end of class.
  · All go outside near the end of class to make last shadow plot observations.
  · Interpret the change in position of the tip of the gnomon's shadow in terms of how
      the Sun appears to have moved across the sky during the time period of
      observations.
  · If feasible, instructor continues shadow plot observations for the groups' portable
      gnomons until the end of the day.
  · During the next session, discuss as a whole group each small group's observations
      and interpretations.
  · Formulate a central idea that articulates findings from this exploration of how the
      Sun seems to move across the sky during the day.
  · If feasible, make shadow plots near the beginning and end of a course and consider
      differences in shadow plots made at different times, particularly if observations have
      been made near an equinox and near a solstice. Try to identify the moment of
      "shortest shadow," which is known as solar noon and to compare the Sun's maximum
      angular altitude, Angle , at different times during the term.

5. Example of student work about how the Sun seems to move across the sky.

              Observing the Sun via shadows. I recorded changes in the shadows cast by the
           Sun by recording a shadow plot with a paperclip as the gnomon and by recording a
           shadow plot with a person as the gnomon. Figure (5.12) shows the shadow plot with a
           paper clip gnomon. Figure (5.13) shows a group member's shadow near the beginning
           and end of class.

                                      FIG. 5.12 Student's sketch of shadow plot with
                                      a paper clip gnomon.

504 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                    For the shadow plot with the paper gnomon, as seen in Figure (5.12), we had a
           piece of white paper with a paper clip attached to it on the center of one of the long
           sides of the paper. We placed the piece of paper with the paperclip facing towards us
           on the sidewalk so that the corner of the paper was lined up to lines in the sidewalk.
           We then marked a dot where the shadow of the paperclip ended on the paper every 15
           minutes, starting at the beginning of class and going until the end of class. I observed
           that the dots on the paper started on the left and moved closer to the center of the
           paper as time went on. I also observed that the dots began to get closer together as
           time went on.

                                      FIG. 5.13 Sketch of group member's shadow on
                                      pavement near beginning and end of class.

                     For the shadow plot with the person as the gnomon, as seen in Figure (5.13),
           I traced a group member's shadow at the beginning of class. Then at the end of
           class, my group member stood in the same exact spot and I observed where the
           new shadow was. I observed that the new shadow was shorter, less skinny, and was
           turned more to the right than the original shadow.

                                                                                       Physics student, Spring 2016
   This class met in the morning, so the student's original shadow was drawn about 10
am. The class ended just before noon. Where we live, the Sun is in the southern sky at
noon, so this student's long morning shadow became shorter in length and shifted in
direction toward North. One way to find North if lost is to observe the shadow of a vertical
stick during a sunny day and identify the direction the shortest shadow is pointing.
(See: https://adventure.howstuffworks.com/survival/wilderness/true-north2.htm ) .

                                                                                                                III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 505
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

  · If feasible, compare shadow plots made near the equinoxes (March or September)
      with those made near the solstices (June or December).

                               Question 5.9 How big is the Sun?

   If one glances at the sky when the Sun and Moon are both visible, an easy comparison
to make is that the Sun and Moon appear to be about the same size. DO NOT LOOK
DIRECTLY AT THE SUN!

   To estimate the actual size of the Sun, however, we used pinhole phenomena in Unit
1, VI. If not undertaken in earlier class sessions, on a sunny day make the observations
outlined for Question 1.16 to estimate the diameter of the Sun.

          To estimate the diameter of the Sun: As shown in Fig. 1.21 (repeated), this involves making a pinhole in a
       sheet of aluminum foil held tight in a cardboard frame; making a cardboard screen covered with a sheet of
       white paper, using a meter stick to separate the pinhole and the screen, tracing the projection of the sun
       through the pinhole on the screen, and measuring the diameter of the projection.

      FIG. 1.21 Student drawing to illustrate using pinhole phenomena to estimate the diameter of
      the Sun (repeated from Unit 1).

Use the mathematics that describes pinhole phenomena to estimate the Sun's diameter:

506 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   Solve for the width (diameter) of the Sun, measure the width (diameter) of the Sun's
projection when one meter away from a pinhole, and assume the Sun is about 100,000,000
miles from the Earth. (Note that it is not necessary to convert meters to miles to calculate
this estimate.)

C. Generating questions about the Moon and designing ways to
explore these questions

           Question 5.10 What questions about the Moon do you want to explore?

                                     How will you do that?

After making a few observations of the Moon, generate some questions about the Moon
that you might explore:

  Equipment for each group: white board marker and eraser for each group member,
  large white board

  · With your group members, generate some questions about the Moon that you could
      explore together during the next few days by looking at the Moon in the sky rather
      than by reading books or searching the Internet.

  · Decide with your group members on the most interesting of these questions.
  · Design your exploration. Who will do what? When? Where? How? Why?
  · Record on a large white board your question and your design for exploring this

      question.
  · Plan and briefly practice how each member of the group will participate in stating

      the question and describing your design for exploring this question.
  · Share your question and your plans with the whole group.

  · At the beginning of each class session, share with your group members the

                                                                                                                 III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 507
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

      observations you have made and enjoy seeing theirs. Talk with one another about
      how your findings inform your question and revise the question, the procedures,
      and/or the findings as needed.
  · During and near the end of this observation period, create with your group members
      some progress reports:

          What tentative claims, if any, can you make now?
          What evidence, if any, can you present to support those claims?
          What rationale explains how the evidence supports those claims?
          What still needs to be explored?
          What have you learned about learning from this exploration so far?

  · Complete your summary of your group's question, observations, and interpretations
      before reading an example of a group's initial question and findings about the Moon.
      Also read nuances about asking questions, making observations, and reporting
      findings.

1. Examples of a group's initial questions and findings about the Moon

   A student reported the following after the first week of looking for the Moon and
comparing observations on March 29 at 9:30 am and April 1 at 8:52 am as shown in Fig.
5.14.

              An initial question that came to mind when making observations was, does the
           angle between the sun and the moon change at all?

              As we can see from the first few observations...the angle present in the first
           observation is obtuse while angle measure of the third is more acute. This shows that
           the angle has gotten smaller since the day of our first observation.

508 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                      Fig. 5.14 Two sky journal observations of the
                                      Moon separated by several days.

                                                                                       Physic student, Spring 2016
   Another student's sky journal observations were slightly different for the same days as
shown in Fig. 5.15.

                                                                                                                III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 509
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                            Fig. 5.15 Another set of two sky journal observations of the
                            Moon separated by several days.

                                                                                     Physics student, Spring 2016
   This student reported the following questions and conclusions from this first week of
observing:

              When we first saw the moon during class, it was large and was about half-lit on
           the left, the side the sun was on, and pretty high above the horizon. Some questions
           I had on that first day were: Will the moon always be lit on the side the sun is closest
           to? Will the lit part of the moon be bigger or smaller? Will the moon be in a different
           place tomorrow, next week, and/or next month?

              I have already found the answers to some of these initial questions through my

510 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           observations of the moon, and thus claims about the moon. First, I have found that
           the moon, when visible, is lit on the side closest to the sun. Therefore, I can make the
           claim that the moon is lit by the sun. Second, I have found the lit part of the moon
           does change size, and it appeared to be a little smaller each day. I have yet to find
           a powerful idea for this observation, as I am unsure of what causes the shaded part
           of the moon. Is it a shadow from the earth, or just that part of the moon is facing
           away from the sun? The third question was answered as well, as the moon was in a
           slightly different location each day, with the angle of my arms getting smaller. This
           has led me to make the claim that the moon is always moving.

                                                                         Another physics student, Spring 2016

2. Nuances about asking questions, making observations, and reporting findings

   Both students made the same claim verbally that the angle formed by pointing one arm
at the Sun and the other arm at the Moon got smaller between March 29 and April 1. The
angle shown by the first student for March 29 is clearly obtuse, however, whereas the
angle shown by the second student for this date looks like a right angle. The angle shown
by the first student for April 1 is clearly acute whereas the angle shown by the second
student for this date still looks like a right angle. The sketch of the Moon shown by the
first student for March 29 is more than half lit on the left and shows only the lit portion,
whereas the second student stated that the moon was "about half lit on the left" and
sketched both the lit and the inferred dark portions of the Moon. This student noted on
the sky journal that the Moon appeared to be about one third lit for the later observation.

   Compared across all members of the class, these early observations typically differ
in the angles drawn for the arms, shapes drawn for the lit portion of the Moon, and
placement of the sketch of the Moon in the sky as well as questions asked and claims
made. It is important for group members to have time in class to compare their sky
journal observations, to become aware of differences in both sketching and thinking.
By discussing such differences among themselves, the students typically become more
accurate and detailed when making their observations.

   Students often come up with questions, experimental designs for making observations,
and interpretations of findings that need refinement. Note that scientists do this as well;
part of doing science is realizing the need to revise what one is asking, to enhance how one
is making observations, and/or to reconsider initial interpretations of the data obtained.

                                                                                                                  III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 511
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Therefore, we do not step in to warn about possible problems in making observations nor
comment on interpretations that reflect inaccurate initial drawings.

   The intent of this open-ended process is for students to experience both overcoming
the pitfalls and enjoying the pleasures characteristic of doing science. A plan to make
observations at a time when the Moon will not be visible, for example, will delay gathering
data about how the Moon appears, but likely will prompt a new question about when the
Moon can be seen. A plan to look for the Moon at 6 p.m. seems reasonable, until one has
gone out to look and not seen the Moon even though the sky is clear. This may be because
the Moon is not yet above the horizon or it may be that the Moon is above the horizon
but the lit portion of the Moon is not visible to the viewer. When students report such a
finding, we encourage them to be careful in their language, to state they that "did not see
the Moon" rather than that "the Moon was not there."

   If students see the Moon but record what they saw later, rather than while looking at the
Moon, they may not sketch the shape of the lit portion accurately. We do not comment if
we see a sketch of a Moon lit on the right, however, when we know the Moon was lit on the
left in the sky; we also do not comment if a sketch of a Moon that is more than half lit looks
like a cookie with a bite out of it instead of like a football . Group members likely will
question those observations and prompt a commitment to draw what one is seeing while
looking at the Moon rather than drawing later while trying to remember what one saw.

   We also initially do not impose vocabulary on observations such as the traditional names
for the various phases of the Moon. The descriptive term half-lit Moon is acceptable and
delays the issue of why such a Moon is called a Quarter Moon until the students have
enough knowledge from watching the Moon to understand the appropriateness of this
designation.

   Our experience has been that when students look for the Moon consistently and make
observations with only their own concerns about whether these are correctly drawn
and labeled, their observations gradually become more accurate without needing critique
from an instructor. They also often begin to experience the fun of puzzling about what
they are seeing, talking with colleagues about their puzzlements, and making predictions
about what will happen next.

512 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                              This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Question 5.11 What does the Moon look like today? What will the Moon look like over the
                                        next few days?

 · Continue looking up at the sky whenever you are outside.
 · Whenever you see the Moon, record what you see in your sky journal.
 · Make predictions for what happens next:

        When would be a good time to look for the Moon next?
        What shape do you think the lit portion of the Moon will be the next time you

          see the Moon?
        What type of angle do you think will be formed by pointing at the Sun and the

          Moon when both are visible? (Acute? Right? Obtuse? Straight?)

Question 5.12 What new question do you and your group members have about the Moon?

 · If you have formed new groups, compare observations in your sky journals and listen
    carefully to the experiences of your new group members as they have been making
    observations of the Moon.
        Are there any differences in your observations that need resolving?
        Are there any similarities that can be articulated as new claims that need
          confirming?

 · Generate a new question about the Moon with your group members.
    The question should be something you can explore by looking at the Moon in the sky
    rather than by reading books or searching the Internet.

 · Design a way to conduct your exploration. Who will do what? When? How? Why?
 · Record your question and your experimental design for exploring this question on a

    large white board.
 · Plan and briefly practice how each member of the group will participate in stating

    the question and describing your design for exploring this question.
 · Share your group's question and experimental design with the rest of the class.
 · Refine your group's question and design in any ways suggested by hearing other

    groups' plans if appropriate.
 · Continue looking up at the sky whenever you are outside.

                                                                                                               III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 513
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

          When would be a good time to look for the Moon?
          What shape do you think the lit portion of the Moon will be the next time you

            see the Moon?
          What type of angle do you think will be formed by pointing at the Sun and the

            Moon when both are visible? (Acute? Right? Obtuse? Straight?)
  · Whenever you see the Moon, record what you see in your sky journal.
  · Continue sharing your observations with your group members and discussing how

      these observations confirm or do not confirm your tentative claims about the Sun
      and the Moon in answer to your group's new question. Revise question and design as
      needed.
  · Write a clear summary of your group's answer so far to your group's new question.

          Present the question and evidence, identifying the observations by date, time,
            and description

          State clearly how this evidence supports or does not support the claims made.
          Also if the new evidence is relevant, confirm or disconfirm the claims made

            earlier about your first group's question.
  · Prepare to share your group's new question and interpretations with the whole

      group. Rehearse with each member of your group participating in some way in
      presenting the question, procedures, observations, and claims based on the
      observations.
  · Make the presentation as a group and invite questions about any aspects of the
      question, procedures, observations and claims.

Question 5.13 How does the Moon seem to move across the sky during several hours? during
                                          several days?

  · When you can see the Moon and expect it to be visible for several hours, record the
      position of the Moon in the sky at least twice separated by one or more hours.

  · How does the Moon seem to move across the sky during several hours?
  · On a series of days when the sky is likely to be clear, record the position of the Moon

      in the sky and its shape at the same time during each of several days.
  · How does the Moon seem to move across the sky during several days?
  · Support each claim with photos of sky journal entries and discussion of the relevant

      aspects of these entries.

514 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

D. Reviewing observations so far, making predictions, and
generating questions

Question 5.14 What have you learned about the Moon from your observations so far? What
                                 do you think will happen next?

  · Look through your observations in your sky journal. Summarize what you have
      learned about the Moon so far about:
          changes in the shape of the lit portion of the Moon you have seen
          changes in the angle formed by pointing one arm at the Sun and one arm at the
            Moon
          changes in the location of the Moon in the sky
          changes in times when the Moon is visible

  · Predict what you think will happen next.
  · When your sky journal is full, shift to keeping track of the Sun and the Moon with a

      regular monthly calendar as shown in Figure 5.16. Fill in the name of the month and
      number the days.
  · As indicated near the bottom of the calendar, for each date that you see the Moon:

          Draw the shape of the lit portion of the moon
          Record the time of your observation, including a.m. or p.m.
          Record the moon's "height" in the sky: is it low? Medium? High?
          Record the Moon's apparent motion: does it appear to be rising? Moving across

            the sky? Setting?
          Record the Moon's direction in the sky: N, NE, E, SE, S, SW, W, NW
          If the Sun is visible, point one arm at the Sun and one arm at the Moon, draw the

            angle formed by your arms. Is it acute? Right? Obtuse? Straight?
          Draw the Sun if visible
          If the stars or planets are visible, record where the Moon appears to be with

            respect to a familiar star pattern or bright planet

                                                                                                                 III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 515
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                 FIG 5.16 Calendar template for keeping track of the next set of Sun and Moon
                 observations.

  · Begin to use the traditional names for the various shapes of the lit portion of the
      Moon: crescent when less than half lit, quarter when half lit although this
      nomenclature may be puzzling, gibbous when more than half lit, full when fully lit.
      Also consider whether the phases are waxing, becoming more lit, or waning,
      becoming less lit.

  · After summarizing your findings so far look at an example of student work and read
      about nuances in observing the Moon.

1. Example of student work summarizing initial findings about the Sun and the
Moon

A student summarized initial findings about the Sun and the Moon as follows:
              Continuing to observe the Moon. Figure (5.17) is my next set of observations from

           my sky calendar.

516 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                  This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

    FIG. 5.17 Student's Observations, April 17-23, 2016

Stating current question and findings. The question that I am now exploring with
my small group members is, how does the appearance of the moon change in regards
to how it is lit and shaded? My role in this exploration is looking for and observing
the moon every evening at 8 p.m., which is right before sunset. My procedure is to
look for the moon wherever I happen to be at 8 p.m., and then record what I see on
my sky calendar. I am finding that the lit part on the right side of the moon increased
until the moon was full, which can be seen in my observations above. Since April
17, the lit part on the right side of the moon has been gradually increasing until the
moon became full, which I observed on April 22.

   Confirming or disconfirming earlier findings. One of my previous claims was that
the angle between the sun and the moon changes. These new observations support
this claim because the angle between the sun and the moon has been increasing. In
just these new observations, a right angle is seen on April 17, an obtuse angle is seen
on April 18-20, and a straight angle is seen on April 21-22. This shows that the angle
between the sun and the moon is changing.

   Another previous claim is that the curve of the line separating the bright and the
shadowed parts of the moon changes shape. This claim is supported by this next
set of observations because the arch of the line is continually changing as the moon
becomes more lit, as seen in the observations in Figure (5.17). Another previous claim
is that the side of the moon that is lit up changes. This is also supported by my new
observations because in previous observations, the lit part was on the left side of the
moon, but in these observations, the lit part is on the right side of the moon.

   One last previous claim was that there is a period of time when the entire moon
is shadowed. These new observations do not support this claim because I had no
observation above in which the entire moon was shadowed.

   Summarizing patterns in what we have been seeing. I am comparing four weeks
of data.

   Summarizing changes in the shape of the Moon so far. At the beginning of the

                                                                                                III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 517
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           term, the left part of the moon was lit, as seen on March 29. The lit part on the left
           side of the moon continued to decrease until the entire moon was shaded. Then, I
           could see the moon again on April 9, when the lit part of the moon was now on
           the right side. The lit part on the right side of the moon continued to increase until
           there was a full moon that was seen on April 22. So, it seems as though the moon is
           partially lit, the lit part decreases until the entire moon is shaded, then the other side
           of the moon is partially lit, and finally, the lit part increases until the entire moon is
           lit.

              Summarizing changes in the angle formed by pointing one arm at the Sun and
           one arm at the Moon so far. At the beginning of the term, the angle between the sun
           and the moon was an acute angle, as seen on March 30. As the term went on, the
           angle increased. It became a right angle on April 17, an obtuse angle on April 18, and
           a straight angle on April 21.

              Summarizing changes in the location of the Moon in the sky. The moon appears
           to move only slightly on the same day over several hours. I first looked at 8 p.m., then
           9 p.m., then 10 p.m. on April 18. The moon seemed to slowly get higher up in the sky
           as time went on, but only slightly.

              I have observed the moon at 8 p.m. over several days. The moon appears to be
           moving more and more east in the sky. The observations above from April 17-April
           22 show that the moon is gradually moving from the west to the east when observed
           at 8 p.m. each night.

              Summarizing changes in the times when the Moon is visible so far. At the
           beginning of the term, the moon was visible in the morning. On March 29, I saw the
           moon at 9:29 a.m. and on March 30, I saw the moon at 7:42 a.m. As the term went
           on, I could no longer see the moon in the morning, such as when I looked on April 3
           at 9:39 a.m. and did not see the moon. I began to look right before sunset and I could
           see the moon. On April 15, I could see the moon at 8:00 p.m. So, at the beginning of
           the term, the moon was visible in the morning and now it is visible in the evening
           and at night.

              Making predictions. I predict that the angle between the sun and the moon will
           become acute again because the angle started as acute, became right, became obtuse,
           and then became straight. So, I think that the cycle will continue and that the angle
           formed will be acute again. I think that the moon will be more towards the west in
           the sky at 8 p.m. The moon moved more and more east in the sky each day at 8 p.m.,
           so I think that it will start to move more west again. I also predict that the right side
           of the moon will start to become shaded and that the shaded part of the moon will

518 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           continue to increase, since that is what I saw happen to the shaded part of the moon
           during the first week of the term.

                                                                                     Physics student, Spring 2016

2. Nuances about observing the Moon

   After observing the Moon for several weeks, most of the students begin to notice and
comment upon details that puzzle them. Several, for example, likely will have noticed
already the intriguing phenomena raised in Question 5.13, of the Moon seeming to move
across the sky from east to west during several hours but from west to east during several
days. At this point in the exploration, this becomes a whole class rather than small group
question, with the emphasis on everyone verifying these observations.

   This intent is made explicit, that when something quite surprising arises, it is helpful to
have multiple observations of the effect by different groups to be sure that the surprising
effect is replicable. Therefore, all students should have observations of their own that the
Moon seems to move east to west over several hours but from west to east over several
days. In order to understand why this puzzling behavior of the Moon occurs, the students
first need to develop central ideas about the Moon based on all the observations they have
been gathering, then use these central ideas to develop an explanation. These summaries
are tentative interpretations of observations to date. After another set of observations
where patterns seem to begin repeating, students will have enough data to make some
strong claims about the Sun and the Moon.

E. Identifying patterns based on evidence

     Question 5.15 What pattern have you observed in the changing shape of the Moon?

  · Compare your observations with your group members' observations.
  · When you group has agreed on the pattern of changes in the shape of the lit portion

      of the moon, draw the shapes on a large white board in order as they appeared in the
      sky.Draw the outline of a shape with a black marker; let the white of whiteboard be
      the filler that represents the lit portion.

                                                                                                                 III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 519
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

  · Write the traditional name of each shape underneath. These are called the phases of
      the Moon. A traditional order is to list them as new (not seen), waxing crescent, 1st
      quarter, waxing gibbous, full, waning gibbous, 3rd quarter, and waning crescent.

  · What is the shape of the lit portion associated with each phase of the Moon?
  · What is the pattern of how the shape of the lit portion of the Moon seems to

      change?

Question 5.16 What pattern have you observed in the angle formed by pointing arms at the
                             Sun and Moon when both are visible?

  · Under each phase, draw stick figures with arms forming the kind of angle observed.
      (Acute? Right? Obtuse? Straight?)

  · What is the pattern of how this angle seems to change?

  Question 5.17 How are the changing shape of the Moon and the changing angle related?

  · Based on the evidence of your observations, make and support a central idea about
      the way the shape of the lit portion of the Moon seems to change during its phases.

  · Based on the evidence of your observations, make and support a central idea about
      the way the angle formed by pointing at both the Sun and the Moon seems to
      change.

  · Based on the evidence of your observations, make and support a central idea about
      the connection between the shape of the lit portion of the Moon and the angle
      formed by pointing at both the Sun and the Moon.

 Question 5.18 What pattern have you observed in the relation of the lit side of the Moon
                                  and the location of the Sun?

  · Based on the evidence of your observations, make and support a central idea about
      the relation between the lit side of the Moon and the position of the Sun in the sky.

520 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

F. Making predictions for when a phase of the Moon will rise and
set

  Question 5.19 How can you predict when a phase of the Moon will rise, transit, and set?

   It is a lot easier to observe the Moon systematically if one can predict when and where
to look for the Moon in the sky.

1. Creating a Sun clock and using it to predict when the Moon will rise, transit,
and set

   One way to make predictions for rising and setting times for the Moon is to use the
angle that the Moon seems to make with the Sun as seen from Earth. To do so, one needs
to identify specific positions of the Sun with particular times.

  · Create a sun clock as shown in Fig. 5.18 by drawing a circle with a horizontal
      diameter.
          If observing in the northern hemisphere, label the left end of the diameter East
            and the right end West.
          Also label the left end of the diameter as "rising position for the Sun"
          Label the top of the circle "transiting position for the Sun"
          Also label the right end of the diameter as "setting position for the Sun"

                                                                                                                 III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 521
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

              Fig. 5.18 Model of a Sun Clock with rising, transiting, and setting positions as seen
              in the northern hemisphere. (If observing in the southern hemisphere, label the
              rising position, East, on the right and the setting position, West, on the left.)

     The arc of the circle above the diameter from East (rising position) to top of the circle
     (transiting position) to West (setting position) represents day, when the Sun is above
     the horizon. In this model of a sun clock, as shown in Fig. 5.18, we are envisioning
     the Sun moving along the top half of the circle, rising in the East, moving high across
     the sky, and setting in the West all in a clockwise direction as seen from the northern
     hemisphere or counterclockwise as seen from the southern hemisphere.
     The arc of the circle below the diameter from West (setting position) to bottom of
     the circle to East (rising position) represents night, when the Sun is not visible. In this
     model of a sun clock, we are envisioning the Sun continuing to move along the bottom
     half of the circle, setting in the west, moving along the bottom of the circle during the
     night, and rising in the east. We are not claiming that the Sun actually does this, only
     that we can envision such a model.
  · Ignore daylight saving time and assume times appropriate for equinoxes (late March,
      late September) when the Sun rises at about 6 a.m., is high in the sky (transiting) at
      about noon, and sets at about 6 p.m. Label the sun clock with these times for the Sun
      at these positions. Assume the position of the Sun at the bottom of the circle would

522 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                            This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   be at midnight, 12:00 a.m. Also indicate about where the Sun would be at
   intermediate times, such as 9 a.m., 3 p.m., 9 p.m., and 3 a.m. Note that this sun clock
   represents a way of envisioning where the Sun seems to be located in the sky (or not
   in the sky) over a 24-hour period.

       FIG. 5.19 Model of a wall clock on the left; model of a Sun clock on the right with times
       associated with the Sun's position in the sky when looking South in the northern
       hemisphere.

· How is this 24-hour sun clock similar to the traditional 12-hour clock one sometimes
   sees on walls and watches? How is it different?

· Now use the sun clock to predict rising, transiting, and setting times for each phase
   of the Moon. Start with a phase for which an easy angle is formed by pointing at the
   Sun and the Moon. Start, for example, with a First Quarter Moon. When does a first
   quarter Moon rise? Transit? Set?

· Based on your observations, what angle is formed by your arms when pointing at the
   Sun and a First Quarter Moon?

· To predict the rising time for a First Quarter Moon, act out with your arms where
   the Sun and the Moon would be in the sky:
   Stand up and orient yourself to face South, if you live in the northern hemisphere (or
   North if you live in the southern hemisphere). Point an arm to the East toward an
   imagined rising First Quarter Moon.

· Where would the Sun be? Would the Sun be "ahead" of the Moon, already visible in
   the sky? Or would the Sun be "behind" the Moon, not yet visible? Point your arms

                                                                                                            III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 523
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

      toward an imagined Moon and Sun with your arms forming a right angle.
  · To use the sun clock, look at what time a Sun would be at the place where you are

      pointing. This is an estimate of the time when a First Quarter Moon is rising.
  · To predict when a First Quarter Moon is high in the sky and easy to see, when it is

      transiting, point your "Moon" arm up toward an imagined First Quarter Moon and
      your "Sun" arm toward an imagined Sun with your arms forming a right angle.
  · To use the sun clock, look at what time a Sun would be at the place where your "Sun"
      arm is pointing. What time is the Sun at this position on the sun clock? This is an
      estimate of the time when a First Quarter Moon is transiting.
  · To predict when a First Quarter Moon is setting, point your "Moon" arm toward an
      imagined First Quarter Moon setting and your "Sun" arm toward an imagined Sun
      with your arms forming a right angle. To use the sun clock, look at what time a Sun
      would be at the place where your "Sun" arm is pointing. What time is the Sun at this
      position on the sun clock? This is an estimate of the time when a First Quarter Moon
      is setting.
  · Summarize when a First Quarter Moon is visible while rising, moving high across the
      sky, and setting. When is a good time to look for one, to see one high in the sky?

  · You now have a tool for predicting when and where to look for the Moon during any
      phase.
      Use this tool to predict rising, transiting, and setting times for all the phases of the
      Moon: new moon, waxing crescent, first quarter, waxing gibbous, full, waning
      gibbous, third quarter, and waning crescent.

  · Organize your predictions in a table such as Table V.1

524 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                          This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                      TABLE V.1 Summarizing findings about the phases of the Moon

                      TABLE V.1 Summarizing findings about the phases of the Moon

Shape              New  Waxing First Waxing crescent quarter gibbous Full  Waning gibbous Third quarter  Waning
Name                                                                                                     crescent
Stick Figure

Angle              0    0                     90<obtuse<180 180            180>obtuse>90   90 or         90>acute>0 or
                                          90                               or              270           270<acute<360
                                                                           180<obtuse<270
                        <acute<90

Waxing/ Waning
Rising
Transiting (High)
Setting

· On each stick figure, label which hand is pointing to the Moon, which to the Sun.
       During which phases is the Sun to the East of the Moon? To the West of the
         Moon?
       During which phases does the Moon seem to chase the Sun across the sky?
       During which phases does the Sun seem to chase the Moon across the sky?

· When are the waxing phases mostly visible? The waning phases?

· State the predictions for each phase:

                                                                                                            III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 525
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

          When can each phase be seen rising, moving high across the sky, and setting?
          Indicate which phases seem to occur over a period of time as the angle sweeps

            through a range of values.
          Indicate which phases seem to occur just at an instant as the angle seems to

            have a particular value.
Table V.1 summarizes findings to date and provides detailed information to guide further
explorations. Requiring considerable waving of the arms as students generate predictions
for rising, transiting, and setting times, this session has been dubbed Moon Dance 1.

   Table V.2 summarizes the central ideas about the Sun and the Moon inferred from these
observations.

526 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   TABLE V.2 Central Ideas about the Sun and the Moon

                  TABLE V.2 Central Ideas about the Sun and the Moon

Sketch of set up  Evidence        Central Ideas                          Vocabulary

                            The shape of the lit
                            portion of the Moon
                            that we see from
                            Earth changes in a
                            regular pattern.

                            The angle formed by
                            pointing one arm at
                            the Moon and one
                            arm at the Sun
                            changes in a regular
                            pattern related to the
                            changing shape of the
                            lit portion of the
                            Moon that we see.

                            The lit side of the
                            Moon is always on the
                            same side as the Sun.

                            III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 527
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                                                       The angle formed by
                                                                       pointing one arm at
                                                                       the Sun and one arm
                                                                       at the Moon is useful
                                                                       for predicting when
                                                                       and where to look for
                                                                       the Moon.

                                                                       The Moon is visible at
                                                                       different times
                                                                       depending upon its
                                                                       phase.

Complete your responses to questions 5.15-5.19 and Tables V.1 and V.2. Then summarize
what you have learned before looking at an example of student work estimating rising,
transiting, and setting times for a 1st quarter Moon as well as an example summary of
central ideas about the Sun and the Moon.

2. Example of student work illustrating how to predict rising, transiting, and
setting times for a first quarter Moon.

           To be able to determine where the moon will be at specific times, one can develop
           and utilize a `sun clock'. The sun clock is able to `tell time' based on where the sun
           seems to be in the sky (or below the horizon) over 24 hours. For example, if you were
           looking for a 1st quarter moon, we know the angle between the sun and the moon
           is 90 degrees and the moon is lit on the right. Therefore, by putting your right arm
           towards the sun, 90 degrees behind that is where the moon will be. Therefore, the 1st
           quarter moon will rise at 12 pm, will be high in the sky at 6 pm, and will be setting at
           midnight as shown in the figure (5.20).

                      FIG. 5.20 Predicting rising, transiting, and setting times for a 1st
                      quarter Moon.

528 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                                                                          Physics student, Fall 2013

3. Example of student work summarizing central ideas about the Moon

           A student summarized central ideas about the Moon as shown below:
              Continuing to observe the Moon. Figure (5.21) presents my observations from my

           sky calendar so far.

                      FIG. 5.21. Student's observations of the Moon, April 17-28, 2016.

              During the week of April 17, I looked for the moon at 8pm, which is right before
           sunset. The lit part of the moon was on the right and it continued to increase
           until there was a full moon on April 22. The angle between the sun and the moon
           continued to increase, changing from an obtuse angle into a straight angle. When
           there was a full moon, the angle between the sun and the moon was a straight angle.
           Since then, I have not been able to see the moon due to it being cloudy.

              Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
              This section will discuss ideas about the moon, as well as the evidence that

                                                                                                                 III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 529
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           supports those ideas. (Figure 5.22) is a chart made in class. Each row of this table
           presents a different idea. Those ideas will be discussed below.

                 FIG. 5.22 Student's entries in a table summarizing findings about the phases
                 of the Moon.

              The shape of the lit portion of the Moon that we see from Earth changes in a
           regular pattern. There are 8 different phases of the moon. In the New Moon phase,
           the moon is completely shaded, so there is no lit portion of the moon that we see.

              In the Waxing Crescent phase, there is a growing small portion, (say about ¼), on
           the right side of the moon that is lit.

              In the First Quarter phase, the right half of the moon is lit.
              In the Waxing Gibbous phase, there is a growing big portion, (say about ¾), on the
           right side of the moon that is lit.
              In the Full Moon phase, the entire moon is lit.
              In the Waning Gibbous phase, there is a decreasing big portion, (say about ¾), on
           the left side of the moon that is lit.
              In the Third Quarter phase, the left half of the moon is lit.
              In the Waning Crescent phase, there is a decreasing small portion, (say about ¼),
           on the left side of the moon that is lit.
              A general description of the pattern observed is that the moon is completely

530 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                  This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

shaded and then the right side of the moon slowly becomes more and more lit until
the entire moon is lit. After the entire moon is lit, the right side of the moon slowly
becomes more and more shaded until the entire moon is shaded again.

   The angle formed by pointing one arm at the Moon and one arm at the Sun
changes in a regular pattern related to the changing shape of the lit portion of the
Moon that we see. The stick figures in the chart above have one arm pointing at the
moon and one arm pointing at the sun. The arms make an appropriate angle for
each phase. There is a different figure for each of the phases.

   In the New Moon phase, there is a 0° angle between the moon and the sun.
   In the Waxing Crescent phase, there is an acute angle between the moon and the
sun.
   In the First Quarter phase, there is a right angle between the moon and the sun.
   In the Waxing Gibbous phase, there is an obtuse angle between the moon and the
sun.
   In the Full Moon phase, there is a straight angle between the moon and the sun.
   In the Waning Gibbous phase, there is an obtuse angle between the sun and the
moon.
   In the Third Quarter phase, there is a right angle between the sun and the moon.
   In the Waning Crescent phase, there is an acute angle between the sun and the
moon.
   A general description of the pattern observed between this angle and the lit
portion of the moon we see is that the greater the lit portion of the moon, the greater
the angle between the sun and the moon. The smaller the lit portion of the moon, the
smaller the angle between the sun and the moon.
   The lit side of the Moon is always on the same side as the Sun. There are several
observations that support this claim. On March 29 at 9:30 am, I observed that the
sun was on the left side of the moon and the lit part of the moon was on the left.
   On April 2 at 9:15 am, I observed that the sun was on the left side of the moon and
the lit part of the moon was on the left.
   On April 11 at 7:45 am, I observed that the sun was on the right side of the moon
and the lit part of the moon was on the right.
   On April 19, at 8:00 pm, I observed that the sun was on the right side of the moon
and the lit part of the moon was on the right.
   A summary of this pattern is that when the sun is on the right side of the moon,
the right side of the moon is lit and when the sun is on the left side of the moon, the
left side on the moon is lit.

                                                                                                III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 531
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

              The angle formed by pointing one arm at the Moon and one arm at the Sun is
           useful for predicting when and where to look for the Moon. Figure (5.23) is a model
           of a sun clock.

              This sun clock can be used to generate predictions for rising, transiting (high in
           the sky), and setting times for various phases of the moon as shown in Table (V.2).
           We can use the sun to tell approximately what time it is. The suns above the horizon
           represent where we see the sun at certain times and the suns below the horizon
           represent where we can envision the sun being located at certain times. This allows
           us to use the sun as a 24-hour clock.

                                      FIG. 5.23 Student's sketch for a sun clock.

              Since the moon rises on the East side of the horizon, in the same position of the
           sun at 6 am on the sun clock, we can use the angle between the sun and the moon
           to predict about the time that the moon rises. For example, during a First Quarter
           phase, there is a right angle between the sun and the moon, with the sun on the right
           side of the moon. So, looking at the sun clock, you look at what time the sun makes a
           right angle with the 6 am time, with the sun on the right side of the moon. The sun
           makes a right angle with the 6 am time at the 12 pm time, so during a First Quarter
           phase, the moon rises at 12 pm.

              During a Waning Crescent phase, there is an acute angle between the sun and the
           moon, with the sun on the left side of the moon. So, looking at the sun clock, you look

532 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                  This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

at what time the sun makes an acute angle with the 6 am time, with the sun on the
left side of the moon. The sun makes an acute angle with the 6 am time at about
3am, so during a Waning Crescent phase, the moon rises at about 3 am, or sometime
between 12 am and 6 am.

   Since the moon transits high in the sky, in the same position of the sun at 12 pm on
the sun clock, we can use the angle between the sun and the moon to predict about
the time that the moon transits. For example, during a Full Moon, there is a straight
angle between the sun and the moon, with the sun on the right side of the moon. So,
looking at the sun clock, you look at what time the sun makes a straight angle with
the 12 pm time, with the sun on the right side of the moon. The sun makes a straight
angle with the 12 pm time at the 12 am time, so during a Full Moon, the moon transits
at 12 am.

   During a Waning Gibbous moon, there is an obtuse angle between the sun and the
moon, with the sun on the left side of the moon. So, looking at the sun clock, you look
at what time the sun makes an obtuse angle with the 12 pm time, with the sun on the
left side of the moon. The sun makes an obtuse angle with the 12 pm time at about 3
am, so during a Waning Gibbous moon, the moon transits at about 3 am, or between
12 am and 6 am.

   Since the moon sets on the West side of the horizon, in the same position of the
sun at 6 pm on the sun clock, we can use the angle between the sun and the moon to
predict about the time that the moon sets. For example, during a Waning Crescent
phase, there is an acute angle between the sun and the moon, with the sun on the left
side of the moon. So, looking at the sun clock, you look at what time the sun makes
an acute angle with the 6 pm time, with the sun on the left side of where the moon is.
The sun makes an acute angle with the 6 pm time at about the 3 pm time, so during
a Waning Crescent phase, the moon sets at about 3 pm, or between 12 pm and 6 pm.

   During a New Moon phase, there is a 0° angle between the sun and the moon. So,
looking at the sun clock, the moon and the sun will be in the same location in the sky.
This means that during a New Moon phase, the new moon sets at 6 pm.

   The Moon is visible at different times, depending on its phase. Waxing moons
are mostly visible during the day and some of the night, from about 9:00 am to 3:00
am, depending on whether it is a Waxing Crescent or a Waxing Gibbous moon. Full
moons are mostly visible from the evening to the early morning, from about 6:00 pm
to 6:00 am.

   Waning moons are mostly visible during the night and morning, from about 9:00
pm to 3:00 pm, depending on whether it is a Waning Gibbous or a Waning Crescent

                                                                                                III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 533
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           moon. Based on my observations, there was a Third Quarter moon on March 31 at
           9:32 am. There was a New Moon from April 5 until around April 8, at least the Moon
           was not visible although the sky was clear. There was a First Quarter moon on April
           15 at 8 pm. There was a Full Moon on April 22 at 8 pm. It has been too cloudy for me
           to see the moon recently, but I predict that there was a Third Quarter moon recently
           in the past day or two. Through my observations, I learned that a full cycle takes
           about a month. Next, I predict that the shaded part of the moon will continue to
           increase until there is a new moon.

              My observations can support the claims mentioned in (Fig. 5.22). I observed a new
           moon around April 7 when I looked for the moon in the morning and in the night
           and it was not visible, even though the sky was clear.

              I observed a Waxing Crescent moon on April 11 at 7:45 pm and the angle between
           the sun and the moon was acute.

              I observed a First Quarter moon on April 15 at 8:00 pm and the angle between the
           sun and the moon was right.

              I observed a Waxing Gibbous moon on April 18 at 8:00 pm and the angle between
           the sun and the moon was obtuse.

              I observed a full moon on April 22 at 8:00 pm and the angle between the sun and
           the moon was straight.

              I observed a Third Quarter moon on March 31 at 9:32 am and the angle between
           the sun and the moon was right.

              I observed a Waning Crescent moon on April 2 at 9:15 am and the angle between
           the sun and the moon was acute.

              I have not yet observed a Waning Gibbous moon. According to my observations,
           there should have been one recently, but it has been cloudy the past week, which
           made it so I couldn't see the moon. I should try to observe the Waning Gibbous moon
           a few days after the next full moon, between around 9:00 pm and 9:00 am.

                                                                                     Physics student, Spring 2016
   Also consider the durations of the various phases of the Moon, their connections to the
format of calendars, and ways in which this process of developing ideas about the phases
of the Moon, based on evidence, has modeled the nature of science.

534 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

               Question 5.20 What is the duration of each phase of the Moon?

  · There are eight phases of the Moon. Do the phases occur at a particular instant or
      over a period of time?
          New: an instant, when angle = 0 degrees
          Waxing crescent: during an increasing acute angle between 0º and 90º, about a
            week
          First quarter, an instant, when angle = 90 degrees
          Waxing gibbous, during an increasing obtuse angle between 90º and 180º, about
            a week
          Full, an instant, when angle = 180 degrees
          Waning gibbous, during a decreasing obtuse angle between 180º and 90º (or
            increasing between 180º and 270º), about a week
          Third quarter, an instant, when angle = 90º (or 270º).
          Waning crescent, during a decreasing acute angle (or increasing between 270º
            and 360º), about a week

  · The phases begin to repeat in about 29.5 days. Why do we have "weeks" in our
      calendar? "months"? (See https://www.timeanddate.com/calendar/days/7-days-
      week.html )

   Question 5.21 What aspects of the nature of science have students experienced so far?

   Table V.1 summarizes observations and interpretations based on a full cycle of the
Moon's phases. The students generated and explored their own questions as well as
issues guided by the instructor and course curriculum. The process was incremental,
with on-going daily observations, brief discussions during many class sessions, homework
assignments to report new data and interpretations, and a culminating session in which
small groups developed central ideas about the Sun and the Moon based on the
accumulated evidence. The students then used a model of the relation between the Sun
and the Moon as seen from Earth to make predictions for rising, transiting, and setting
times for each phase of the Moon.

   This was a long process, at least five weeks with considerable time and effort. Was
it worth it? There are computer programs that students can use to simulate the entire

                                                                                                                 III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence | 535
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

sequence of the Moon's changing phases within a much shorter time period by gathering
data from the computer rather than from the sky. From our perspective, when weather
permits, engaging students in actually looking for the Moon in the sky over this extended
time period is preferable. This process models the nature of science in sharpening skills
in recording observations accurately, generating questions of interest based on these
observations, looking for patterns in the data, discussing various interpretations, and
using those to make predictions of when and where to see the moon to maximize the
likelihood of observing the phenomena being studied.

   The central ideas about the Sun and the Moon, based on observational evidence, provide
the basis for the next step: developing explanatory models for three interconnected
phenomena: day and night, the phases of the moon, and the Earth's seasons. This extended
experience throughout the term is intended to foster deeper understandings of the Sun/
Earth/Moon system as well as of the nature of science and perhaps a greater sense of
satisfaction whenever the students see the Moon throughout their lives.

536 | III. Developing Central Ideas Based on Evidence
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop Two
Explanatory Models For Day And
Night

   This section develops two models for explaining the daily observation that when the Sun
is above the horizon, during day, one can see things, one's world outside is well lit; after
the Sun is below the horizon, during night, one's world outside is dark unless illuminated
by artificial lighting.

                         Question 5.22 Why does it get dark at night?

   Two models offer explanations for why it gets dark at night: the Fixed Earth, Revolving
Sun model and the Fixed Sun, Rotating Earth model.

A. Developing the Fixed Earth, Revolving Sun explanatory model
for day and night

   What does the Sun seem to be doing during a day and night? One can observe the Sun
seem to rise in the east in the early morning, climb in an arc until high in the sky at about
noon, continue to move across the sky while sinking in an arc, and set in the west before
it gets dark at night.

   After the sun sets, the sky is dark for many hours. One cannot see where the Sun seems
to have gone at night. One could infer, however, that the Sun continues its daily journey
of revolving in an arc around the other side of the Earth.

   This Earth-centered perspective, with the Sun revolving daily around a fixed Earth, is
also known as a geocentric model as shown in Fig. 5.24. The prefix geo- refers to the Earth
and centric refers to something that is at the center, something around which other things
revolve.

                                                                      IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop Two Explanatory Models For Day And Night | 537
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                                FIG. 5.24 Fixed Earth, Revolving
                                                Sun explanatory model for day
                                                and night.

  Equipment: To act out this model, use your head as representing the Earth and a fist
  as representing the Sun.

  · How can you move your fist to act out this model?
          In the northern hemisphere where we live, stand facing South. East is to the left;
            West is to the right.
            In the southern hemisphere, stand facing North. East is to the right; West is to
            the left.
          Make a fist to represent the Sun.
          Point your fist horizontally toward the east to represent the rising Sun.
          Move your fist upward in an arc until it is pointing high to represent the sun
            moving toward being high in the sky at noon.
          Continue moving your fist in a downward arc until it is pointing horizontally
            toward the west to represent the setting Sun.
          Continue moving a fist in an arc down behind your back toward what can be
            thought of as the Sun's position at midnight (change fists to do this).
          Move your fist in an arc up until it is pointing horizontally at the Sun's rising
            position in the east (change fists to do this).

  · What evidence supports this model?
          What do you see if you keep track of where the sun seems to be in the sky
            during the day?
          What perspective do you hear if someone uses language such as sunrise and

538 | IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop Two Explanatory Models For Day And Night
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

            sunset to refer to the sun's apparent daily arrival and departure?
          How are people acting if they look toward where the sun `is' in the sky in order

            to estimate the time?
          On what basis have instruments like a sundial been designed? For a sundial

            simulation, see: https://www.britannica.com/technology/sundial. For
            information about ancient sundials, see http://sundials.org/index.php/all-
            things-sundial/ancient-sundials ).
These all reflect a model of the Sun revolving daily around a fixed Earth.
   This is a very helpful model! We used it ourselves, along with the angle formed by
pointing one arm at the Sun and the other arm at the Moon, to make predictions about
when and where to look for each phase of the Moon. To make a sun clock, we labeled
the positions where we see the Sun in the sky with the associated times and continued
the pattern of such associated times when we envisioned the Sun continuing to move in a
circle below the horizon as shown in Fig. 5.23 (repeated).

                                      FIG. 5.23 (repeated) Student's sketch for a sun
                                      clock.

   People have believed in this model, that the Earth is at rest in the center of the universe,
for thousands of years. Aristotle, a Greek philosopher (384 BC - 322 BC), for example,
built upon earlier ideas by Plato and Eudoxus to propose that the Moon, Sun, planets, and

                                                                     IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop Two Explanatory Models For Day And Night | 539
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

fixed stars all revolve around the Earth on a series of concentric transparent crystalline
spheres. (see: http://www.pas.rochester.edu/~blackman/ast104/aristotle8.html).

   Ptolemy, a Greek astronomer who lived in Egypt during the 2nd century (85-165 AD),
tried to summarize everything known about astronomy at that time. He presented a
complex mathematical Earth-centered model that predicted well the motions of the
Sun, Moon, planets and stars (see: http://astronomy.nmsu.edu/geas/lectures/lecture11/
slide01.html . His writings, a series of books known as the Almagest, were accepted for
about 1400 years.

B. Developing the Fixed Sun, Rotating Earth explanatory model for
day and night

   An alternative model is harder to envision. How might the Earth be moving that makes
the Sun seem to be revolving daily around the Earth? If a lamp representing the Sun
is fixed in place, how can you move yourself to make the lamp seem to appear and
disappear? Spin! By spinning your body around in a circle, you can make the lamp seem
to `rise' and `set'.

   As shown in Fig. 5.25, a spinning Earth represents the fixed Sun, rotating Earth
explanatory model for day and night.

                            FIG. 5.25 Fixed Sun, Rotating Earth explanatory model for day
                            and night.

  Equipment: To act out this model, use a lamp without a shade in a dark room as

540 | IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop Two Explanatory Models For Day And Night
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

  representing the Sun, your head as representing the Earth, and your arms as forming
  a horizon. Also use a globe of the Earth and Internet resources about a Foucault
  pendulum and Coriolis effects.

  · How can you move your body to act out this model?
          Stand with both arms forming a horizon by being stretched out horizontally at
            your sides, with your head facing forward. Move so that the lamp seems to be
            rising, transiting, and setting although it remains fixed in place.
          Start by standing with a hand pointing at a lamp representing the Sun; this
            represents your position on a rotating Earth for which the Sun is just coming
            into view at the eastern horizon at about 6 a.m.
            (In the northern hemisphere where we live, point East with your left hand; in the
            southern hemisphere, point East with your right hand.)
          Continue holding your arms out horizontally at your sides while turning your
            body until you are facing the lamp; this represents your position on a rotating
            Earth for which the Sun appears to be high in the sky at about noon.
          Continue turning your body until your other hand is pointing at the lamp; this
            represents your position on a rotating Earth for which the Sun is passing out of
            view at the western horizon at about 6 p.m.
          Continue turning your body until your head is facing away from the lamp; this
            represents your position on a rotating Earth for which the Sun is completely out
            of view at about midnight.

          Continue turning your body until your hand is again pointing east at the lamp;
            this represents your position on a rotating Earth for which the Sun is just
            coming into view again in the eastern horizon at about 6 a.m.

  · What evidence supports this model?

   None to which we have direct access in this course. So far, this is just a theoretical idea
that we have been acting out with the movements described above.

   An everyday way to help students visualize the Fixed Sun, Rotating Earth model,
however, is to take advantage of equipment frequently found in classrooms: a globe of the
Earth.

   Tape a stick figure on the globe, at the place representing where you live

                                                                      IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop Two Explanatory Models For Day And Night | 541
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   Turn out the lights, turn on a lamp without a shade, spin the globe and watch the
      stick figure spin in and out of the light shining on it from the lamp.

   Note that this is another illustration of the proposed model of a rotating Earth rather
than evidence that supports its confirmation.

   This is known as the heliocentric model. The prefix helio- refers to the Sun and centric
refers to something that is at the center, something around which other things revolve.

   Later in this course, you will develop a logical argument in favor of the Fixed Sun,
Rotating Earth model. Meanwhile, here is some information about physical evidence for
the Fixed Sun, Rotating Earth model that can be obtained with resources outside this
course:

  · To observe an effect of the rotation of the Earth, visit a Foucault pendulum as shown
      in Fig. 5.26. (See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Foucault_pendulums for
      suggestions of where one can see such a pendulum. There is one, for example, at the
      Portland Oregon Convention Center, https://www.youtube.com/
      watch?v=6oYvffE6iGY , http://www.seattleastronomy.com/blog1/2011/10/the-
      worlds-biggest-foucault-pendulum/) Watch as a pendulum on a long cable swings
      back and forth. After a while the pendulum will appear to be swinging in a different
      direction as the floor has rotated underneath it as indicated by the fallen pegs in Fig.
      5.26.

                                            FIG. 5.26 Foucault pendulum at Museu
                                            de les Ciències, Valencia, Spain by
                                            Daniel Sancho. This file is licensed
                                            under the Creative Commons
                                            Attribution-Share Alike 2.0 Generic
                                            license.

542 | IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop Two Explanatory Models For Day And Night
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

  · To watch a Foucault pendulum in action via the Internet (see:
      https://www.geophysik.uni-muenchen.de/outreach/foucault-pendulum or this one
      at the Science Museum of Valencia, Spain https://www.youtube.com/
      watch?v=0cJosxIWISo ). Léon Foucault (1819-1868) demonstrated the Earth's rotation
      in this way in Paris in 1851 (https://www.aps.org/publications/apsnews/200702/
      history.cfm).

Another effect of the Earth's rotation involves weather. Storms in the northern
hemisphere swirl counterclockwise whereas those in the southern hemisphere swirl
clockwise. Gustave Coriolis, (1792-1843), a French mathematician and engineer, explained
this effect. For information about the Coriolis effect, see: https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=i2mec3vgeaI and https://www.nationalgeographic.org/encyclopedia/coriolis-
effect/

   For a real-time demonstration of the Coriolis effect, download a free version of the app
my radar, open, scroll through "layers" until you see "wind," click on wind, broaden the
view until you can see the oceans in both hemispheres and watch how the winds swirl.
The red dots indicate earthquakes.

  · How do the wind patterns shown in Fig. 5.27 indicate where the equator is?

                                                                      IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop Two Explanatory Models For Day And Night | 543
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                 Fig. 5.27. Example wind patterns in the northern and southern hemispheres.
                 https://www.myradar.com

See https://www.jpl.nasa.gov/spaceimages/details.php?id=pia20365 for examples of
ways that such wind diagrams can help develop understandings of El Niño events.

  · Make sketches illustrating the two explanatory models for day and night.
  · Also complete entries in Table V.3. Then write a summary of what you have learned

      before reading an example of student work about explanatory modes for day and
      night. Also available is a brief introduction to historical interpretations of these
      phenomena.

544 | IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop Two Explanatory Models For Day And Night
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

TABLE V.3 Developing Two Explanatory Models for Day and Night

TABLE V.3 Developing Two Explanatory Models for Day and Night/th>

URL/Sketch of set up                      Evidence  Central Ideas     Relevant
                                                                      Vocabulary
http://www.polaris.iastate.edu/                     Fixed Earth,
EveningStar/Unit2/unit2_sub1.htm                    Revolving Sun     Aristotle
                                                    Explanatory       (384-322 BC)
                                                    Model:
                                                                      Ptolemy
                                                    Sun seems to      2nd century AD
                                                    move east to
                                                    west, revolving     Sun clock
                                                    around the Earth  model
                                                    each day. Moon,   Revolve
                                                    planets, stars    Geocentric
                                                    also seem to do   model
                                                    this.

http://ian.umces.edu/blog/2014/01/14/               Fixed Sun,        Copernicus (1543
nicholas-copernicus-and-                            Rotating Earth    AD published
the-copernican-revolution/                          Explanatory       book)
(scroll to assumption #5)                           Model:
https://www.classzone.com/books/                                      Foucault
earth_                                              Sun seems to be   pendulum
science/terc/content/visualizations/                fixed. Moon,
es0403/es0403page01.cfm?chapter_                    planets, stars      Coriolis effect
no=visualization                                    also seem to be     Spinning globe
                                                    fixed over 24     model
http://education.nationalgeographic.com/            hours               Rotate
education/encyclopedia/coriolis-                                        Heliocentric
effect/?ar_a=1                                        Earth rotates   model
                                                    on its axis.
    https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=i2mec3vgeaI

1. Example of student work about developing two explanatory models for day and
night

   In representing the Fixed Earth, Revolving Sun exploratory model as shown in Fig. 5.28,
the student drew a stick figure to represent a person on a fixed earth. An arm points to
the east, where the Sun seems to rise; next the arm points high in the sky, where the Sun
seems to be about noon; and then the arm points to the west, where the Sun seems to set.

                                                                      IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop Two Explanatory Models For Day And Night | 545
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

To complete this representation, the arm finally swings down and around back up to the
rising position in the east to represent the Sun continuing its journey below the horizon

   In representing the Fixed Sun, Rotating Earth explanatory model, the student wrote,
Sun represented by light on stool, moon represented as basketball held in one place. I am
earth and I rotate counterclockwise. Left hand = rising, facing = high, right hand = setting;
*facing south.

                          FIG. 5.28 A student's entries in a table about explanatory models
                          for day and night.

              Developing two explanatory models for day and night. ...we discussed two
           explanatory models for day and night. We demonstrated these ideas by using our
           arms, a basketball, a light, and...our bodies to represent the Sun, the Moon, and
           the...earth.

              A Fixed Earth, Revolving Sun Model can explain day and night. As we have
           observed, the sun seems to rise in the east, move high across the sky, and set in the
           west. During this motion we stay `right here' on a fixed earth. This sounds familiar
           because this model is what we typically think: the sun rises and sets...In class we

546 | IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop Two Explanatory Models For Day And Night
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           modeled this by pointing one arm out with our hand representing the sun and then
           moving that arm in a circle to represent the sun rising, high in the sky, and setting.

              A Fixed Sun, Rotating Earth Model also can explain day and night. In this model
           the Sun is thought of as "just there" and we on the earth are moving. We modeled
           this in class by holding both arms straight out to our side, with one pointing at the
           lamp, then rotating in place so that the lamp (sun) seemed to rise, be high in the sky,
           and set while we spun around. First one arm pointed to the lamp (rising) and then
           (we were) facing the lamp (noon) and the other arm pointed to the lamp (setting) and
           then (we were) facing away from the lamp (midnight) and continuing to turn so the
           other arm was once again pointing at the lamp (rising).

                                                                                          Physics student

2. Interpreting two different models for the same phenomenon

   Having two different models that explain the same phenomenon frequently occurs as
one is exploring something of interest systematically. Eventually arguments based on
evidence may lead to confirming one explanation as more likely than the other. However,
both can be useful in particular contexts.

   When enjoying a beautiful sunset, for example, it is easy to "see" the Sun sinking
toward the horizon and hard to envision oneself instead as whizzing by a fixed Sun. The
Fixed Earth, Revolving Sun model seems attractive in that one can daily observe the Sun
apparently rising, moving high across the sky, and setting instead of thinking of oneself as
spinning by the Sun while on the surface of a rotating Earth. The Fixed Earth, Revolving
Sun model also can be useful, as in our formal process for predicting when and where to
look for the Moon as summarized in Table V.1.

   The history of ideas about the Earth's rotation is connected to ideas about the Earth's
relation to the Sun. In the early 1500's, a Polish astronomer, Nicholas Copernicus
(1473-1543), wrote in Latin about his assumptions that the Earth spins on its axis as
it revolves around the Sun, rather than the firmament (sun, moon, planets, and stars)
revolving around the Earth:

 5. Whatever motion appears in the firmament arises not from any motion of the
      firmament, but from the earth's motion. The earth together with its circumjacent
      elements performs a complete rotation on its fixed poles in a daily motion, while the

                                                                      IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop Two Explanatory Models For Day And Night | 547
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

      firmament and highest heaven abide unchanged. (translation)

 6. What appear to us as motions of the sun arise not from its motion but from the motion
      of the earth and our sphere, with which we revolve about the sun like any other planet.
      The earth has, then, more than one motion. (translation)

                                                                         Nicolaus Copernicus, Commentariolus
   (http://ian.umces.edu/blog/2014/01/14/nicholas-copernicus-and-the-copernican-
revolution/).

   This perspective was so controversial, however, that Copernicus did not publish his
ideas until 1543. His book On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Sphere appeared shortly
before his death.

   Almost a century later, in 1632, Galileo (1564-1642) published a book, Dialogue, later titled
Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems, in which he presented a discussion
among three individuals about the generally accepted geocentric Ptolemaic system and
the heliocentric Copernican system. In 1633, the Roman Catholic Church banned Galileo's
writings, including this book, and placed him under house arrest until his death in 1642.

   During the 350th anniversary of Galileo's death, in 1992, Pope John Paul II addressed
the Pontifical Academy of Sciences about "the Galileo case." He reported the findings of
a committee that had concluded that Galileo's preference for the Copernican perspective
was correct. (See https://www.nytimes.com/1992/10/31/world/after-350-years-
vatican-says-galileo-was-right-it-moves.html ). In his speech to the Academy, Pope John
Paul II said,

        12. Another lesson which we can draw is that the different branches of knowledge
     call for different methods. Thanks to his intuition as a brilliant physicist and by relying
     on different arguments, Galileo, who practically invented the experimental method,
     understood why only the Sun could function as the centre of the world, as it was
     then known, that is to say as a planetary system. The error of the theologians of
     the time, when they maintained the centrality of the Earth, was to think that our
     understanding of the physical world's structure was, in some way, imposed by the
     literal sense of the Sacred Scripture. Let us recall the celebrated saying attributed to
     Baronius: "Spiritui Sancto mentem fuisse nos docere quomodo ad coelum eatur non
     quomodo coelum gradiatur."* In fact the Bible does not concern itself with the details of
     the physical world, the understanding of which is the competence of human experience
     and reasoning. There exist two realms of knowledge, one which has its source in

548 | IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop Two Explanatory Models For Day And Night
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

     Revelation and one which reason can discover by its own power. To the latter belong
     especially the experimental sciences and philosophy. The distinction between the two
     realms of knowledge ought not to be understood as opposition. The two realms are not
     altogether foreign to each other; they have points of contact. The methodologies proper
     to each make it possible to bring out different aspects of reality.

                                                                                               Pope John Paul II, 1992

   Pope John Paul II, Address to the Plenary Session on `The Emergence of Complexity in Mathematics,
Physics, Chemistry and Biology' 31 October 1992, (Vatican City: the Pontifical Academy of Sciences).
http://www.accademiascienze.va/content/accademia/en/magisterium/johnpaulii/31october1992.html

   *Galileo also had quoted this saying in a letter to the Grand Duchess Christina of Tuscany in 1615: I would
say here something that was heard from an ecclesiastic of the most eminent degree: "That the intention of the Holy Ghost
is to teach us how one goes to heaven, not how heaven goes." (lines 373-376, bottom of page 5) https://hti.osu.edu/sites/
hti.osu.edu/files/galileo_galilei.pdf

   In this address, Pope John Paul II drew a clear distinction between the realm of religious
faith and the realm of the experimental sciences while offering respect for both. The
methodology of science involves making claims based on evidence and presenting
arguments that explain the rationale for why the evidence supports the claim.

                                                                     IV. Using Central Ideas to Develop Two Explanatory Models For Day And Night | 549
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an
Explanatory Model for the Phases of the
Moon

   As noted in II.B.4, Joseph's Moon, even very young children are aware of the Moon and
able to communicate what they are observing. That the Moon often is visible during the
day is a surprise to many adults. After starting to notice the Moon during the day, many
also become puzzled that the Moon sometimes seems to chase the Sun across the sky
but sometimes the Sun seems to chase the Moon. Also intriguing after more systematic
observation is the paradox that the Moon seems to move like the Sun, from east to west
over several hours, but in the opposite direction, from west to east, over several days.

   These are examples of the increasing complexity typical of scientific endeavors, in
which more detailed observations prompt deeper pondering and questioning. This section
explains these observations in the context of developing an explanatory model for the
Moon's changing phases. We then consider how the Moon appears to us here on Earth
compared to how the Moon would appear if we could look down upon the Moon, Earth,
and Sun from above the solar system. The section also discusses the causes of solar and
lunar eclipses and concludes with exploring Internet resources about the Moon to share
with a friend or family member.

     Question 5.23 Why does the Moon seem to have different shapes at different times?

   This section begins with a review of relevant central ideas, next presents a report on
a child's insights about the Sun and the Moon, and then proceeds with developing an
explanation for the Moon's changing phases as seen from here on Earth.

550 | V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

A. Reviewing central ideas about the relationship between the
Sun and the Moon

What central ideas developed so far describe the relationship between the Sun and the
Moon?

  · The Sun is always on the same side as the lit side of the Moon.

  · The shape of the lit portion of the Moon that we see from Earth changes in a regular
      pattern:
      Where we live in the northern hemisphere, the shape of the lit portion of the Moon
      grows from a crescent lit on the right (waxing crescent), to half lit on the right (first
      quarter), to more than half lit on the right (waxing gibbous), to fully lit; then
      decreases to more than half lit on the left (waning gibbous), half lit on the left (third
      quarter), to a crescent lit on the left (waning crescent), to no moon visible (new
      moon). In the southern hemisphere, the shape of the lit portion of the Moon changes
      in a similar pattern but from lit on the left (waxing phases) to lit on the right (waning
      phases).

  · The angle formed by pointing one arm at the Moon and one arm at the Sun changes
      in a regular pattern related to the changing shape of the lit portion of the Moon that
      we see:
      As the lit side of the Moon seems to get bigger, the angle gets bigger until the Moon
      is fully lit and the angle is a straight angle; as the lit side of the Moon seems to get
      smaller until not visible, the angle gets smaller until the angle is zero.

B. Building upon a child's insights about the phases of the Moon

   Andy diSessa (1986) described an experience that he had one day as a child. He was
tossing a ball up and catching it when he happened to notice both the moon and the ball
as he looked up in the sky. When he tossed the ball straight up so that it was high enough
to seem to be near the moon, he suddenly realized, "I was seeing the phase of my little
tennis ball/moon and that it was the same as the phase of the real moon!" If feasible, we try

                                                               V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon | 551
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

to schedule modeling the phases of the moon on a sunny day when students can replicate
this experience by seeing the lighted side of a ball next to the moon they are seeing in the
sky. (We provide balls on sticks that the students hold in their hands rather than tossing
their balls.)

           diSessa, A. (1986). "Artificial worlds and real experience." Instructional Science, 14, 207-227. (p. 213).

C. Developing an explanatory model for the phases of the Moon

As a first step in explaining the changing phases of the Moon, consider the following:

  · What is the source of the light that shines on the Earth from the Moon?
  · What phase is the Moon in today?
  · What do you expect to see in the next few days?

 Equipment: To model the phases of the Moon, go outside on a sunny day or use a lamp
 without a shade to represent the Sun in a dark room; use a small ball (golf ball, ping
 pong ball, Styrofoam ball) on a stick to represent the Moon, and your head to represent
 the Earth.

  · If outside, DO NOT LOOK DIRECTLY AT THE SUN!
      If inside, stand well away from a lamp without a shade in a dark room.

  · How can you hold up your ball so that the lit portion of the ball looks like the current
      lit portion of the Moon in the sky?

  · How can you move your ball to see on the ball here on Earth all of the phases of the
      Moon that you have been observing in the sky?
          For example, hold the ball up so that the Sun (or the lamp) is shining on the ball
            to light the ball as a waxing crescent ball.
            What is the angle formed by pointing one arm at the Sun (or lamp) and the other
            arm holding out the ball?
          What phase will the Moon have next?
          How can you move the ball to match a first quarter Moon?
            What is the angle for arms pointing at the Sun and first quarter Moon?
          How can you move the ball to match a waxing gibbous Moon?

552 | V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

            What is the angle for arms pointing at the Sun and a waxing gibbous Moon?
          How can you move the ball to match a full Moon?

            What is the angle for arms pointing at the Sun and a full Moon?
            To avoid a lunar eclipse hold the ball a little above your shadow.
          How can you move the ball to get it to look like a waning gibbous Moon?
            What is the angle for arms pointing at the Sun and a waning gibbous Moon?
          How can you move the ball to get it to look like a third quarter Moon?
            What is the angle for arms pointing at the Sun and a third quarter Moon?
          How can you move the ball to get it to look like a waning crescent Moon?
            What is the angle for arms pointing at the Sun and a waning crescent Moon?
          How can you move the ball to get it to "look" like a new Moon?
            What is the angle for arms pointing at the Sun and a new Moon?
            To avoid a solar eclipse hold the ball a little above your view of the lamp.

  · How have you moved the ball to replicate seeing on the ball the same pattern of
      changing phases here on Earth that you have observed on the Moon in the sky?

  · What can you infer is the cause of the changing phases of the Moon?
  · Make a series of sketches that illustrate how you used the Sun (or a lamp without a

      shade as a model of the Sun), a ball on a stick, and yourself to model the phases of
      the Moon.

This explanatory model for the phases of the Moon can be summarized as:
        The phases of the Moon are caused by the Moon revolving around the Earth.

  · Take the perspective of looking down on this Sun/Earth/Moon system from above:
          Model this in a dark room lit by a lamp with no shade.
          Hold one hand out in front of your body, thumb up, so you are looking down on
            the thumb from above. Let the thumb represent the Earth.
          Hold a ball in the other hand to represent the Moon. Move the ball around your
            thumb while looking down on both.
          For each phase, look at the side of the ball that is facing toward the lamp. How is
            it lit?
          For each phase, look at the side of the ball that is facing away from the lamp.
            How is it lit?

                                                               V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon | 553
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

  · What does this imply about the shaded side of a phase of the Moon as seen from
      Earth?

Complete entries in Table V.4. Then write a summary of what you have learned before
reading an example of student work about developing an explanatory model for the phases
of the Moon.

554 | V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon
            This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

TABLE V.4 Developing an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon

TABLE V.4 Developing an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon

Sketch of set up                  Evidence  Central Ideas           Relevant Vocabulary

                                            Light from the Sun is
                                            reflected from the
                                            Moon toward the Earth

https://starchild.gsfc.nasa.gov/            The phases of the
docs/                                       Moon are caused by
StarChild/questions/                        the Moon revolving
phases.html                                 counterclockwise
                                            around the Earth about
                                            once a month as seen
                                            from our location in
                                            the northern
                                            hemisphere.

                                  V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon | 555
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                                                        The side of the Moon
                                                                        facing the Sun is
                                                                        always fully lit.

                                                                        The shaded side of a
                                                                        phase of the Moon is
                                                                        the shadow of the
                                                                        Moon on itself. It is
                                                                        not the shadow of the
                                                                        Earth.

1. Examples of student work developing an explanatory model of the phases of the
Moon

              The Sun is the source of light from the Moon on the Earth. Through our
           knowledge that the Moon does not appear to be fully lit, based on our observations,
           we can infer that this light is not coming from the Moon but from another source.

              We can also surmise that from these observations we see the lit portion of the
           Moon to be always on the same side as the Sun, so the Moon's light is coming from
           the Sun.

              We infer that light rays from the Sun are bouncing off the Moon in all directions
           from the surface of the Moon that is facing the Sun; some of these light rays travel in
           the direction of Earth when some of the lit part of the Moon's surface is facing Earth.

              The phases of the Moon are caused by the Moon revolving counter-clockwise
           around the Earth about once a month as seen from our location. Going to the roof
           of a building you can create a replication of what happens with the Earth, Sun and
           Moon. The Sun was the Sun and I was me standing on Earth and I used a physical
           model of the Moon (a ball) to represent the Moon.

              By holding the ball directly in front of the sun, in front of my face, this represented
           new moon. (The ball blocked the light of the Sun from my eyes.)

               By moving the ball to the left at an acute angle from the sun we were able to see
           the depiction of the waxing crescent moon on the ball.

556 | V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

              We did this at each stage as we simulated a revolution of the ball around the
           "earth" to see all the phases of the moon until the ball was in front of us and the sun,
           creating a new moon once again.

              This could also be done in a darkened room with a light from a lamp representing
           the Sun, but if you are doing this method you have to remember to back up across
           the room to get the right effect on the ball.

              From these activities here on Earth we can infer that we see the changing phases
           of the Moon in the sky because the Moon is REVOLVING around the Earth.

                                                                                          Physics student, Fall 2014
   Another student included a set of diagrams that showed the Sun as well as a student
holding a ball on a stick in such a way as to show the lit portion on the ball for each phase
of the ball. The angles formed by pointing toward the Sun (in the sky or toward a lamp in
a dark room) and holding out the ball were the same as observed in the sky for the phases
when pointing one arm at the Sun and the other arm at the Moon.
   As shown in Fig. 5.29, the student was able to create on the ball the phases seen as
waxing crescent, first quarter, waxing gibbous, and full Moon in the sky.

                 FIG. 5.29 Student using a ball on a stick to model the waxing phases of the
                 Moon.

   As shown in Fig. 5.30, the student also was able to create on the ball the phases seen as
waning gibbous, third quarter, waning crescent, and new Moon in the sky.

                                                               V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon | 557
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                 FIG. 5.30 Student using a ball on a stick to model the waning phases of the
                 Moon.

                                                                                          Physics student, Fall 2016
   Figures 5.29 and 5.30 suggest why this process has been dubbed Moon Dance 2.
   To model the phases of the Moon as seen from above the solar system, the students held
out their thumbs and looked down as they moved their balls around their thumbs. This
showed clearly that in all positions the side of the ball facing toward the lamp was always
fully lit and that the side of the ball facing away from the lamp was always dark. A student
reflected upon the experience of looking down on the ball as it revolved around the thumb
as follows:

              The side of the Moon facing the Sun is always fully lit. In class students were
           given a ball on a stick. This ball was small, approximately the size of a ping pong ball.
           Students were asked to picture their thumb as the earth, and to revolve the "moon"
           around our "earth". While doing this a lamp was placed on one side of the room
           and turned on to represent the sun. As students revolved their moon around their
           earth they were able to see that in fact there is always half of the moon being lit, the
           portion that is pointing towards the sun. However, due to the position of the moon
           in reference to the earth we cannot always see this full lit portion.

              The dark side of the moon is the shadow of the Moon on itself. Students learned in
           one of our early lessons that there are two types of shadows, there is a shadow cast
           by an object blocking light from traveling on its intended path, and there is a shadow
           formed on the back of the object that is blocking the light. The dark side of the moon
           is actually the shadow formed on the back of the object blocking the light, the moon.

558 | V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                                                                          Physics student, Fall 2015
   When asked why the moon seems to have different shapes at different times, many
people attribute the shaded side of a phase of the Moon to the shadow of the Earth. This
may be because they associate shadows with situations in which light from a source is
blocked by a barrier. In this case, however, the barrier is the Moon itself. This is similar
to the shadow on the back side of a barrier placed between a lamp and a screen, as in
Question 1.6 and Fig. 1.8 in Unit 1.

D. Explaining a paradox based on detailed observations of the
Moon

Question 5.24 Why does the Moon seem to move east to west during several hours but west
to east during several days?

  · Discuss a paradox that has emerged from detailed observations of the Sun and Moon
          Present observations that indicate that the Moon seems to move from east to
            west during several hours.
          Also present observations that indicate that the Moon seems to move from west
            to east during several days.
          Explain this paradox using the explanatory models developed for day and night
            and for the phases of the Moon.

  · What does this explanation imply about the status of the two models for day and
      night?

   Complete entries in Table V.5. Then write a summary of what you have learned before
reading an example of student work about developing an explanation of the paradox that
the Moon seems to move from east to west during several hours but west to east during
several days.

                                                               V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon | 559
                  This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

TABLE V.5 Explaining a Paradox Based on Detailed Observations of the Moon

TABLE V.5 Explaining a Paradox Based on Detailed Observations of the Moon

Sketch of set up  Evidence  Central Ideas                                                Relevant Vocabulary

                            The Moon seems to
                            move east to west
                            during several hours
                            because the viewer on
                            the surface of the
                            Earth is moving,
                            spinning by the Moon
                            as the Earth rotates
                            daily on its axis.

                            The Moon seems to
                            move west to east
                            during several days
                            because the Moon
                            actually IS moving as
                            it revolves
                            counterclockwise
                            around the Earth as
                            seen from our location
                            in the northern
                            hemisphere.

1. Example of student work resolving the paradox about the apparent movements
of the Moon

              In figure (5.31) below, we were drawing a model for our observations of the sky
           over several hours. When we watch the sun and moon over several hours, the sun
           seems to rise in the east, move across the sky in an arc shape, and then set in the
           west. The moon seems to do the same by rising in the east, transitioning across the
           sky in an arc and setting in the west. This model makes it appear as if, for day and
           night, the planet Earth is stationary and the sun and moon are revolving around
           the earth each 24 hours. This model is easy for one to wrap the brain around, as it
           is what we initially observe, and it is in the language we learned to describe what
           we see, the sun rises, the sun sets. This model is challenged, however, by the second
           model, figure (5.32).

560 | V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon
                  This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

               FIG. 5.31 Student sketch of 3rd quarter moon appearing to
               move east to west during several hours.

   In figure (5.32), we were drawing a model for if one was to watch the sky over
several days, observing at the same time each day. In this model, the moon seemed
to move from west to east, contrary to the first model. If someone were to look at the
moon over many days at 6 pm, where we live they would see a waxing crescent moon
low in the southwestern sky, then a first quarter moon high in the southern sky,
followed by a waxing gibbous moon midway up in the southeastern sky, and finally
a full moon rising in the east. This model makes it seem as if the moon is revolving
around the earth from west to east over about two weeks.

               FIG. 5.32 Student sketch of subsequent phases appearing to
               move west to east during several days when viewed from the
               same location at the same time such as 6 pm each day.

   These two models pose a paradoxical situation where the moon both seems to be
moving across the sky from east to west, and west to east. How can this be? Well it

                                              V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon | 561
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           is important to understand that, although we can more easily accept the stationary
           Earth model in figure (5.31), that model does not make it the best. In order to explain
           this paradox, we need to be able to accept (the following).

              The sun is still and it is the earth that is moving by rotating on its axis. If we
           remain in the same location on the earth as it first rotates by the sun, the sun seems
           to rise in the east. As (our location on) the earth rotates directly by the sun, the sun
           seems to be moving high across the sky, around noon. Finally, as (our location on)
           the earth spins all the way past the sun, the sun seems to set, and the daylight ends.
           When our location on Earth rotates away from the sun, it becomes night.

              The same happens with the moon. The earth's first rotation by the moon shows the
           moon appearing to rise. As (our location on) the earth spins directly by the moon,
           the moon seems to be transitioning across the sky in an arc. As (our location on)
           the earth finally spins all the way past the moon, the moon seems to be setting. This
           model is a way to defend the apparent daily east to west motion of both the sun and
           moon due to the earth's daily rotation on its axis.

              In class, we used ping pong balls on a stick to represent the moon and a lamp
           to represent the sun...With the ball on the stick physical model representing the
           moon we replicated the changing phases of the moon. By moving the ball in an orbit
           around our heads, we could see the waxing crescent ball, first quarter ball, waxing
           gibbous ball, full ball, waning gibbous ball, third quarter ball, waning crescent ball,
           and new ball.

              From these models, we can infer that the moon is moving from west to east over
           about two weeks, caused by the moon revolving around the earth. We also could see
           that the fixed sun, rotating earth model was the truer model. The apparent east to
           west movement during the day is only due to the earth spinning on its axis. That is
           how we have explained this paradoxical situation.

                                                                                          Physics student, Fall 2016
   Note the difference in meaning between the two words describing the motions involved
here:

        REVOLVE: one object moves around another; the Moon REVOLVES around Earth
     roughly once a month (29.5 days)

        ROTATE: spinning on an axis; the Earth ROTATES once daily

562 | V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

2. Acting out the explanation of this paradox

Playing the roles of an observer on Earth, of the Moon, and of the Sun in the paradox can
help build understandings of what the paradox is and how it can be explained:

 Equipment: Small groups of three students work together to act out this paradox: use a
 flashlight to represent the Sun and a ball to represent the Moon; one person plays the
 role of an observer on Earth, another person holds the ball and plays the role of the
 Moon, the third person holds the flashlight and plays the role of the Sun.

  · Where should the "Moon" person stand with respect to the "Sun" person and the
      "Earth" person in order to model the current phase of the Moon?

  · For a first quarter Moon, for example, the "Moon" person should stand so that the
      "Earth" person can form a right angle by pointing arms at the "Sun" person holding
      the flashlight and at the "Moon" person holding the ball. As shown in Fig. 5.3, this
      could model a rising first quarter Moon .

                                                        FIG. 5.33 Modeling a
                                                        rising first quarter Moon
                                                        as seen when the
                                                        transiting Sun is high in
                                                        the southern sky at our
                                                        location in the northern
                                                        hemisphere.

  · These positions model an observer at our location who is looking at a rising first
      quarter Moon and pointing arms at the Sun and the Moon, where the arms form a

                                                              V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon | 563
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

      right angle. What time is it when the first quarter Moon is in the rising position?

  · How can you model the apparent east to west daily motion of the Moon? There are
      two models:
          One model is the Fixed Earth, Revolving Sun model. What would the "Earth
            Person" do to act out this model? What would the "Sun" person do? What would
            the "Moon" person do?
          The "Earth" person would just stand there, for example, while watching the "Sun"
            person and the "Moon" person moving quickly in a circle around the "Earth" one
            time. Which way would they move: clockwise or counterclockwise?

          The other model is the Fixed Sun, Rotating Earth model. What would the "Sun"
            person do to act out this model? What would the "Earth" person do? What
            would the "Moon" person do?

          The "Sun" person would just stand there, for example, as would the "Moon"
            person for now. The "Earth" person would model a rotating Earth. How would
            the "Earth" person do that? .

                                                    FIG. 5.34. Modeling the
                                                    apparent east to west
                                                    motion of a first quarter
                                                    Moon due to the rotation
                                                    of the Earth (as seen from
                                                    our location in the
                                                    northern hemisphere).

          As shown in Fig. 5.34, the "Earth" person could start by modeling what happens
            when the first quarter Moon appears to be rising. Instead of using arms at right
            angles to point at the Moon and the Sun, the "Earth" person would hold both

564 | V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

            arms stretched out to the side to represent the horizon. One arm would
            represent looking east, the other arm would represent looking west. Wherever
            the "Earth" person faces would represent looking high in the sky (south in the
            northern hemisphere, north in the southern hemisphere).
          In this starting position, the "Earth" person would be pointing the "looking east"
            arm at the "Moon" person while facing the "Sun" person. This would model a first
            quarter Moon rising in the east while chasing a transiting Sun high in the sky at
            noon.
          After rotating a quarter turn, the "Earth" person would be facing the "Moon"
            person while pointing the "looking west" arm at the "Sun" person. This would
            model a first quarter Moon transiting high in the sky while chasing a setting Sun
            at about 6 p.m.
          After rotating another quarter turn, the "Earth" person would be pointing the
            "looking west" arm at the "Moon" person while facing away from the "Sun"
            person. This would model a first quarter Moon setting in a dark sky with the Sun
            not in sight at about midnight.
          After rotating another quarter turn, the "Earth" person would be pointing the
            `looking east" arm at the "Sun" person while facing away from the "Moon"
            person. This would model a rising Sun with the Moon not in sight at about 6 am.
          The next quarter rotation would return to the initial position modeling a rising
            first quarter Moon with a transiting Sun high in the sky at about noon.
          During one rotation by the "Earth" person, both the "Sun" person and the
            "Moon" person will appear to the "Earth" person as having risen, transmitted,
            and set even though neither moved at all.

  · Practice both models, with each person playing each role, until all are confident
      about understanding both models for explaining the apparent east to west daily
      motion of the Moon.

Now consider what is happening during the apparent motion of the Moon from west to
east over several days as illustrated in Fig. 5.32.

  · How can you model the apparent west to east motion of the Moon over several days?
      There are two models:
          One model is the Fixed Earth, Revolving Sun model. What would the "Earth
            Person" do to act out this model? What would the "Sun" person do? What would

                                                               V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon | 565
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

            the "Moon" person do?
          The "Earth" person would just stand there, watching while the "Sun" person and

            the "Moon" person move quickly in a circle around the "Earth" many times. If
            starting in the first quarter phase, for example, the "Moon" person would appear
            to be chasing the "Sun" person but slowing down, falling more and more
            "behind" the "Sun" person during each of the 7 cycles (days) until full Moon ;
            however, after the full Moon phase, the "Sun" person would appear to be chasing
            the "Moon" person, but speeding up, getting closer and closer to the "Moon"
            person during each of the next 7 cycles (days) until the 3rd quarter Moon. Such
            complicated slowing down and speeding up motions, with the Moon and Sun
            changing who seems to be chasing whom, seem problematic.
          The other model is the Fixed Sun, Rotating Earth model. What would the "Sun"
            person do to act out this model? What would the "Earth" person do? What
            would the "Moon" person do?
          The "Sun" person would just stand there, watching while the "Earth" person
            rotates in place with arms outstretched representing the rotating horizon. As
            the "Earth" person's arm representing the eastern horizon swings by, the "Moon"
            person would seem to be rising.
          As the "Earth" person's face turns toward the "Moon" person, the "Moon" person
            would seem to be transiting.
          As the "Earth" person's arm representing the western horizon swings by, the
            "Moon" person would seem to be setting.
          As the "Earth" person turns away, the "Moon" person would seem to disappear
            from sight,
          As before, during one rotation of the "Earth" person, the "Moon" person would
            seem to be moving from east to west, rising in the east, transiting high in the
            sky, and setting in the west during each cycle.
          Now, however, the "Moon" person would also move, slowly revolving around the
            "Earth" person. The "Sun" person would continue to just stand in the same place.
          During the first 7 "Earth" person rotations, however, the "Moon" person would
            revolve to the full Moon position and after another 7 "Earth" person rotations,
            the "Moon" person would revolve to the 3rd quarter Moon position, which would
            appear to the "Earth" person as moving west to east as shown in Fig. 5.32.
          Such motions do not require the complexity of a Moon slowing down and a Sun
            speeding up while changing positions relative to each other. This model involves
            only an Earth spinning on its axis in a consistent way with a Moon revolving in

566 | V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

            its orbit around the Earth, also in a consistent way.

Be sure to shift roles so that all three members of the group play all three roles.

  · Discuss with one another which model of the Sun, Earth, and Moon system makes
      the most sense in this situation: the Fixed Earth and Daily Revolution of the Sun and
      Moon around the Earth? Or the Fixed, Sun, Daily Rotating Earth, and Monthly
      Revolution of the Moon around the Earth?

  · Summarize concisely what the paradox is and how it can be explained.

   Students can conduct this activity without a ball if the "Moon" person's face is regarded
as representing the Moon. Another possibility is to have students stand as a group, far
enough apart to model rotating Earths, while one student revolves around the group while
holding a ball representing the Moon revolving around the Earth and while a lamp simply
remains in place.

   This complex process of acting out the explanation of the Moon apparently moving east
to west over several hours, due to the daily rotation of the Earth, and actually moving west
to east over several days, due to the revolution of the Moon around the Earth, has been
dubbed Moon Dance 3.

E. Considering other aspects of the Moon's motion

   Several questions typically arise after students have experience observing the moon and
explaining what they have seen. These include whether the moon rotates while it revolves
and what the Moon's phases look like from other places.

Question 5.25 Does the Moon rotate while it revolves around the Earth?

  · Observe the features visible on the Moon that you see during each phase. (see:
      https://www.space.com/10610-moon-craters-skywatching-tips.html )

  · Do the locations of particular craters seem to change? Is the crater named for
      Copernicus, for example, always in the same place on the Moon as seen from your

                                                               V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon | 567
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

      location (midway somewhat to the left of the center as seen from our location)?
  · Stand in pairs. One of you model the rotating Earth while the other models the

      revolving Moon as in Question 5.24. The person modeling the revolving Moon should
      keep facing the Earth during a complete revolution.
  · Start in the new moon position. If the person modeling the revolving Moon always
      faces the person modeling the Earth, is the "Moon" rotating while revolving?

          In the new moon position, if the person modeling the revolving Moon is facing
            the person modeling the Earth, what part of the room is the "Moon" person
            seeing?

          In the 1st quarter position, if the person modeling the revolving Moon is facing
            the person modeling the Earth, what part of the room is the "Moon" person
            seeing now?

          In the full moon position, if the person modeling the revolving Moon is facing
            the person modeling the Earth, what part of the room is the "Moon" person
            seeing now?

          In the 3rd quarter position, if the person modeling the revolving moon is facing
            the person modeling the Earth, what part of the room is the "Moon" person
            seeing now?

  · How many times does the person modeling the Moon rotate while revolving once
      around the person modeling the Earth?

Question 5.26 What do the phases of the Moon look like from other places on the Earth?

          Equipment: Have available a globe representing the Earth.

  · Invite friends or relatives in other places to look for the Moon and alert you when
      they see it. Are they seeing what you are seeing? The same phase? Lit in the same
      way? At the same time?

   A first-grade teacher, Akiko Kurose, engaged her students in watching the Moon in
Seattle. Stella (a pseudonym) continued watching the Moon while visiting Australia with
her parents for about a month. The city of Melbourne in Australia is in the southern
hemisphere, near the bottom of a typical globe of the Earth as shown in Fig. 5.35. The city

568 | V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

of Seattle in the United States is in the northern hemisphere near the top of a typical globe
of the Earth. A line around the middle of the globe represents the equator.

                            FIG. 5.35 Globe showing Melbourne in Australia in the
                            southern hemisphere and Seattle the United States in the
                            northern hemisphere. Modified from https://www.flickr.com/
                            photos/healthebay/8139426732/in/photostream/. CC
                            BY-NC-SA 2.0

When Stella returned to Seattle, she and her classmates compared their observations of
the waxing crescent Moon as shown in Figs. 5.36 and 5.37.

                                                              V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon | 569
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                    FIG. 5.36 Observations of the waxing crescent moon in Australia.

                    FIG. 5.37 Observations of the waxing crescent moon in Seattle.

570 | V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

The teacher was participating in a study in which she routinely audiotaped conversations
about science in her class. She reported the following:

      ...For discussion, we used a globe and a map on the floor. Australia is in the southern
   and Seattle in the northern hemisphere. Some of the children lay on the floor and realized
   that if they are upside down something lit on the right looks as if it is lit on the left:

        Teacher: Stella, do you want to tell us about your observations in Australia?
        Stella: The waxing crescent moon was facing the other way.
        Teacher: The waxing crescent moon was facing the other way?
        Why do you think it was facing the other way?
        Stella: It was on the other side of the world.
        The children and I found Australia and Seattle on a globe. Then Stella drew her
     observation on the board, a crescent moon curved on the left.
        Student: It's like the waning crescent.
        Student: I thought it was like this! (The child turned upside down.)
        Teacher: That's right. When he lies down on the ground he sees it the opposite way.
        Then we discussed how the waxing crescent moon would look in Canada.
        Student: Right side up.
        Teacher: What do you mean right side up?
        Student: The way we see it.
        Teacher: Do you mean the way we see it in Seattle?
        Student: Uh, huh.
        Teacher: In Australia, do you think they would think they're upside down?
        Student: No. Maybe. Stella thought so.
        Teacher: For them, they would think that they're right side up, wouldn't they?
        It's just that they see it from a different perspective.
        We also discussed how the moon would look in Florida and other places.
        Student: My dad's been to Brazil.
        Teacher: How do you think you would see the moon there?
        Remember where the equator is. Make a hypothesis.
        Student: The way Stella saw it in Australia.
        Teacher: The way that Stella saw it in Australia....
        So it depends upon where you are on earth.
        Student: How does it look if you're on the equator?
   This was a new and unexpected question, a fascinating one that none of us had thought
about before. The teacher reflected upon this experience:
        The children's experiences in our daily moon gazings over a period of several months

                                                               V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon | 571
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

     also nurture their abstract thinking and questioning skills...These experiences engender
     thoughts about the moon from different places, granting the students the gift of a global
     perspective. Engagement in this type of abstract thinking and questioning has become
     part of our class culture, in which virtually all of the children participate.

   Akiko Kurose, "Eyes on science: Asking questions about the Moon on the playground, in class, and
at home." Inquiring into inquiry learning and teaching in science , edited by James Minstrell and Emily
van Zee (American Association for the Advancement of Science, Washington, DC, 2000). (pp. 139-147).
https://www.aaas.org/sites/default/files/s3fs-public/InquiryPart2.pdf

   These children were very familiar with the Moon from on-going observations together
on the playground when the moon was visible during the day and from observations with
their families when the moon was visible in the afternoons and evenings or mornings
before school. They also were familiar with global thinking from celebrating the multiple
countries represented by students in the class, the daily opening activity in which they
sang a song in several languages, the world map painted on the floor on which they could
choose to sit on different countries, and the globe, which was a familiar reference tool in
their explorations of literature and art.

F. Developing representations of the Sun/Earth/Moon system as
seen from space

   This course has emphasized the exploration of physical phenomena, development of
central ideas based on evidence, and the use of these central ideas to develop explanatory
models for intriguing phenomena. Through extensive observations and on-going
discussions of the Moon and its relation to the Sun, students have produced detailed
insights into when and where to look for each phase of the Moon, explained these
changing phases, and resolved a complex paradox that emerged from detailed
observations. All of this has been based upon the perspective of an observer here on Earth.
This section turns toward developing a wider view.

572 | V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

        Question 5.27 How are the Sun, Earth, and Moon arranged in space?

   Moving one's perspective from what one is seeing oneself to what one would see if one
were somewhere else is a complex process. This section provides a report of a child's
spontaneous wonderings involving various perspectives and guides students in exploring
how the Sun, Earth, and Moon are arranged in space.

1. Building upon a child's spontaneous wonderings

   Andy diSessa (1986) continued his story by reflecting upon multiple perspectives that he
generated during his experience as a child in tossing a ball and seeing the same phases on
both the ball and the moon. He remembered being impressed that even though the moon
seemed to be far away, it was "on the scale set by the distance to the sun, just a next-door
neighbor distance" to him and his ball. This realization led him to imagine himself "as a
viewer far enough away to see the moon and ball as right next to one another in relation
to the sun." Then he began wondering about the Earth and concluded "It too must have
the same illumination." The next section takes up this issue of multiple perspectives, of
exploring more explicitly about how things look from space.

   diSessa, A. (1986). "Artifical worlds and real experience."Instructional Science, 14, 207-227. (p. 213).

2. Exploring the arrangement of the Sun, Earth, and Moon in space

  Equipment: Use a quarter Moon as an example, a lamp with no shade in a dark room,
  and a basketball to try to reproduce here on Earth what you have seen in the sky.
   In order to make connections between how each of the Moon's phases look on Earth
and how they each look from space, we need to know how the Sun, Earth, and Moon are
arranged in space. An easy phase to think about is a quarter Moon as shown in Fig. 5.38.

  · What is the angle formed by pointing your arms at the Sun and a quarter moon?
  · When we consider the Sun and a full Moon, how do their sizes compare? (DO NOT

      LOOK DIRECTLY AT THE SUN!

                                                               V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon | 573
                            This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

· How might the Sun, Earth, and Moon be arranged in space?

  When solar eclipses occur, the Sun and full Moon appear to be about the same size.
  This suggests they might be roughly the same distance away from Earth as shown
  here:

                                                                                         M
                                                                                 S E
            Or the Sun might be close to Earth and the Moon far away as shown here:

                                                                                         M

                                                                                         S E

Or the Sun may be far from Earth and the Moon close by as shown here:

                                                                                              M

S                                                                                             E

FIG. 5.38 Three possible arrangements for the Sun, Earth, and Moon in space.

· How can you decide which of these arrangements of the Sun, Earth, and Moon is the
   case?

· Consider modeling here on Earth what you see in the sky during a quarter Moon:

       Stand next to a lamp without a shade but do not turn it on yet.
       Touch the lamp with one hand stretched out.
       Hold out the ball with the other hand stretched out so the ball and lamp are

         equally far away.
       Hold your arms at a right angle as shown in Fig. 5.39.

574 | V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon
                            This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           FIG. 5.39 Student holding arms at a 90 degree right angle while holding out ball in
           one hand and touching lamp with the other hand.

· How should the ball look when you turn on the lamp if the ball looks like a quarter
   moon?

· Turn on the light.
· What do you see?
· How can you move so the ball looks half lit when holding your arms at a right angle?
· What can you infer about the arrangement of the Sun, Earth, and Moon if you have

   to move far away from the lamp in order to see a half lit ball when your arms are
   forming a right angle when pointing at the lamp and holding out the ball?

           Question 5.28 What are the relative sizes of the Sun and the Moon?

· If the Sun is very far away and the Moon is close by but they look about the same size
   in the sky, what are their relative sizes?
       Hold your thumb up and compare it to a round wall clock or some other object
         that looks roughly the same size as your thumb when viewed from a distance.

                                                           V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon | 575
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

          Then walk close to the wall clock or other object and compare its size with your
            thumb.

          What can you infer about the relative sizes of the Sun and the Moon?

3. Example of student work discussing the arrangement and relative sizes of the
Sun, and Moon.

              The moon is close to the earth and the sun is far away. To model evidence of this
           statement we took a basketball in our right hand and held it out to the right side and
           took our left arm and held it out in front of us, creating a 90 degree angle. We started
           with a darkened room and a lamp directly in front of us, representing the sun, the
           basketball representing the moon and ourselves representing the Earth. We started
           about an arm's length from the "sun" and knew from previous observation that if the
           sun and moon are 90 degrees apart that the "moon" should be half lit representing
           a quarter moon. However, the ball looked more than half lit when held equidistant
           from the lamp with arms at 90 degrees. So in order to accomplish this visual we had
           to walk backwards until only half of the "moon" was lit, which ended up being about
           halfway across the room. Based on the visual we had just given ourselves with this
           representation, we could then infer that the sun is far away from the moon and the
           earth is closer to the moon.

              The moon is small and the sun is very large. When looking at the sun and moon in
           the sky it is very hard to tell which is bigger and which is smaller, or if they might be
           the same size. Based on the previous example, we inferred that the sun was far away
           from the earth and moon, so we recreated this same scenario in the classroom to
           demonstrate why we see what we see in the sky. Everyone was to look up at the clock
           in the classroom and hold their thumb up so it looked like they were visually next to
           each other. Then we were told to back up until our thumb and the clock appeared to
           be the same size, so everyone backed up and was almost all the way on the other side
           of the room before their thumb appeared to be the same size as the clock. We saw
           how far we were from it and then were told to walk up close to the clock and see how
           large the clock was as we got closer. It seemed huge at a short distance! With this
           simulation we have some information that allows us to infer why the sun may seem
           the same size, because it is so far away, but in reality is very large compared to the
           moon and earth.

576 | V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                                                                          Physics student, Fall 2014

 Question 5.29 How does the view of the phases of the Moon from Earth compare with the
                               view from above the solar system?

       Equipment: For each student: Use both sides of a folded 8.5×11 sheet of paper.
   As shown in Fig. 5.40, fold the sheet in half lengthwise; next fold in half again, but top to
bottom; finally fold in half one more time top to bottom. Then open the sheet to provide
the multiple-box format for Table V.6 as shown in Fig. 5.41.

                          FIG. 5.40 Creating the boxes for Table V.6 by folding a sheet of
                          paper in half three times.

  · Open the sheet. As indicated in Fig. 5.41, in the left column, sketch a phase of the
      Moon as seen from Earth. In the right column, sketch that phase of the Moon as
      would be seen from above the solar system.

  · Observed view from Earth:
          Near the bottom of each box, draw a line to represent the horizon and label the
            cardinal directions.
          Place a stick figure (without arms) on the horizon.
          Center a small round circle at the top of a box to represent the Sun at noon.
          For each phase, add arms with one pointing at the Sun and the other pointing at
            the appropriate angle for the Moon for each phase.
          Sketch the Moon with about the same diameter of the circle representing the
            Sun and with the appropriate shape for each phase.

  · Inferred view from above the solar system:
          Sketch a large curve at the top of the box to represent part of a large Sun.

                                                               V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon | 577
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

          Sketch a small circle near the bottom of the box to represent the Earth.
          For each phase, sketch a smaller circle (about ¼ size of Earth) to represent the

            Moon; place this smaller circle near the circle representing the Earth, so that
            this Moon forms the appropriate angle with respect to the Earth and Sun for
            that phase.

                           FIG. 5.41 Format for comparing observed view from Earth with
                           inferred view from above the solar system.

  · On the reverse side, sketch full, waning gibbous, third quarter, and waning crescent

578 | V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon
                  This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   phases as seen from the Earth and from above the solar system.
· What determines the size and shape of the lit portion of the phase of the Moon we

   see?

Complete entries in Table V.7. Then write a summary of what you have learned before
reading an example of student work about how the phases of the Moon would look when
viewed from above the solar system.

                  TABLE V.7 Additional insights about the phases of the moon

                  TABLE V.7 Additional insights about the phases of the moon

Sketch of set up  Evidence  Central Ideas              Relevant Vocabulary

                            What we see depends
                            upon our perspective.

                            What we see from Earth
                            is the portion of the lit
                            side that is visible from
                            Earth given the relative
                            positions of the Sun,
                            Earth, and Moon as the
                            Moon revolves around
                            the Earth.

4. Example of student work about views of the Moon from Earth and above the
solar system.

              What we see depends upon our perspective. The table below (Figs. 5.42 and 5.43)
           presents how each phase of the moon is viewed from Earth, and the view of the solar
           system from above during that phase.

                            V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon | 579
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                 FIG. 5.42 Student table presenting observed views of waxing phases from
                 Earth and inferred views from space.

580 | V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon
         This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

FIG. 5.43 Student table presenting observed views of waning phases from
Earth and inferred views from space.

                                                                       Physics student, Fall 2016

                                    V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon | 581
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

5. Nuances about viewing the phases of the Moon from above the solar system

   The right columns of Figs. 5.42 and 5.43 show inferred views from above the solar
system as the Moon revolves around the Earth. For the Moon, the side facing toward the
Sun is always fully it. This is shown as half-lit in Figs. 5.42 and 5.43 because this is a view
from above a fully lit sphere facing the Sun. The same would be the case for the Earth as
well. The circle representing the Earth in Figs. 5.42 and 5.43 also should be shown as fully
lit sphere facing the Sun (which looks half lit from above).

   In the right columns of Figs. 5.42 and 5.43, the side of the Moon facing away from the
Sun is not lit. This represents that the shaded side of a phase of the Moon is caused by the
Moon's shadow on itself. It is not the shadow of the Earth. This is similar to the shadow
on the back side of a barrier placed between a lamp and a screen, as in Question 1.6 and
Fig. 1.8 in Unit 1. The same would be the case for the Earth as well. The circle representing
the Earth in the right columns of Figs. 5.42 and 5.43 also should be dark for the side facing
away from the Sun.

   In the right columns of Figs. 5.42 and 5.43, the relative sizes of the circles representing
the Earth and Moon should show the Moon about ¼ the size of the Earth. This is an
assertion by the instructor rather than a comparison resulting from an observation. The
placement of the Moon should be a consistent distance close to the Earth and both Earth
and Moon should be far from the Sun. The student has positioned the Moon correctly for
the various phases and has been consistent in showing the Moon's lit face toward the Sun
and the dark side away from the Sun.

   In the left columns of Figs. 5.42 and 5.43, the student has shown the size of the Sun
and the Moon as roughly equal, as they appear from Earth. The shapes of the phases and
angles formed by pointing at the Sun and Moon are basically correct. The phases that are
not visible at noon are shown at the correct angle below the horizon.

   Fig. 5.44 shows another way to illustrate what the phases of the moon would look like
from above the solar system as well as on Earth.

582 | V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                              FIG. 5.44 Inferred Moon orbit from above the solar system
                              with adjacent table showing observed phases on Earth.
                              http://astro.unl.edu/naap/lps/lunarPage2.html Image
                              reproduced from the Astronomy Education website at the
                              University of Nebraska-Lincoln. (http://astro.unl.edu).

   Sunlight is shown as coming from so far away that the rays traveling toward the Earth
and Moon are parallel. The positions of the Moon in its revolution around the Earth are
numbered, starting with new Moon. The views of the phases as seen from the northern
hemisphere on Earth are shown separately in the adjacent table. This is helpful because
the first quarter moon at position #3 is shown appropriately lit on the same side as the
incoming sunlight, on the left as seen from above the solar system. This phase (#3) also
is shown appropriately lit on the right in the table showing the phases as seen from the
northern hemisphere on Earth.

   In contrast, many diagrams of the Moon's phases combine the views from Earth and
from above the solar system into one diagram as in Fig. 5.45. In such diagrams, the
moons representing the Moon in orbit are all lit the same way, facing the Sun. The moons
representing waning phases as seen from Earth, however, are lit facing away from the Sun.
Such combined diagrams can be very confusing for students who are just learning that the
Sun is always on the same side as the lit side of the Moon.

                                                               V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon | 583
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                              FIG. 5.45 Combined diagram of the Moon's phases viewed
                              from Earth and from above the solar system.
                              https://spaceplace.nasa.gov/review/dr-marc-earth/
                              moon-phases.html

   Figure 5.46 shows a diagram that illustrates how much of the lit side of the Moon can be
seen from Earth and distinguishes between the dark side and the far side of the Moon.

                              FIG. 5.46 Observed view of phases of the moon from Earth
                              and inferred view from above the solar system that
                              illustrates how much of the lit side of the Moon can be
                              seen from Earth. https://starchild.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/
                              StarChild/questions/phases.html

584 | V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   The dark side of the Moon is the half of the moon that is not facing the Sun and is in the
Moon's own shadow; as the Moon revolves around the Earth, the dark side is always dark.

   The front side of the Moon is the half of the moon that is facing the Sun and is always lit;
as the Moon revolves around the Earth, the front side is always lit.

   The far side of the Moon is the half of the moon that is facing away from the Earth and is
represented by the green stripes.

   The near side of the Moon is the half of the moon that is facing the Earth, which is what
we "see" from Earth:

  · In the new moon position (#1), for example, the near side of the Moon is the same as
      the dark side of the Moon and is completely dark, which is why we cannot see the
      new moon in the sky even when the sky is clear. It looks like the Moon should be
      casting a shadow on the Earth, which it does during a solar eclipse. Usually, however,
      the Moon is a little above or below the direct line of sight and the Moon's shadow
      misses the Earth.

  · In the waxing crescent phase (#2), the near side of the Moon is partially lit and what
      we see from Earth is that partially lit side, which looks like a crescent.

  · In the 1st quarter phase (#3), the near side of the Moon is half lit and that's what we
      see from Earth.

  · In the waxing gibbous phase (#4), the near side of the Moon is mostly lit, on the right
      side as seen from the northern hemisphere, on the left side as seen from the
      southern hemisphere.

  · In the full phase (#5), the near side of the Moon is the same as the front side of the
      Moon and is fully lit as seen everywhere from Earth. The Earth looks like it is in the
      way and should be casting a shadow on the Moon, which it does during a lunar
      eclipse. Usually, however, the Moon is a little above or below the Earth's shadow and
      not eclipsed.

  · The waning phases are similar, with the near side facing the Earth now showing less
      and less of the lit side facing the Sun.

Envisioning what one would see from the perspective of standing on the Earth can be
confusing when looking at such diagrams. If you envision yourself standing on the top
half of the blue Earth (in the northern hemisphere) and looking outward from the Earth
toward position #3 in the circle (which is lit on the left), for example, you would see the
Moon half lit on the right as shown for phase #3 in the row below. If you envision yourself

                                                               V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon | 585
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

standing on the bottom half of the blue earth (in the southern hemisphere) and looking
toward position #3, you would see the Moon half lit on the left as shown in the the circle.

   Such diagrams reflect choices made by the artists who drew them. The artists drawing
Figures 5.44 and 5.46, for example, drew rays from the Sun coming from the left whereas
the artist for Figure 5.45 drew rays coming from the right. Figure 5.46 shows an Earth and
moons of the same size whereas both Fig. 5.44 and Fig. 5.45 show moons about half the
size of the Earth. The appropriate proportion would be a moon about 1/4 the diameter of
an Earth. In addition, the artists drawing Figures 5.44 and 5.46 drew from the perspective
of looking down from above the solar system with the Moon revolving around the Earth
in a circular orbit whereas the artist drawing Figure 5.45 drew from the perspective of
looking from the side so that the Moon's almost circular orbit looks like an elongated
ellipse. You can see this effect of a circular object looking like an elongated eclipse by
looking down on a circular lid and then moving the lid up until you are looking directly at
it from the side.

Question 5.30 Does the Moon revolve around the Earth in the clockwise or
counter-clockwise direction?

  · Compare the representations of the Moon's revolution around the Earth in Figs. 5.29,
      5.30, 5.32, 5.42 - 5.46. Are they consistent? If so, do they represent the Moon as
      revolving clockwise or counter-clockwise around the Earth?

  · Suppose you are teaching students in Australia and choose to develop an explanation
      for the changing phases of the moon as discussed in section V.A.3 above. The
      students would need to move a ball around their heads so that the waxing phases
      look lit on the left and the waning phases look lit on the right. How should they move
      their balls? Clockwise or counter-clockwise?

586 | V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

G. Considering what happens when the Sun, Earth, and Moon are
arranged in a line.

                     Question 5.31 What causes lunar and solar eclipses?

   Equipment: Use a lamp without a shade in a dark room and a ball on a stick to model
                                                        eclipses.

  · How can you hold a ball to model a lunar eclipse?
          Stand away from the lamp. Hold the ball in the waxing gibbous Moon position.
            Move the ball into the full Moon position and on into the waning gibbous
            position so that the ball moves into and through the shadow of your head
            (representing the Earth).

          Use the central idea developed in Question 1.5 in Unit 1 to draw a ray diagram
            that illustrates the arrangement of the Sun, Moon, and Earth that causes a lunar
            eclipse. Indicate the umbra and penumbra parts of the Earth's shadow. The
            umbra is the dark central shadow formed by the Earth blocking light from all
            areas of the Sun. Penumbra refers to the lighter shadow formed on either side of
            the umbra by the Earth blocking light from only one side of the Sun.

  · How can you hold a ball to model a solar eclipse?
          Stand away from the lamp. Hold the ball in the waning crescent Moon position.
            Move the ball into the new Moon position and then into the waxing crescent
            position so that the shadow of the ball falls on a particular place on the "Earth"
            (your eyes in your head).

          Use the central idea developed in Question 1.5 in Unit 1 to draw a ray diagram
            that illustrates the arrangement of the Sun, Moon, and Earth that causes a solar
            eclipse.

  · Check https://www.timeanddate.com/eclipse/next-lunar-eclipse.html and
      https://www.timeanddate.com/eclipse/next-solar-eclipse.html to see when the

                                                               V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon | 587
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

      next eclipses are and whether any are within viewing distance for you. A total lunar
      eclipse is predicted to be visible in Corvallis OR on May 26, 2021, beginning at 1:47
      am, being total at 4:28 am, and ending at 5:44 am for a total of 3 hours and 57
      minutes. (See: https://www.timeanddate.com/eclipse/in/usa/corvallis .)

          Select an upcoming total lunar eclipse. Click on the areas that will be seeing
            totality. What is the typical length of time that people will be able to see the
            entire Moon eclipsed? Is the area on Earth where totality is visible wide or
            narrow?

          Select an upcoming total solar eclipse. Click on areas that will be seeing totality.
            What is the typical length of time that people will be able to see the entire Sun
            eclipsed? Is the area on Earth where totality is visible wide or narrow? If you are
            able to see a solar eclipse be sure to obtain and use appropriate safety
            protection for your eyes.

          How are solar and lunar eclipses similar? How are they different?
The reason that eclipses do not happen every month is that the Moon's orbit is tilted about
5° as shown in Fig. 5.47.

                                 FIG. 5.47 Tilted orbit of the Moon around the Earth.
                                 https://spaceplace.nasa.gov/eclipses/en/

Complete entries in Table V.8. Then write a summary of what you have learned before
reading an example of student work about the causes of solar and lunar eclipses.

588 | V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon
                       This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                       TABLE V.8 Explaining eclipses of the Sun and Moon

                       TABLE V.8 Explaining eclipses of the Sun and Moon

Sketch of set up       Evidence  Central Ideas                            Relevant Vocabulary

https://www.nasa.gov/            Eclipses occur when
audience                         the Moon is precisely
/forstudents/5-8/                in line with the Earth
features/nasa-knows/             and the Sun.
what-is-an-eclipse-58

1. Example of student work about the causes of lunar and solar eclipses

              Eclipses occur when the Moon is precisely in line with the Earth and the Sun.
           Below (Figs. 5.48 and 5.49) I have inserted both a sketch of a lunar eclipse and a solar
           eclipse. We recently had a lunar eclipse back in September. In my sketch you can
           see that this is when the Sun, Moon and Earth are directly in front of each other,
           basically in a straight line. The Earth is between the Moon and the Sun; this is the
           Earth blocking the light rays from the Sun getting to the Moon. This is what created
           what people say was the "Blood Moon". The moon was dark, but still had a slight
           outline of its shape. It was crazy to be able to see that, it was awesome!

                       FIG. 5.48 Student diagram for a lunar eclipse.

                                 V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon | 589
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                       FIG. 5.49 Student diagram for a solar eclipse.

              I was lucky enough to be able to see that in my lifetime and will actually get to
           see a solar eclipse as well. There is a prediction that this is going to be visible from
           Corvallis in August of 2017. A solar eclipse is when the Moon is between the Sun and
           the Earth. There is going to be a portion of the Earth that is going to see this at this
           time. This is because the Moon is blocking the Sun in that specific spot. This is crazy
           to think about because the last one happened back in 1991 when I was not even born
           yet.

                                                                                          Physics student, Fall 2014

H. Exploring Internet resources about the Moon with a friend or
family member

Question 5.32 What Internet resources are available for teaching and learning about the
Moon?

  · Put "phases of the moon" in your computer browser. View at least four websites that
      present a diagram and explanation about the phases of the moon. Select the diagram
      and explanation you like the best. Why do you like this one best?

  · Invite a friend or family member to explore this website with you. If possible, invite
      someone of the age you want to teach. Then write a reflection upon your
      conversation:
          What does your friend/family member already know about the phases of the
            moon?
          Describe what your learner asked, said, did and found.

590 | V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

          What aspects of the website seemed to help this learner learn about the phases
            of the moon?

          What aspects of the website, if any, seemed to hinder learning?
          What have you learned about science learning and teaching from this

            experience?

1. Example of student work about engaging a friend or family member in learning
about the phases of the Moon

              For this assignment, I asked my family friend who is a 6th grade student about
           the moon. When I asked her what she already knew about the moon, she said things
           like "there are different shapes of the moon" and "I see it at night." We looked
           at the website https://www.timeanddate.com/calendar/aboutmoonphases.html . I
           liked this site because it not only had a picture of all the moon phases which she
           seemed to somewhat know about, but also summaries for each phase as well as some
           pictures that show where the moon, sun and earth are at a certain phase.

              G asked me why the moon spins in a circle around the earth. This was a hard
           question for me to answer because I can't explain why it revolves in a circle, I can
           just explain what is happening as it revolves. I find that often times, my learners are
           asking me questions that I have trouble answering.

              An aspect of the website that seemed to really help us learn was the variety of
           pictures that included the moon, sun and earth for different phases, This helped
           me to show and explain that at different phases the moon is in different places.
           However, there was lots of writing on the website. While this was helpful for me, this
           seemed to hinder G's learning, as she didn't have a desire to read it and it made the
           website appear more difficult/boring.

              In regards to science learning and teaching. I have learned through this that there
           are going to be times where my students stump me. I am not always going to know
           all the answers, but that is okay, and it is part of science.

                                                                                     Physics student, Winter 2018
   This is another example of the nature of science, that as one learns more and shares that
knowledge with others, new questions often arise. Question 5.48 addresses the question
that emerged during this conversation, what keeps the Moon revolving around the Earth
in its orbit?

                                                               V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon | 591
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

I. Pausing to review before taking the next step

   Before undertaking the next step in an extended exploration, it can be helpful to review
the understandings developed so far.

1. Reviewing two explanatory models for day and night

 Equipment: Use a fist and your body to demonstrate the fixed Earth, REVOLVING Sun
 model for day and night (see IV.A. Question 5.22)

  · What is the evidence supporting this explanatory model for day and night?

 Equipment: Use a lamp without a shade and your body to demonstrate the fixed Sun,
 ROTATING Earth model for day and night (See IV.B, Question 5.22)

  · What is the evidence supporting this explanatory model for day and night?
  · How are these models useful?

2. Reviewing an explanatory model for the phases of the Moon

  · Where is the Sun with respect to the phase of the Moon when both are visible in the
      sky?

  · What are the phases of the moon observed?
  · How are these phases related to the angle formed by pointing one arm at the Sun

      and the other arm at the Moon?

 Equipment: Use a lamp without a shade, a ball on a stick, and your head to replicate
 here on Earth the phases of the Moon observed in the sky. (See V, C, Question 5.23 )

  · What is the logic by which one can infer that the phases of the Moon are caused by
      the revolution of the Moon around the Earth?

592 | V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

  · What causes lunar and solar eclipses?

   Daily observations indicate that the Sun seems to rise in the east, move in an arc across
the sky and set in the west. The Moon seems to move in the same way, rising in the
east, moving in an arc across the sky, and setting in the west. These observations suggest
that the Sun and the Moon revolve daily around the Earth. An alternative model, hard to
envision, is that the Earth is rotating on its axis daily, that we, living on the surface of
the Earth, are spinning on by the Sun and Moon rather than that the Sun and Moon are
revolving around us on a fixed Earth.

   On-going observations of the Moon indicate that the lit shape of the Moon changes in
a regular way, increasing from crescent to half lit to more than half lit to full and then
decreasing from more than half lit to half lit to crescent to not being visible even when the
sky is clear. The Moon sometimes is visible during the day as well as at night. Sometimes
the Moon is lit on the right and sometimes on the left but when both the Sun and the
Moon are visible in the sky, the Sun is always on the same side of the Moon that is lit.

   The angle formed by pointing one arm at the Sun and one arm at the Moon changes,
from acute to right, to obtuse, to straight as the lit portion of the Moon increases on
the right at our location and back from straight to obtuse to right to acute as the lit
portion of the Moon decreases on the left at our location. Patterns identified in systematic
observations of the relation between the lit portion of the Moon (its phase) and this angle
are useful in predicting when each phase of the Moon will be rising, transiting, and setting.
Such systematic observations lead to paradoxes, however, such as that sometimes the
Moon seems to chase the Sun across the sky but sometimes the Sun seems to chase the
Moon. Also the Moon seems to move from east to west, like the Sun, over several hours
but in the opposite direction from west to east over several days.

   If both the Sun and the Moon are visible in the sky and one holds up a ball near the
Moon, one can see the Sun shining on the ball in the same way that the Sun is shining
on the Moon. It is important NOT to look directly at the Sun in order to avoid damaging
one's eyes! The shape of the lit portion of the ball matches the shape of the lit portion of
the Moon. The shape of the dark part of the ball matches the shape of the missing portion
of the circular shape of a full Moon. The shadow forming the dark part of the ball is the
ball's own shadow as the front of the ball is blocking light from falling on the back of the
ball. This suggests that the missing portion of the Moon is not visible because it is in the
Moon's own shadow, the front of the Moon blocking light from falling on the back of the
Moon. The Earth's shadow is not involved at all, although many people explain the Moon's
changing phases this way, probably because they associate objects with casting shadows

                                                              V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon | 593
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

on nearby surfaces rather than with objects blocking light from falling on the backs of the
objects themselves.

   To move the ball in a way that replicates the changing phases of the Moon one simply
moves the ball around one's head while taking care not to block the light falling on a "full"
ball and to hold the ball in such a way that it does not block light falling directly in one's
eyes in the "new" ball position. This replication here on Earth of what one sees in the sky
suggests that the cause of the changing phases of the Moon is that the Moon is revolving
around the Earth, not daily, but rather during the many days that the phases are changing,
in about a month.

   The claim that the phases of the Moon are caused by the Moon revolving around the
Earth during about a month is supported by its power in explaining two paradoxes. The
Moon seems to be chasing the Sun daily across the sky in the waxing phases, when
seen by those of us on a daily rotating Earth, as the Moon is revolving around the Earth
through angles 0° to 180°. The Sun daily seems to be chasing the Moon when the Moon is
continuing to revolve around the Earth through angles 180° to 360° (or from 180° back to 0
depending upon how one labels the angles). The Moon appears to be moving east to west
over several hours because the Earth is rotating past it as the Earth rotates on its axis. The
Moon appears to be moving west to east over several days because the Moon actually IS
moving as it revolves around the Earth.

   Eclipses occur when the Moon, Earth, and Sun are directly lined up in the full Moon
(lunar eclipse) and new Moon (solar eclipse) positions. Eclipses do not occur every month
because the Moon's orbit is inclined about 5 degrees so usually the Moon is little above or
a little below the direct line of sight from the Sun.

   The practices involved in developing these understandings included questioning,
observing, discussing, predicting, modeling, and interpreting findings. Of particular
importance was identifying patterns, seeking ways to link cause and effect, and employing
systems thinking.

594 | V. Using Central Ideas to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Phases of the Moon
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

VI. Developing Additional Central
Ideas Based on Evidence about the Sun,
Earth, and Stars

This section focuses upon observing seasonal differences in patterns of stars that are
visible at night, tracking details about the Sun's apparent daily motion, and noticing
seasonal differences in regional climates. Interpreting these observations will be helpful
in developing an explanatory model for the Earth's annual motion around the Sun as well
as for explaining why the Earth has seasons,

A. Noticing seasonal patterns in the night sky

People who live where there are few lights at night typically are very familiar with patterns
of stars that are visible in the night sky and with ways in which these change with the
seasons. People who live in cities typically are unaware of such patterns and their changes
because of the many artificial lights that brighten the night sky. Some star patterns may
be visible, however, if you look up on a clear night. During this course, try to do this
frequently!

Question 5.33 What seasonal patterns are evident in the constellations of stars visible at
night?

  · Discuss with your group members any patterns of stars that you have noticed.
  · On a clear night go outside and look up! Enjoy what you can see and create your own

      patterns among the visible stars.
  · If interested in what others have envisioned when viewing the stars, go to a website

      such as https://www.windows2universe.org/the_universe/Constellations/
      constnavi.html or
      http://www.astronomy.com/observing/astro-for-kids/2008/03/learn-the-

                                                     VI. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence about the Sun, Earth, and Stars | 595
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

      constellations where you can read about the circumpolar constellations, those which
      are visible all year long, and about constellations only visible during different seasons
      (spring, summer, fall, winter) in the northern and southern hemispheres.
  · To access an interactive map of the sky that can display what you might see on a
      clear night in your location, go to https://www.skyandtelescope.com/observing/
      interactive-sky-chart/. Click to open, enter your zipcode, year, month, day, and
      hour. To access names of bright stars, click the display option Star Names. To see
      traditional constellations, click on Constellation lines and later Constellation names.
Some constellations are visible in both the northern and southern hemispheres although
the southern hemisphere constellations may look upside down from those shown below.
Stars within a constellation look as if they are near by one another as seen from Earth;
however, they likely are very distant from one another in space. In 1922, the International
Astronomical Union defined 88 official constellations, (https://www.iau.org/public/
themes/constellations/). Many of their names were derived from Greek and Roman
mythology as shown in the star chart for the northern hemisphere in Fig. 5.50. For a
similar star chart for the southern hemisphere see: https://maas.museum/app/uploads/
sites/6/2016/03/starmapApril2016.pdf.

596 | VI. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence about the Sun, Earth, and Stars
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

       Fig. 5.50 Star chart for spring skies in the northern hemisphere. From The Call of the Stars
       by John R. Kippax (G. P. Putnam's Sons, New York, 2010), p. 58. https://www.flickr.com/
       photos/internetarchivebookimages/14783530782

People of many cultures have seen a wide variety of patterns in the stars. The O jibwe
People of Canada and northern United States, for example, envisioned constellations
based upon their own stories as shown in the O jibwe Sky Star Map at
https://web.stcloudstate.edu/aslee/OJIBWEMAP/home.html. This star map shows
O jibwe constellations superimposed on those described in Greek and Roman myths.

  · Different constellations are high in the night sky during different seasons of the year.

                                                     VI. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence about the Sun, Earth, and Stars | 597
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

      During spring in the northern hemisphere or autumn in the southern hemisphere,
      for example, look for stars that seem to form a backwards question mark as shown in
      Fig. 5.51. These stars were seen as outlining the head and mane of Leo, a
      constellation representing a vicious lion fought by Hercules according to Greek and
      Roman mythology. The brightest star, Regulus, has the Latin name for king. Another
      bright star, Denebola, has an Arabic name for "lion's tail" (see:
      https://africancosmosdiary.wordpress.com/tag/constellations/). Many cultures
      interpreted the changing patterns of stars high in the sky in terms of seasonal
      patterns in climate. Seeing the constellation Mishi Bizhiw, a mountain lion , high in
      the sky, for example, warned O jibwe travelers not to trust thin ice on lakes as they
      moved from winter camp (See information about Mishi Bizhiw at
      https://web.stcloudstate.edu/aslee/OJIBWEMAP/O jibweConstellationGuide.pdf).

                               Fig. 5.51 The constellation Leo the Lion associated with
                               Greek and Roman mythology. Modified from star map
                               created by Torsten Bronger.
                               https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
                               File:Leo_constellation_map.png [CC 3.0]

  · During summer in the northern hemisphere or winter in the southern hemisphere,
      look for stars high in the sky that seem to form a half circle near stars that seem to
      outline a human figure as shown in Fig. 5.52. In Greek and Roman mythology, Corona
      Borealis was a northern crown and Hercules was a hero. In 2013, the biggest super
      cluster of galaxies in the universe, the Hercules-Corona Borealis Great Wall, was
      discovered in the direction of these two constellations (see

598 | VI. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence about the Sun, Earth, and Stars
                            This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   https://www.space.com/33553-biggest-thing-universe.html). The O jibwe
   community saw this half circular star pattern as representing Madoodiswan, a sweat
   lodge, with a person nearby, Noondeshin Bemaadizid, a bather exhausted from the
   experience but renewed in strength and spirit. (See: https://web.stcloudstate.edu/
   aslee/OJIBWEMAP/O jibweConstellationGuide.pdf).

                                  Fig. 5.52 The constellations Corona Borealis and
                                  Hercules associated with Greek and Roman
                                  mythology. Star patterns modified from
                                  https://www.iau.org/public/images/detail/
                                  crb/ and https://www.iau.org/public/images/
                                  detail/her/; IAU and Sky and Telescope
                                  [CC:4.0].

· During fall in the northern hemisphere or spring in the southern hemisphere, look
   for stars that seem to form a square near stars that seem to outline a flying bird as
   shown in Fig. 5.53. In Greek and Roman mythology, Pegasus, was a winged horse and
   Cygnus, a swan. Telescopes looking in this direction have detected planets orbiting
   stars outside our solar system (See: https://exoplanets.nasa.gov/resources/231/
   hd-209458b/). In O jibwe mythology, Mooz was a moose, appreciated for providing
   food, clothing, and shelter. Ajiijaak was a crane, leading people to stay strong. (See:
   https://web.stcloudstate.edu/aslee/OJIBWEMAP/O jibweConstellationGuide.pdf).

                                                 VI. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence about the Sun, Earth, and Stars | 599
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                          Fig. 5.53 The constellations Pegasus, the flying horse, and
                          Cygnus, the swan, associated with Greek and Roman mythology.
                          Star patterns modified from https://www.iau.org/public/
                          images/detail/peg/ and https://www.iau.org/public/images/
                          detail/cyg/; IAU and Sky and Telescope [CC 4.0]

  · During winter in the northern hemisphere or summer in the southern hemisphere,
      look for stars that seem to form a human figure with a belt as shown in Fig. 5.54.
      Orion was a great hunter in Greek mythology. Some stories envisioned Orion as
      followed by one of his dogs, Canis Minor, as he was raising a club and holding up a
      shield to fight Taurus, a charging bull (See: http://www.ianridpath.com/startales/
      orion.htm). Below the belt is M42, the Orion Nebula, where stars are being formed
      (https://www.nasa.gov/feature/goddard/2017/messier-42-the-orion-nebula). The
      O jibwe community also envisioned a human-like figure, Biboonkeonini, the
      Wintermaker, with stars for shoulders and knees as well as three stars for a belt and
      long arms stretching to a bright star on either side (see:
      https://web.stcloudstate.edu/aslee/OJIBWEMAP/O jibweConstellationGuide.pdf).

600 | VI. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence about the Sun, Earth, and Stars
                            This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                              Fig. 5.54 The constellations Canis Minor, Orion, and
                              Taurus associated with Greek mythology. Star
                              patterns modified from https://www.iau.org/public/
                              images/detail/ori/, https://www.iau.org/public/
                              images/detail/cmi/ and https://www.iau.org/
                              public/images/detail/tau/; IAU and Sky and
                              Telescope [CC 4.0]

· Summarize the changes that occur in the constellations visible in the sky during a
   year. Complete entries in Table V.9. Then write a summary of what you have learned
   about seasonal differences in the stars visible at night.

                                                 VI. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence about the Sun, Earth, and Stars | 601
                  This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

TABLE V.9 Developing central ideas about seasonal differences in visible stars

TABLE V.9 Developing central ideas about seasonal differences in visible stars

Sketch of set up  Evidence  Central Ideas                                                        Relevant
                                                                                                 Vocabulary

                            Like the Sun and the Moon, the                                       constellation
                            stars seem to be revolving
                            around the Earth each night

                            Some constellations of stars are                                     northern
                            seasonal, seeming to rise in the                                     hemisphere
                            east and set in the west like the
                            Sun and Moon but are only                                            southern
                            visible during part of the year                                      hemisphere

                            Some constellations of stars are
                            always visible in one hemisphere
                            but not in the other.

                            Some constellations are visible
                            in both the northern and
                            southern hemispheres
                            depending upon where one is

B. Noticing seasonal patterns in sunlight and shadows

   In addition to seasonal differences in some of the stars visible overhead at night, there
are large seasonal differences during the day in the lengths of shadows on the ground as
well as in the Sun's apparent motion across the sky.

Question 5.34 What seasonal patterns are evident in how the Sun seems to move across the
sky?

602 | VI. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence about the Sun, Earth, and Stars
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

1. Interpreting changes in the Sun's maximum angular altitude 

Section III.B. Question 5.8 explored how the Sun seems to move across the sky by
observing the shadows cast by a gnomon (person, post, paperclip, or nail) perpendicular
to the ground as shown in Figs. 5.9 and 5.13 (repeated below).

  · What do you wonder about such shadows?

FIGs. 5.9 and 5.13 (repeated). Sketching a group member's shadow on pavement near beginning and end
of class.

Some aspects to consider include:
  · How do shadows change in size and orientation during morning, noon, and
      afternoon on a sunny day?
  · In what directions do the shadows point?
  · When during the day are shadows longest? When are shadows the shortest?
  · What happens during the year? How do shadows change in size and orientation

                                                     VI. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence about the Sun, Earth, and Stars | 603
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

      throughout the day during different times of year?
  · How does the length of the shortest shadow during the day change with the

      seasons?
  · What is the connection between how long a shadow is and how high the Sun seems

      to be in the sky?
Now consider how the Sun seems to be moving. DO NOT LOOK DIRECTLY AT THE SUN!

  · What do you wonder about the Sun's apparent daily journey across the sky?
Here are some aspects to consider:

  · How does the Sun's maximum angular altitude  (alpha) seem to be changing over a
      week? Over several weeks? Several months?

  · Does the Sun's apparent maximum angular altitude  seem to be getting higher?
      Lower?

  · Is the Sun ever directly overhead?

                                               FIG. 5.55 Angular altitude 
                                               (alpha) of the Sun in the sky.

The angular altitude of the Sun, angle  (alpha), can be estimated by measuring the
height of a gnomon H and the length of its shadow L, drawing a careful ray diagram and
measuring the angle  with a protractor or calculating the tangent H/L, and identifying
the angle for which that is the tangent as shown in Fig. 5.10 (repeated).

604 | VI. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence about the Sun, Earth, and Stars
                            This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                        FIG. 5.10 (repeated). Right triangle formed by gnomon, its
                        shadow, and rays from the Sun.

· Complete entries in Table V.10. Then write a summary of what you have learned
   about seasonal differences in the lengths of shortest shadows during the day.

                                                VI. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence about the Sun, Earth, and Stars | 605
                             This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

TABLE V.10 Developing central ideas about seasonal differences in the lengths of the shortest
                                                   shadows during a day

TABLE V.10 Developing central ideas about seasonal differences in the lengths of the shortest
                                                   shadows during a day

Sketch of set up  Evidence  Central Ideas                                                        Relevant Vocabulary

                            The shortest length of                                               gnomon
                            a shadow cast by a                                                   angular altitude
                            gnomon occurs when
                            the Sun is at its                                                    protractor
                            apparent maximum                                                     tangent
                            angular altitude

                            The Sun's apparent
                            angular altitude 
                            (alpha) is formed by
                            the rays of the Sun
                            and a gnomon's
                            shadow. Angle  can
                            be estimated by
                            measuring the height
                            of the gnomon H, and
                            length of the shadow
                            L, drawing a careful
                            ray diagram, and
                            measuring  with a
                            protractor or using a
                            calculator or trig table
                            to find the angle for
                            which the tangent is
                            equal to H/L.

606 | VI. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence about the Sun, Earth, and Stars
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                                             The angle  (beta) is
                                                             formed by the rays of
                                                             the Sun and a
                                                             gnomon. This angle
                                                             can be estimated by
                                                             measuring  on a
                                                             careful ray diagram
                                                             with a protractor or
                                                             estimated by finding
                                                             the angle for which
                                                             the tangent is (L/H).

2. Interpreting data obtained from Internet resources

  · What differences have you noticed in what the Sun seems to be doing during the
      different seasons of the year. During this course, for example:
          Where has the Sun seemed to rise? (north of east? directly east? south of east?)
          What has been the apparent daily maximum height of the Sun above the
            horizon? (high, medium, low?)
          Where has the Sun seemed to set? (north of west? directly west? south of west?)
          What is the duration of daylight compared to darkness? (longer time period?
            about the same time period? shorter time period?

  · Use the Internet or other source of information to identify the current dates in your
      location for the:
          spring equinox (equal number of hours of sunlight and darkness)
          summer solstice (longest number of hours of sunlight and shortest number of
            hours of darkness
          autumn equinox (equal numbers of hours of sunlight and darkness)
          winter solstice (shortest number of hours of daylight and longest number of
            hours of darkness)

  · To consider seasonal effects at your location, go to https://www.timeanddate.com/
      sun/ , enter a place or city in the search window, and explore predictions of what
      happens on the spring equinox, summer solstice, fall equinox, and winter solstice at
      your location:
          Where does the Sun seem to rise (north of east? east? south of east?) at this

                                                     VI. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence about the Sun, Earth, and Stars | 607
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

            location on the spring equinox? summer solstice? autumn equinox? winter
            solstice?
          What is the maximum altitude of the Sun in the sky for this location on these
            dates?
          Where does the Sun seem to set (north of west? west? south of west?) at this
            location on these dates?
          What is the duration of daylight for this location on these dates?
          Create a table to report this information.
  · Summarize these seasonal effects for your location for the Sun's apparent:
          rising and setting times
          maximum height of the Sun's arc across the sky
          duration above the horizon

3. Example of interpreting Internet data about changes in the Sun's apparent daily
motion

At https://www.timeanddate.com/sun/, enter Corvallis, Oregon, for example, in the
search window for place or country, click on the Sunrise & Sunset button, change the
month to March and current year, click on Go and click on a box in the row highlighted for
the date of the equinox. A report appears as shown in Fig. 5.56. The green band indicates
the start of daylight saving time at this location.

   The report below predicts that on this spring equinox in Corvallis, the Sun would appear
to:

   rise at 7:16 am, Pacific daylight saving time
   rise almost directly east (specifically 89° east of north)
   be highest in the sky at 1:20 pm time, Pacific daylight saving time
   be at a maximum altitude of 45° above the horizon
   set at 7:25 pm, Pacific daylight saving time
   set almost directly west (specifically 271° west of north)

and that the duration of daylight would be about 12 hours.

608 | VI. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence about the Sun, Earth, and Stars
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

      FIG. 5.56 Predictions for rising, transiting, and setting for the Sun on a March equinox, in
      Corvallis. https://www.timeanddate.com/sun/usa/corvallis?month=3&year=2019

As shown in Fig. 5.57, predictions for these events on a June solstice in Corvallis, Oregon
are for the Sun to appear to:

   rise at a much earlier time, at 5.28 am, Pacific daylight saving time
   rise north of east (55º NE)
   be at a much higher maximum altitude in the sky (69º) at about the same time (1.14

      pm, Pacific daylight saving time)
   set much later, at 9:01 pm, Pacific daylight saving time
   set north of west (305º NW)

                                                     VI. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence about the Sun, Earth, and Stars | 609
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

and that the duration of daylight would be much longer, about 15 ½ hours.

            FIG. 5.57 Predictions for rising, transiting, and setting for the Sun on a June solstice
            in Corvallis. https://www.timeanddate.com/sun/usa/corvallis?month=6&year=2019

As shown in Fig. 5.58, predictions for these events on a September equinox in Corvallis,
Oregon are similar to the March equinox. The Sun appears to:

   rise at about the same time, at 7:01 am Pacific daylight time,
   be almost directly east (89º E),
   be at about the same maximum altitude in the sky (45º) at about the same time (1.05

      pm Pacific daylight time),
   set at about the same time , at 7:08 pm Pacific daylight time),
   set directly west (270º W)
and that the duration of daylight would be about 12 hours.

            FIG. 5.58 Prediction for rising, transiting, and setting for the Sun on a September
            equinox. https://www.timeanddate.com/sun/usa/corvallis?month=9&year=2019

As shown in Fig. 5.59, predictions for these events on a December solstice in Corvallis,
Oregon are for the Sun to appear to:

610 | VI. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence about the Sun, Earth, and Stars
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   rise at a much later time, at 7:46 am Pacific standard time, (equivalent to 8:46 am,
      Pacific daylight saving time)

   rise south of east (123º ESE),
   have a much lower maximum altitude in the sky (22º) at about the same time, 12:11

      pm, Pacific standard time, (equivalent to 1:11 pm Pacific daylight saving time),
   set much earlier, 4:35 pm, (equivalent to 5:35 pm Pacific daylight saving time),
   set south of west (237º WSW),
and that the duration of daylight would be much shorter, about 8 3/4 hours.

            FIG. 5.59 Predictions for rising, transiting, and setting for the Sun on a December
            solstice. https://www.timeanddate.com/sun/usa/corvallis?month=12&year=2019

The shaded portions of Figs. 5.56-5.59 demonstrate the large differences between the
solstices in the duration of daylight and the maximum altitude of the Sun at this location.
The information provided in this website is summarized in Table V.11.

                                                      VI. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence about the Sun, Earth, and Stars | 611
          This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

          Table V.11 Solar data for Corvallis, Oregon during equinoxes and solstices

          Table V.11 Solar data for Corvallis, Oregon during equinoxes and solstices

Date in   Sun rise  Direction Transit  Maximum   Sun set    Direction                            Duration
2019                                   angular                                                   of
                                       altitude                                                  daylight

March 20  7:16 am   89°     1:20 pm PDT 45°      7:25 pm    271°                                 12 hours
spring    PDT       E of N                       PDT        W of N
equinox

June 21   5:28 am   55°     1:20 pm              9:01 pm    305°                                 15.5
summer    PDT       N of E                  69°  PDT        N of W                               hours
solstice
                            PDT

Sept 23   7:01 am   89° E   1:05 pm PDT 45°      7:08 pm    270°                                 12 hours
autumn    PDT                                    PDT        W
equinox

Dec 21    7:46 am   123°    12:11 pm             4:35 pm    237°                                 8.75
Winter    PDT       S or E  PST                  PST (like  S of W                               hours
solstice                                         5:35 pm
                                            22°  PDT
                            (like 1:11
                            pm PDT)

   The data provided in Figs. 5.56 - Fig. 5.59 and Table V.11 indicate that at our location, the
Sun's maximum altitude  (alpha) at the summer solstice is about 69º, but only about 22º at
the winter solstice, and in between these, about 45º, at the spring and autumn equinoxes.
What this means is that the shortest shadows during a day also change in length, being
shortest at the summer solstice and longest at the winter solstice as shown in Fig. 5.60.

      FIG. 5.60 Differences in maximum angular altitude  of the Sun and lengths of shortest
      shadows during the seasons.

612 | VI. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence about the Sun, Earth, and Stars
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

The data in Table V.11 also indicate that at our location:

  · The Sun rises well North of East and sets well North of West at the summer solstice
      but rises well South of East and sets well South of West at the winter solstice, and in
      between these, rises in the East and sets in the West at the spring and autumn
      equinoxes.

  · The Sun is above the horizon for the most hours (15.5) at the summer solstice and the
      fewest hours at the winter solstice (8.75), and in between these, above the horizon
      the same number of hours (12) as below the horizon at the spring and autumn
      equinoxes.

  · During summer, the Sun's maximum altitude is higher, the Sun's rays shine down
      more directly through the atmosphere, and the duration of daylight is longer than
      during winter.

4. Cultural examples of noticing changes in the Sun's maximum angular altitude 

Ancient peoples erected monuments oriented to the solstices such as at Maeshowe,
built by Neolithic farmers about 5000 years ago on the Island of Orkney in Scotland.
This burial cairn is a large mound made of stone, with a long low entrance passageway
that is oriented so that sunlight shines through it into the inner chamber only during
a few days before and after the winter solstice. ( http://www.orkneyjar.com/history/
maeshowe/solstice.htm, http://www.orkneyjar.com/history/maeshowe/index.html,
http://www.maeshowe.co.uk).

   As shown in Fig. 5.61, ancient peoples also constructed large upright stone monuments
oriented toward the Sun and Moon, such as the Calanais Standing Stones on the Island of
Lewis, also in Scotland (https://stonesofwonder.com/callanis.htm).

                                                     VI. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence about the Sun, Earth, and Stars | 613
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

     Fig. 5.61 Calanais Standing Stones, Isle of Lewis, Scotland. https://commons.wikimedia.org/
     wiki/File:Calanais_Standing_Stones_20090610_01.jpg CC 3.0

These sites predate Stonehenge in England, which also has large upright stones
positioned with astronomical significance (https://www.english-heritage.org.uk/visit/
places/stonehenge/history-and-stories/history/significance/). New instruments and
techniques have led to new information about this area
(https://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/what-lies-beneath-
Stonehenge-180952437/). Recent droughts have led to new discoveries in Ireland of the
remains of ancient henges, circular structures that have become visible in fields
photographed from above by drones (https://www.smithsonianmag.com/smart-news/
drought-reveals-giant-4500-year-old-irish-henge-180969650/).

   Several ancient henges in North America have been excavated in part of the Cahokia
Mounds State Historic Site located in Collinsville, Illinois. Built about 900-1100 A,D, these
henges were made with red cedar posts about 15-20 inches in diameter and about 20 feet
high. Some aligned with the rising Sun during solstices and equinoxes. See the description
of WoodHenge at https://cahokiamounds.org/explore/#tab-id-r.

614 | VI. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence about the Sun, Earth, and Stars
            This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Modern people have chosen to celebrate astronomical solar equinoxes and solstices in

similar ways. In a project led by astronomer Judith Young, the University of Massachusetts

at Amherst has constructed a modern standing stone circle (See: http://www.umass.edu/

sunwheel/pages/whatis.html)  and  http://www.umass.edu/sunwheel/images/

sunwheel/paper.html

The Southern Colorado Astronomical Society has created a standing stone circle near

Spanish Peaks in a project led by Russ Erganbright, a retired engineer. They have carefully

sited each stone to illustrate where the Sun will rise and set during equinoxes and

solstices. (See https://www.skyandtelescope.com/sky-and-telescope-magazine/

beyond-the-printed-page/beyond-the-printed-page-a-modern-standing-stone-

calendar/)

As shown in Fig. 5.62, Keppel Henge is a standing stone circle in a garden in Ontario,

Canada that was developed by Steve Irvine and Bill Loney.

Fig.5.62 Keppel Henge, a standing stone circle in Ontario, Canada.
http://www.steveirvine.com/henge4.html. Photograph copyright Steve Irvine, 2019.

                                             VI. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence about the Sun, Earth, and Stars | 615
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Keppel Henge includes a North Star Stone with a notch through which a nearby Pointer
Stone points at Polaris, the North Star. As shown in Fig. 5.63, the stars appear to move
around Polaris during this photograph made with a one hour exposure.

                                          FIG. 5.63 The apparent movement of stars
                                          around Polaris during one hour.
                                          http://www.steveirvine.com/henge4.html
                                          Photograph copyright Steve Irvine, 2019.

As shown in Fig. 5.64, Steve Irvine used a pinhole camera to photograph the apparent path
of the Sun over a six-month period at the Keppel Henge site. This photograph shows the
changing height of the arc that the Sun made as it appeared to move across the sky. The
pinhole camera was a coffee can with a pinhole on one side, attached to the trunk of a
tree.

616 | VI. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence about the Sun, Earth, and Stars
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                 FIG. 5.64 The apparent daily path of the Sun across the sky from the winter to
                 summer solstices as photographed with a pinhole camera at Keppel Henge,
                 Ontario, Canada. http://www.steveirvine.com/henge_solargraph.html
                 Photograph copyright Steve Irvine, 2019.

For additional images of the Sun, Moon, and stars from this location, see
http://www.steveirvine.com/astro/index.html

C. Interpreting connections between seasonal differences in the
Sun's apparent angular altitude and regional climates

Question 5.35 What is the connection between seasonal differences in the Sun's apparent
angular altitude and regional climates?

  · To consider monthly differences in climate in the US, click on your state and nearest
      town or city in https://www.usclimatedata.com/climate/united-states/us

  · Describe seasonal differences in:
          average monthly temperature

                                                      VI. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence about the Sun, Earth, and Stars | 617
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

          average monthly precipitation
As shown in Fig. 5.65, for example, a graph represents the average monthly high and low
temperatures as well as monthly average rainfall for Corvallis, Oregon.

                    FIG. 5.65 Average monthly temperature and precipitation for Corvallis,
                    Oregon. https://www.usclimatedata.com/climate/corvallis/oregon/
                    united-states/usor0076

In summary, during summer in our location the Sun rises north of east and sets north of
west during the spring and summer; rises directly east and sets directly west, during the
equinoxes; and rises south of east and sets south of west, during autumn and winter. The
Sun appears to rise earlier in the morning, to travel in a higher arc across the sky, and
to set later in the evening in the summer than in the winter. The Sun's maximum angular
altitude is about 69º on the summer solstice, 45º on the equinoxes, and 22º on the winter
solstice.

   During summer the Sun is above the horizon for more hours and seems to travel
in a higher arc across the sky so that its rays shine more directly down through the
atmosphere. Therefore, more energy from the Sun reaches the surface for a longer time
period during the summer compared to the amount of energy from the Sun reaching the

618 | VI. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence about the Sun, Earth, and Stars
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

surface during winter. Our summers are warm and dry; our winters cool and wet. This
climate is typical for our region, the Pacific Northwest in the US.

   For some world wide climate information, go to https://www.nnvl.noaa.gov/view/
globaldata.html .

  · Summarize the seasonal changes that occur in your location for:
          when and where the Sun appears to rise
          how high the Sun appears to go in its arc across the sky
          when and where the Sun appears to set
          how long the Sun is above the horizon
          the average monthly temperature
          the average monthly precipitation

Complete entries in Table V.12. Then write a summary of what you have learned about
connections between seasonal differences in the details of the Sun's apparent daily motion
and in the typical temperature and precipitation experienced in your region on the Earth.

                                                     VI. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence about the Sun, Earth, and Stars | 619
                  This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

TABLE V.12 Developing central ideas about seasonal differences in the details of the Sun's
                              apparent daily motion and in regional climates

TABLE V.12 Developing central ideas about seasonal differences in the details of the Sun's
                              apparent daily motion and in regional climates

Sketch of set up  Evidence  Central Ideas                                                        Relevant Vocabulary

                            The Sun seems to rise
                            north of east (spring,
                            summer), directly east
                            (spring and autumn
                            equinoxes), and south
                            of east (autumn and
                            winter) in the
                            northern hemisphere

                            The Sun's apparent
                            highest maximum
                            angular altitude (angle
                            ) in the sky occurs at
                            the summer solstice;
                            the Sun's lowest
                            maximum angular
                            altitude  occurs
                            during the winter
                            solstice.

                            The Sun seems to set
                            north of west (spring,
                            summer), directly
                            west (spring and
                            autumn equinoxes),
                            and south of west
                            (autumn and winter)
                            in the northern
                            hemisphere

620 | VI. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence about the Sun, Earth, and Stars
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                          During spring and
                                          summer, the Sun is
                                          visible above the
                                          horizon for a longer
                                          duration (more than 12
                                          hours) than not visible
                                          below the horizon; On
                                          the spring and
                                          autumn equinoxes,
                                          the Sun is visible
                                          above the horizon for
                                          the same duration, 12
                                          hours, as not visible
                                          below the horizon;
                                          During autumn and
                                          winter, the sun is
                                          visible above the
                                          horizon for a shorter
                                          duration (less than 12
                                          hours) than not visible
                                          below the horizon.
                                          During summer, the
                                          Sun's maximum
                                          altitude is higher, the
                                          Sun's rays shine down
                                          more directly through
                                          the atmosphere, and
                                          the duration of
                                          daylight is longer than
                                          during winter.

              VI. Developing Additional Central Ideas Based on Evidence about the Sun, Earth, and Stars | 621
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

VII. Using Central Ideas Based on
Evidence to Develop Two Explanatory
Models for Seasonal Patterns in the
Constellations Visible at Night

This section uses evidence of seasonal differences in developing two explanatory models
for seasonal patterns in the constellations visible at night.

Question 5.36 Why are there seasonal patterns in the constellations visible at night?

Just as there were geocentric and heliocentric models to explain day and night, people
have developed two explanatory models for the seasonal patterns of the visible stars.

A. Using a geocentric model to explain the seasonal patterns of
constellations visible at night

Using a fixed Earth, revolving Sun model, many ancient astronomers considered the Sun,
planets, and stars to be revolving daily around a stationary Earth. They envisioned these
entities as being located on nesting celestial spheres centered on the Earth and spinning
daily on their axes. The Sun also appeared to move annually with respect to the stars along
a path on its celestial sphere known as the ecliptic as shown in Fig. 5.66.

622 | VII. Using Central Ideas Based on Evidence to Develop Two Explanatory Models for Seasonal Patterns in the Constellations
Visible at Night
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                               Fig. 5.66 Model of celestial sphere centered on the Earth.

Because the Sun was so bright, it would outshine the stars near where it was on the
ecliptic. Therefore, people on Earth would see different stars at different times of year,
those opposite the Sun in its annual path on the ecliptic around the Earth. These ancient
astronomers envisioned the Sun's path along the ecliptic as tipped at an angle to the
celestial sphere's equator. In this geocentric model, the constellations appeared on an
inclined band on the ecliptic of a celestial sphere encircling the Earth as shown in Fig.
5.67. The band was known as the Zodiac as shown in this illustration published in a
book by Regiomontanus about Ptolemy's Almagest in 1496. (http://abyss.uoregon.edu/~js/
glossary/ptolemy.html).

  VII. Using Central Ideas Based on Evidence to Develop Two Explanatory Models for Seasonal Patterns in the Constellations Visible at
                                                                                                                                                                            Night | 623
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                          FIG. 5.67 Illustration of the zodiac on a celestial sphere in
                          Epitome of the Almagest, 1496. https://library.si.edu/
                          digital-library/book/epytomaioannisd00regi (page 7) Dibner
                          Library of the History of Science and Technology, Smithsonian
                          Libraries.

B. Using a heliocentric model to explain the seasonal patterns of
the constellations visible at night

As suggested by Copernicus in 1543 and Galileo in 1632, an alternative explanatory model

624 | VII. Using Central Ideas Based on Evidence to Develop Two Explanatory Models for Seasonal Patterns in the Constellations
Visible at Night
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

is that the Sun is not moving but it is the Earth that is revolving around the Sun.
Demonstrate this heliocentric model as follows:

 Equipment: Use a lamp without a shade, masking tape, 4 pieces of chart paper, marker,
 and circular lid for each small group or student:

    Place a lamp without a shade in the middle of a dark room. Use masking tape to
 tape the cord to the floor to avoid having anyone trip over it. On each of four large
 pieces of chart paper, draw a constellation to represent one of the seasons such as those
 shown in Figs. 5.50-5.54. On each wall of the room, tape a constellation representing
 spring, summer, fall or winter night skies. Start by placing the constellation representing
 summer on the wall that is in the north direction if you live in the northern hemisphere
 or in the south direction if you live in the southern hemisphere.

  · Everyone stand in a circle around the lamp. How would you each model "midday"?
  · Next all model a rotating Earth by rotating in place, counter-clockwise if you live in

      the northern hemisphere, clockwise if you live in the southern hemisphere.
  · How would you each model "midnight"?
  · What constellation do you each see represented on the wall you are facing?

      What constellations do colleagues see when facing other walls?
  · What constellation represents what is seen during each season?

          What constellation is on the wall modeling what someone may see at midnight
            during spring?

          during summer?
          during autumn?
          during winter?
  · If you live in the northern hemisphere, keep rotating while revolving around the
      lamp in a counter-clockwise direction.
      If you live in the southern hemisphere, keep rotating while revolving around the
      lamp in a clockwise direction.
  · Stop in the midnight position occasionally and report what constellation you see on
      the wall you are facing.
  · Describe how this demonstrates a heliocentric model of the Earth's annual motion
      with respect to the Sun.
  · Sketch the circular path you and your classmates are following around the lamp

  VII. Using Central Ideas Based on Evidence to Develop Two Explanatory Models for Seasonal Patterns in the Constellations Visible at
                                                                                                                                                                            Night | 625
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

          as if you are looking down on this activity from above the lamp
          as if you are looking at this activity from the side, as if you are looking in on it

            from a window
  · Check the shape of your drawings by looking at a circular lid

          from above
          from the side
Resources in books and on the Internet frequently differ in the perspective assumed in
drawings of the Earth's orbit. As shown on the left in Fig. 5.68, drawings from a perspective
of looking down on the solar system from above show an almost circular orbit. As shown
on the right in Fig. 5.68, drawings from a perspective looking at the orbit from the side
show an exaggerated elliptical shape.

                 FIG. 5.68 Drawings of the orbit of the Earth around the Sun from two
                 perspectives
                 https://spaceplace.nasa.gov/launch-windows/en/
                 https://www.nasa.gov/audience/forstudents/5-8/features/nasa-knows/
                 what-is-orbit-58.html

626 | VII. Using Central Ideas Based on Evidence to Develop Two Explanatory Models for Seasonal Patterns in the Constellations
Visible at Night
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

VIII. Using Central Ideas Based on
Evidence to Develop an Explanatory
Model for the Earth's Seasons

A. Explaining the Earth's seasons with a heliocentric model

             Question 5.37 Why is it hot in the summer and cold in the winter?

An additional aspect of this heliocentric model is to envision the Earth as tilted on its axis.
The tilt of the Earth's axis of rotation has profound implications for variations in climate
as the Earth revolves in its orbit around the Sun as shown in Fig. 5.69.

       FIG. 5.69 Model of the Earth envisioned as tilted on its axis while revolving
       counter-clockwise around the Sun, with seasons identified for the northern hemisphere.

Note that the tilt is envisioned as always being in the same direction throughout the
Earth's annual trip around the Sun:

   In the northern hemisphere, as shown in Fig. 5.69 for example, the Earth is envisioned
as moving in a counter-clockwise direction around the Sun with the tilt is always in the
same direction, toward the north star, Polaris. In spring, the tilt is toward Polaris but

                                      VIII. Using Central Ideas Based on Evidence to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Earth's Seasons | 627
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

opposite to the counter-clockwise direction of motion around the Sun. In summer, the tilt
is still toward Polaris and now toward the Sun but perpendicular to the counter-clockwise
direction of motion. In autumn, the tilt is still toward Polaris but also in the counter-
clockwise direction of motion around the Sun. In winter the tilt is still toward Polaris but
away from the Sun, perpendicular to the counter-clockwise direction of motion.

   To model the revolution of the tilted rotating Earth around the Sun :

  Equipment: Use a lamp without a shade, masking tape, four constellations drawn on
  chart paper, and a globe representing the Earth. Place the lamp without a shade in
  the middle of the room, with its cord taped to the floor. Tape the four constellations
  representing spring, summer, fall, and winter to the appropriate walls.

  · Which wall is in the north direction? east? south? west?
  · Have someone hold the globe. Toward which wall should this person always tilt the

      axis of the globe?
  · Which season is being represented by where this person is standing with respect to

      the lamp, the tilted globe, and the designated wall?
          Tilt backwards along the path around the lamp but toward the designated wall
            for spring
          Tilt both toward the designated wall and the lamp for summer
          Tilt forward along the path around the lamp and toward the designated wall for
            autumn
          Tilt away from the lamp but toward the designated wall for winter

  · Have the person holding the globe keep the globe rotating on its axis and tilted
      toward the designated wall while walking around the lamp

  · Where should the person be standing to represent:
          the spring equinox?
          the summer solstice?
          the autumn equinox?
          the winter solstice?

     as the person walks around the lamp, while keeping the rotating globe's axis tilted
     toward the designated wall?
   Now everyone model the tilted rotating Earth revolving around the Sun:

628 | VIII. Using Central Ideas Based on Evidence to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Earth's Seasons
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

  · Tilt in the direction of the designated wall.
  · Practice modeling the Earth's daily rotation while tilted in this direction.
  · Which season are you modeling?

          Where are you with respect to the lamp and the constellations on the walls?
          Are you:
          tilted toward the designated wall but tilted backwards along the path around the

            lamp as you move forwards ? (spring)
          tilted toward both the designated wall and the lamp? (summer)
          tilted toward the designated wall and forward along the path around the lamp ?

            (autumn)
          tilted toward the designated wall but away from the lamp but? (winter)
  · Now put the rotating and revolving motions together. As you revolve around the
      lamp, keep your body tilted toward the designated wall while rotating on that axis.
  · What is the connection between this model of a tilted rotating Earth revolving
      around the Sun and the evidence of changes in the Sun's maximum angular altitude 
      and the tilt's effect on seasonal changes in the climate?
  · Draw two diagrams, one representing a tilted Earth revolving around the Sun in an
      almost circular orbit and the other representing a lamp and students modeling the
      reasons for the Earth's seasons.

The data reported in section VI.B.3 indicate that during summer the Sun is above the
horizon for more hours and seems to travel in a higher arc across the sky so that its rays
shine more directly down through the atmosphere. Therefore, more energy from the Sun
reaches the surface for a longer time period during the summer compared to the amount
of energy from the Sun reaching the surface during winter.

   In summary:

  · The Sun is higher in the sky when the Earth is in a position in its orbit where its axis
      is tilted toward the Sun during the summer solstice.

  · The Sun is lower in the sky when the Earth is in a position in its orbit on the other
      side of the Sun, where the Earth's axis is tilted away from the Sun during the winter
      solstice.

  · During spring and autumn equinoxes, the Earth's tilt is parallel to the direction of
      travel and the tilt does not affect the number of hours that the Sun is above or below
      the horizon.

                                      VIII. Using Central Ideas Based on Evidence to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Earth's Seasons | 629
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

  · Note that the Earth's axis of rotation always tilts in the same direction, in the
      northern hemisphere, for example, always toward Polaris, the North Star. What
      changes is where the Earth is in its orbit around the Sun.

Many people associate being warm with being close to a heat source and being cold with
being far away from a heat source. Thus it may seem reasonable to associate summer
with being closer to the Sun and winter with being farther away. This is not the case
here, however. The Sun is about 100,000,000 miles away. The diameter of the Earth is only
about 10,000 miles. The fractional difference in being on one side (tilted toward) or the
other side (tilted away) from the Sun is only 10,000/100,000,000 = 1/10,000. This is not
enough to make a difference.

   The northern and southern hemispheres are effectively the SAME distance from the
Sun; yet the southern hemisphere experiences winter while the northern hemisphere is
experiencing summer; the southern hemisphere experiences summer while the northern
hemisphere is experiencing winter. The difference is caused by where the Earth is in its
orbit around the Sun and how this position affects the direction of the tilt of Earth's axis
of rotation with respect to the Sun, not by a very minor difference in distance from the
Sun.

   Fig 5.69 assumes that the Earth's orbit around the Sun is circular. The orbit is, however,
slightly elliptical. This means that the northern hemisphere is actually slightly closer to
the Sun in January than in July, the opposite of what one might expect.

   If you have a globe, light source, and a light sensor or a smartphone with a built-in light
sensor or a light sensor app, you can explore the effect on the brightness of light from a
source (flux) of a location's latitude on a globe as well as the effect on brightness of the
orientation of the globe's tilt to the source. You also can explore the effect of differences
in distance of the globe from the source to model the effect of the slight elliptical shape
of the Earth's orbit around the Sun so that the northern hemisphere is closer to the Sun
in January (perihelion) than in July (aphelion). See J. Durelle, J. Jones, S. Merriman, and A.
Balan, "A smartphone-based introductory astronomy experiment: Seasons investigation,"
The Physics Teacher, 55, 2, 122-123 (2017).

  · Complete entries in Table V.13. Then write a summary of what you have learned
      about developing an explanatory model for the Earth's seasons.

630 | VIII. Using Central Ideas Based on Evidence to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Earth's Seasons
         This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

TABLE V.13 Developing an explanatory model for the Earth's seasons
TABLE V.13 Developing an explanatory model for the Earth's seasons

URL or Sketch                            Evidence Central Ideas  Relevant
                                                                 Vocabulary

                                         The Earth               revolves
                                         revolves around
                                         the Sun in one          orbit
                                         year.                      constellations

                                         The orbit is
                                         nearly circular.

http://sciencenetlinks.com               The Earth's axis        axis
/science-news/science                    is tilted at about      plane of orbit
-updates/tilted-earth/                   23.4 degrees to
                                         the plane of the
https://www.illustrativemathe            orbit
matics.org/content-standards/tasks/1140
                                         As viewed from          rotates
                                         the northern
                                         hemisphere, the         revolves
                                         Earth rotates              counterclockwi
                                         counterclockwise
                                         about an axis           se
                                         tilted about 23.4          clockwise
                                         degrees to the
                                         plane of the
                                         Earth's orbit
                                         while Earth
                                         revolves
                                         counterclockwise
                                         around the Sun

               VIII. Using Central Ideas Based on Evidence to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Earth's Seasons | 631
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

https://spaceplace.nasa.gov/seasons/en/             A hemisphere        Hemisphere
http://www.todayifoundout.com/                      tilts toward the    solstice
index.php/2011/12/                                  Sun but
the-earth-is-hottest-when-it-is-furthest            perpendicular to
-from-the-sun-on-its-orbit-not-when-it-is-closest/  the Earth's orbit,
                                                    during the
https://spaceplace.nasa.gov/seasons/en/             summer solstice

https://spaceplace.nasa.gov/seasons/en/             A hemisphere        equinox
                                                    tilts along the
                                                    Earth's orbit,
                                                    either in the
                                                    opposite or same
                                                    direction of
                                                    motion, during
                                                    the spring and
                                                    autumn
                                                    equinoxes

                                                    A hemisphere
                                                    tilts away from
                                                    the Sun,
                                                    perpendicular to
                                                    the Earth's orbit,
                                                    during the winter
                                                    solstice

632 | VIII. Using Central Ideas Based on Evidence to Develop an Explanatory Model for the Earth's Seasons
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

IX. Estimating the Tilt of the Earth

   How curious are you about the tilt of the Earth? This section provides a detailed account
of geometric arguments that underlie a surprisingly simple way to estimate the tilt of the
Earth's axis. The only equipment you need would be a post and a way to measure its height
and the length of its shortest shadow during equinoxes and solstices. If you enjoy puzzling
through such geometrical arguments, read on. If not, perhaps skim this briefly to see what
is here and then go on to the next section.

     A. Developing and using mathematical representations to
                   estimate the tilt of the Earth's axis

Ancient peoples noticed seasonal changes in the lengths of shadows as well as in the
Sun's apparent path across the sky, particularly during equinoxes and solstices. A Greek
astronomer, Eratosthenes (276-195 BC), for example, estimated the magnitude of the tilt
by using such observations and his knowledge of geometry.

         Question 5.38 How can one estimate the tilt of the Earth's axis of rotation?

This section develops a geometrical approach to estimating the tilt of the Earth's axis of
rotation. This approach is surprisingly simple:

  · Measure the maximum angular altitude of the Sun, angle  (alpha), at a given location
      during a solstice and during an equinox; then subtract one angle from the other.

  · Or measure the maximum angular altitude of the Sun, angle  (alpha), at a given
      location during both solstices; then subtract the angle during the winter solstice
      from the angle during the summer solstice and divide by two.

  · Or substitute (90º - the latitude of the gnomon) for the maximum angular altitude of
      the sun at an equinox and use this along with the maximum altitude of the Sun at
      one of the solstices as indicated in the box below.

                                                                                                                                   IX. Estimating the Tilt of the Earth | 633
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Estimating those angles involves simply using a protractor, consulting data sources such
as the tables presented in Figs. 5.56-5.59, or measuring the height of the gnomon (a post)
and the length of its shadow at solar noon, dividing one by the other to find the angle's
tangent, and identifying the angle with a calculator or trigonometry table.

                1. Envisioning the tilt of the Earth's axis of rotation

The tilt of the Earth's axis is known as its obliquity and is represented by angle  (the
Greek letter epsilon). As shown in Fig. 5.70, the tilt is the angle  between the Earth's
axis of rotation, which is represented by the large dashed line from the North Pole to the
South Pole, and the vertical axis, which is represented by the small dashed vertical line.
The vertical axis is perpendicular to the plane of the Earth's orbit around the Sun. This
discussion assumes the Earth is spherical. The small dashed horizontal line represents the
projection of the orbital plane on this cross section of a spherical Earth.

                 FIG. 5.70 Tilt of the Earth's axis of rotation with respect to the vertical to the
                 plane of its orbit.

634 | IX. Estimating the Tilt of the Earth
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                 2. Estimating the tilt of the Earth's axis of rotation

How can you find out what the maximum angular angle of the Sun is at your location
during a solstice or equinox?

          To estimate the maximum angular angle of the Sun by observing a gnomon's shadow, provide for each
       group: a vertical post (a gnomon) in a flat sunny area, chalk, straight stick, protractor, and if needed a meter
       stick and trigonometry table or calculator with trig functions. Or use measurements of the maximum
       angular altitude of the Sun for the equinoxes and solstices at your location as reported in tables such as
       those shown in Figs. 5.56 - 5.59.

  · Find a vertical post such as a fence post whose height you can measure and whose
      shadow is visible on flat ground during the middle of a sunny day. Or create such a
      gnomon by positioning a straight stick vertically in a flat sunny area.

  · Mark the tip of the gnomon's shadow on the ground frequently during the middle of
      the day. Local solar noon occurs at the moment of the gnomon's shortest shadow.

The maximum angular altitude of the Sun, angle (alpha), varies as shown in Fig. 5.71.

                 FIG. 5.71 Maximum angular altitudes of the Sun formed by a gnomon's
                 shadows and rays of light from the Sun during the solstices and equinoxes.

There are many ways to obtain values for the maximum angular altitude of the Sun, angle 
(alpha), during the solstices and equinoxes at a particular location:

                                                                                                                                   IX. Estimating the Tilt of the Earth | 635
                            This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

· Estimate the maximum angular altitude of the Sun, angle , directly by placing a
   straight stick, representing a light ray, from the top of the gnomon to the tip of the
   shadow at local noon (time of shortest shadow) and use a protractor to estimate the
   angle  formed by the stick and the gnomon's shadow.

· Or measure the height of the gnomon, H, and the length of its shadow, L, at solar
   noon. Then:

       Draw a careful ray diagram: First draw a line of length H representing the
         gnomon perpendicular to a line of length L representing the shadow. Next draw
         a straight line representing a light ray traveling from the tip of the line
         representing the gnomon to the end of the line representing the shadow. Then
         use a protractor to estimate the angle  formed by the lines representing the
         light ray and the shadow on the ground.

       Or calculate the tangent of angle :

Tangent of                                  .

       Then with a trigonometry table or calculator with trigonometry functions
         (arctan, sometimes written as tan-1), identify the angle  for which H/L is the
         tangent.

· Or one can calculate angle e at an equinox if one knows the latitude, angle (phi),
   of the location of the gnomon. Angle e at solar noon during an equinox is related to
   the latitude of the location of the gnomon as stated here and derived under #4
   below.

Maximum angular altitude of the Sun during an equinox, angle e = 90° - angle

       Find a location's latitude in a data base or if in the northern hemisphere,
         estimate the latitude  by using a protractor to estimate the angular altitude of
         the star Polaris on a clear night. Polaris is close to where the Earth's axis of
         rotation points in the northern sky. (A star does not appear near where the
         Earth's axis points in the southern sky; this option for estimating a location's
         latitude is not available there.) Substitute (90º - the latitude  of the gnomon) for
         the maximum angular altitude of the sun at an equinox and use this along with

636 | IX. Estimating the Tilt of the Earth
                            This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

         the maximum altitude of the Sun at one of the solstices as indicated in the box
         below

· Another way to find the maximum angular angle of the Sun during the solstices and
   equinox is to use data for your location as predicted in tables such as in Figs.
   5.56-5.59.

· Once you have estimates for the maximum angular altitude of the Sun, angle , as
   discussed above:

       Estimate the tilt of the Earth's axis, angle  (epsilon), in at least one of the ways
         below:

Tilt of the Earth's axis, angle :

 = angle s at summer solstice - angle e at equinox

Tilt of the Earth's axis, angle :

 = angle e at equinox - angle w at winter solstice

Tilt of the Earth's axis, angle :

                                                    =

   These mathematical relationships can be envisioned as shown in Fig. 5.72. Detailed
derivations are presented in sections #5, #7, and #8 below.

                                                    IX. Estimating the Tilt of the Earth | 637
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                  FIG. 5.72 Geometrical relationships among the tilt of the Earth  and the
                  maximum angular altitude of the Sun at the summer solstice, s, equinox, e, and
                  winter solstice, w.

      At our location, for example, as noted in the tables presented in Figs. 5.56 - 5.59:
                          angle s at the summer solstice in Corvallis = about 69 º
                                       angle e at an equinox in Corvallis = about 45 º
                           angle w at the winter solstice in Corvallis = about 22 º

         Tilt of the Earth's axis, :
             = angle s at summer solstice - angle e at equinox
             = about 69º - about 45 º
             = about 24 º

         Tilt of the Earth's axis, :
             = angle e at equinox - angle w at winter equinox
             = about 45º - about 22 º
             = about 23 º

         Tilt of the Earth's axis, :
             =
             = (about 69º - about 22 º)/2
             = about 47 º/2
             = about 23.5º

638 | IX. Estimating the Tilt of the Earth
                        This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   The currently accepted value for the tilt of the Earth, called its obliquity, is 23.4º
(https://www.timeanddate.com/astronomy/axial-tilt-obliquity.html)

   An example middle school science lesson plan exploring this relationship is
provided in http://www.umass.edu/sunwheel/pages/lesson5.html (this refers to:
http://www.umass.edu/sunwheel/pages/lesson1.html)

   Deriving the relationship that the tilt  equals the difference between two angles
depends upon a series of geometrical arguments that are presented next.

 3. Nuances in developing and using mathematical representations to estimate
                      the tilt of the Earth's axis of rotation

According to the heliocentric model, a nearly spherical Earth is revolving around the
Sun each year in a nearly circular orbit that forms a plane. Diagrams representing the
revolution of the Earth around the Sun can be confusing, however, because of the
differing perspectives from which they are drawn.

   As shown in Fig. 5.73, the perspective of a diagram of the Earth's orbit around the
Sun can be from above, looking down on a nearly circular orbit, or from the side,
where the nearly circular orbit appears to be elliptical. Both of these diagrams are
drawn from the perspective of the northern hemisphere where small arrows indicate
the Earth to be orbiting counter-clockwise.

   The diagrams in Fig. 5.73 differ, however, in how they portray a tilted axis, either
tilted to the left or to the right. The direction of the tilt is consistent, however, either
always toward the left or always toward the right. The statement "the axis tilts toward
the Sun during summer and away from the Sun during winter" does not mean that the
Earth's axis is tilting back and forth. What is changing instead is where the Earth is in
its orbit with respect to the Sun.

                                                                                                                          IX. Estimating the Tilt of the Earth | 639
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

      FIG. 5.73 Left: Earth in its orbit around the Sun as viewed from above, with tilt to the left. Right:
      Earth in its orbit around the Sun as viewed from the side, with tilt to the right.
      https://www.illustrativemathematics.org/content-standards/tasks/1140 (CC BY-NC-SA 4.0)
      https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
      File:Orbital_relations_of_the_Solstice,_Equinox_%26_Intervening_Seasons.svg (CC0 1.0)

      The artist drew a circular orbit in the diagram on the left, from the perspective of
      a viewer looking down from above the solar system. The position for summer (A) is
      on the right, with the North Pole shown tilted toward the left, toward the Sun. The
      position for winter (C) is on the left, with the North Pole still tilted toward the left, but
      away from the Sun.

         The artist drew an apparently elliptical orbit in the diagram on the right, from
      the perspective of looking from the side, outside of the position labeled for fall. The
      position for summer is on the left, with the North Pole shown tilted toward the Sun
      on the right. The position for winter is on the right, with the North Pole tilted toward
      the right, away from the Sun.

         The perspective shown on the right is the perspective adopted in the solstice
      diagrams below. In the diagram for the summer solstice in the northern hemisphere,
      light rays come from the Sun on the right. In the diagram for the winter solstice in the
      northern hemisphere, light rays come from the Sun on the left.

         From this perspective, however, the Sun's rays during an equinox would be coming
      into or out of the plane of the paper and difficult to show in a diagram. Therefore,
      the perspective chosen for a diagram for an equinox is at right angles to those for the
      solstices.

640 | IX. Estimating the Tilt of the Earth
                        This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

 4. Estimating latitude and maximum angular altitude of the Sun during an
                                     equinox

        Question 5.39 Why does a location's latitude, angle = 90° - angle e?

Fig. 5.74 is a cross section of a spherical Earth during the spring equinox, with the
Sun's rays coming from the right. The tilt of the Earth's axis would be into or out of
the plane of the paper and not visible from this perspective. Fig. 5.74 is not to scale.
During an equinox, the Sun would appear to rise directly east, set directly west and be
above the horizon for 12 hours everywhere on Earth (spring: March 19, 20, or 21 and
autumn: September 22, 23, or 24).

   A gnomon of height H is placed at a location with latitude (phi). Latitude tells how
far above the equator a location is. The gnomon's latitude, angle , is the angle formed
by a line to the center of the Earth from this location and a line from a point on the
equator to the center of the Earth,

              Fig. 5.74 Diagram representing the Sun's rays shining on the Earth during the
              spring equinox.

The gnomon casts a shadow of length L on the flat ground; the shadow is represented
by the left part of the line perpendicular to the gnomon and tangent to the circle
representing a spherical Earth. Rays of light from the Sun make an angle e with the

                                                                                                                           IX. Estimating the Tilt of the Earth | 641
                        This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

ground. Angle e is the maximum angular altitude of the Sun during an equinox and
its tangent is H/L at solar noon when L is the gnomon's shortest shadow.

   The rays of light from the Sun are coming from so far away that they are considered
to be parallel. Therefore, the angle formed by the rays of light and the gnomon is equal
to the latitude, angle , because alternate interior angles formed by a transversal
are equal when the transversal cuts two parallel lines. (See:
https://www.mathopenref.com/anglesalternateinterior.html ) The tangent of angle
is L/H at solar noon.

   The rays of light, gnomon, and shadow form a right triangle. The angles in a right
triangle sum to 90°. Therefore: angel e+ angle = 90° and

A location's latitude, angle  = 90° - angle e where e is the maximum angular altitude of the Sun
                                           during an equinox

This equation will be helpful below in estimating the tilt of the Earth's axis during the
summer and winter solstices at the same location. Note also that at a latitude of angle

  = 0 degrees, at the equator, angle e will equal ninety degrees. This means the Sun
will be directly overhead and there will be no shadows at solar noon during an equinox
at the equator.

At our location in Corvallis, Oregon, the height of a gnomon and its shortest shadow
on an equinox are about equal in length and the angular altitude of the Sun is about
45º, the value provided in the tables shown in Figs. 5.56 and 5.58. The actual latitude
for Corvallis is 44.5646º.

    5. Deriving the tilt of the Earth in terms of the difference between the
    maximum angular altitudes of the Sun during the summer solstice, s, and
    equinox, e

      Question 5.40 Why does the tilt, angle  = angle s at summer solstice - angle e at
                                               equinox?

      Representing the tilted Earth during a solstice is quite complicated and therefore

642 | IX. Estimating the Tilt of the Earth
                        This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

developed here in a series of steps. In Fig. 5.75, the perspective is from the side and
the Earth's orbital plane is represented as perpendicular to the plane of the paper,
with a spherical Earth emerging from the paper.

        FIG 5.75 Cross-section of orbiting Earth with horizontal line representing projection
        of the plane of the Earth's orbit around the Sun.

A cross-section of the spherical Earth is represented by a circle that has horizontal
and vertical axes at right angles. The dashed horizontal line represents a horizontal
axis through the middle of the sphere. This is a projection of a plane that represents
the plane of the Earth's orbit around the Sun. Envision a spherical Earth emerging
from the plane of the paper.

   The dashed vertical line represents a vertical axis through the middle of the Earth
that is perpendicular to the plane of the Earth's orbit around the Sun.

   Next consider that the spherical Earth also has axes tilted by an angle  (epsilon) as
in Fig. 5.76. The top of the tilted vertical axis represents the North Pole of the Earth
and the bottom of the tilted vertical axis represents the South Pole of the Earth. Both
ends of the tilted horizontal axis represent points on the Earth's equator.

                                                                                                                          IX. Estimating the Tilt of the Earth | 643
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                    Fig. 5.76 Cross-section of a spherical Earth whose axis of rotation is tilted at
                    angle  (epsilon) with respect to the vertical to the plane of the Earth's orbit
                    around the Sun.

         Fig. 5.76 represents a cross-section through the center of a spherical Earth, rather
      than an attempt to represent the sphere in three-dimensions.

         The dashed North/South pole line represents an axis through the center of the
      Earth. Envision the Earth rotating daily about this axis.

         The dashed tilted horizontal axis represents the projection of the equator through
      the center of the rotating Earth.

         The angle  (epsilon) is the Earth's obliquity or tilt of the Earth's axis of rotation with
      respect to the vertical axis perpendicular to the plane of its orbit around the Sun.

         The short dashed horizontal axis represents the projection of the plane of the
      Earth's orbit around the Sun.

         The short dashed vertical axis represents a vertical axis perpendicular to the plane
      of the Earth's orbit around the Sun

         Then consider a point that is at an angle (phi) between the Equator and the North
      Pole. As shown in Fig. 5.77, the angle (phi) represents the latitude of the point. The
      latitude (phi) of the point is the angle formed by a line from the point to the center
      of the Earth (red) and the line from a point at the Earth's equator to the center of the
      Earth (red). Points on the equator are considered to be at latitude of = 0. Fig. 5.77 is
      not drawn to scale.

644 | IX. Estimating the Tilt of the Earth
                        This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

              (phi) represents the latitude of a point with respect to a point on the equator."
              width="500 height="302 /> FIG. 5.77 Angle [latex]\phi[/latex] (phi)
              represents the latitude of a point with respect to a point on the equator.

   During the summer solstice (June 19, 20 or 21) in the northern hemisphere, the
Earth's tilted axis is pointing directly toward the Sun. During the summer solstice, the
Sun rises the most north of east, moves highest across the sky, sets the most north of
west, and is above the horizon for the most hours.

   In Fig. 5.78, the yellow arrows represent light rays from the Sun, which is so far away
that the incoming rays are essentially parallel. A gnomon at latitude has its shortest
shadow at solar noon on the summer solstice. The shadow is represented by the gray
half of the line representing the ground perpendicular to the gnomon.

                                                                                                                          IX. Estimating the Tilt of the Earth | 645
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

FIG. 5.78 Rays from the Sun and the gnomon create its shortest shadow at
noon during the summer solstice in the northern hemisphere.

Angle s, angle alpha during the summer solstice, is the maximum angular altitude of

the Sun. This angle is formed by the shadow and rays from the Sun at solar noon on

the summer solstice.

Angle s, angle beta during the summer solstice, is formed by the gnomon and rays

from the Sun at solar noon on the solstice.

Angle s + angle s = 90° because the gnomon forms a right angle with the flat area

on which the shadow falls.

   Therefore, angle s = 90° - angle s
   The angle s formed by the gnomon and the light rays is congruent with the angle
s formed by the red line to the center of the Earth from the point and the red

line representing the horizontal axis. These angles are congruent because they are

alternate interior angles formed by a transversal cutting across two parallel lines.

As shown in Fig. 5.77, angle                = angle s+ angle 
Solving for angle :

The tilt of the Earth, angle  = angle - angle s
   Both of these angles can be rewritten in terms of other angles:
   The latitude of the gnomon, angle , is related to the maximum angular altitude of the

Sun at the equinox as shown earlier in #4:

646 | IX. Estimating the Tilt of the Earth
       This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

angle + angle e = 90° so angle = 90° - angle e
Angle sforms a right triangle with angle s:
angle s + angle s= 90° so angle s = 90° - angle s

If the tilt of the Earth, angle  = angle - angle s

Then:  angle  = (90° - angle e) - (90° - angle s)

       = 90° - angle e- 90° + angle s

The tilt of the Earth, angle  = angle s - angle e

   As claimed above in #2, the angular tilt of the Earth, angle , can be estimated simply
by measuring the height of a gnomon (person, post, upright stick...) and its shadow at
solar noon during the summer solstice and during the equinox, dividing the height of the
gnomon by the length of the shadow (H/L) for each observation, finding the angles for
which these numbers are the tangents, and subtracting the maximum angular altitude of
the Sun in the sky at the equinox from the maximum angular altitude of the Sun in the sky
at the summer solstice.

         6. Discussing the effect of the tilt of the Earth at several latitudes

Question 5.41 What are the Tropic of Cancer, Arctic Circle, and Antarctic Circle?

The tilt of the Earth's axis of rotation causes unusual effects at several latitudes known
as the Tropic of Cancer near the equator, the Arctic Circle near the North Pole, and the
Antarctic Circle near the South Pole.

   As shown in Fig. 5.79, at latitude equal to angle  above the equator at solar noon
on the summer solstice in the northern hemisphere, sunlight shines directly down on
a gnomon (a person, post, upright stick...) that casts no shadow. A long red dashed line
in Fig. 5.79 represents a projection of the Tropic of Cancer, a line around the Earth
at this latitude of about 23.4°, the most northern latitude at which the Sun is ever
directly overhead, where s= 90°. The Tropic of Cancer was named about 2000 years ago
when the Sun was perceived as being in the constellation with the Latin name for crab
(https://www.space.com/16970-cancer-constellation.html) in its annual path along the
zodiac in the geocentric model of the Sun revolving around the Earth. The word tropic is

                                                                                                                                   IX. Estimating the Tilt of the Earth | 647
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

derived from a Greek word for turn. After the summer solstice, the Sun appears to turn
back toward the south in where it appears to rise and set.

   The Arctic Circle is the lowest latitude at which the Sun never seems to set during the
summer solstice in the northern hemisphere, where s = 0°. As shown in Fig. 5.79, this
occurs at a latitude of an angle  below the North Pole, about 66.5° above the equator. A
short red line with thin dashes represents the projection of the Arctic Circle on this cross
section through the middle of a spherical Earth.

   At this same time (June 19, 20, or 21) but known as the winter solstice in the southern
hemisphere, no sunlight reaches the South Pole or areas within the latitude of an angle
 above the South Pole, about 66.5° below the equator. A line around the Earth at this
latitude, about -66.5°, is known as the Antarctic Circle. A short red line with thick dashes
represents the projection of the Antarctic Circle on this cross section through the middle
of a spherical Earth in Fig. 5.79.

           FIG. 5.79 Tropic of Cancer, Arctic Circle and Antarctic Circle during the June solstice.

The diagrams in Figs. 5.74 and 5.79 can be puzzling in that both include a point at which
light rays shine directly on a gnomon at solar noon so that the gnomon does not cast a
shadow. Fig. 5.74 identifies this as a point on the equator. Fig. 5.79 identifies this as a point
at a latitude angle  above the equator, on the Tropic of Cancer. Both points appear as if

648 | IX. Estimating the Tilt of the Earth
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

they lie half-way between the top and bottom of a circle representing a cross section of
a spherical Earth, a circle divided by a horizontal line representing the projection of the
equator in Fig. 5.74 and a circle divided by a horizontal line representing the projection of
the plane of the Earth's orbit around the Sun in Fig. 5.79.

   The key to understanding this puzzle is to recognize that these diagrams are drawn
from two different perspectives that represent different positions in the Earth's orbit
around the Sun. Fig. 5.74 represents the Earth in a position at an equinox. Fig. 5.79
represents the Earth in a position at a solstice. It can be difficult to envision the difference
between these 3-dimensional perspectives as represented on these 2-dimensional
diagrams.

   Fig. 5.74 represents an equinox, when the Earth's tilt is not evident in a cross section
through the middle of a spherical Earth emerging from the paper. The tilted axis is
pointing along the direction of travel, into or out of the plane of the paper, and only
represented by a dot in the center of the circle. Fig. 5.79 represents the summer solstice
in the northern hemisphere; the tilted axis is pointing perpendicular to the direction of
travel and visible as the inclined axis of rotation in a cross section of a spherical Earth
emerging from the plane of the paper.

 7. Deriving the tilt of the Earth in terms of the difference between the maximum
    angular altitudes of the Sun during an equinox, e, and during the winter
                                      solstice, w

    Question 5.42 Why does the tilt, angle  = angle e at equinox - angle w at winter
                                             solstice?

During the winter solstice in the northern hemisphere (December 20, 21, or 22), when the
Earth's axis of rotation points away from the Sun, the Earth is on the other side of the Sun
from its position during the June solstice shown above in Fig. 5.78. The light rays from the
Sun come in parallel from the opposite direction, as shown below in Fig. 5.80. During the
winter solstice at this location in the northern hemisphere, the Sun rises the most south
of east, moves the lowest across the sky, sets the most south of west, and is above the
horizon for less than 12 hours.

   Envision a gnomon placed perpendicular to the surface, at a location whose latitude is
angle . In this case the Sun is at its smallest maximum angular altitude at this latitude and

                                                                                                                                   IX. Estimating the Tilt of the Earth | 649
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

the gnomon casts a long shadow as shown in the gray line on the right part of the tangent
to the surface of the Earth at the gnomon's location as shown in Fig. 5.80. This figure is
not to scale.

   The angle w (angle beta during the winter solstice) is formed between the ray from the
Sun and the gnomon. This angle is equal to the angle w formed by a line from the point to
the center of the Earth and the horizontal axis because they are alternate interior angles
formed by a transversal line intersecting with two parallel lines.

                 in the northern hemisphere." width="500 height="306 /> FIG. 5.80 Diagram
                 for the winter solstice at latitude [latex]\phi[/latex] in the northern
                 hemisphere.

       w

                                                                 angle  = angle w - angle

Both of these angles can be rewritten in terms of other angles:
   Angle wforms a right triangle with angle w:
   angle w + angle w = 90°;
   Therefore: angle w = 90° - angle w
   The latitude of the gnomon, angle , is related to the maximum angular altitude of the

650 | IX. Estimating the Tilt of the Earth
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Sun at the equinox as shown earlier in #4: angle + angle e = 90° so angle   = 90° -
angle e

   If the tilt of the Earth, angle  = angle w - angle
                         Then: angle  = (90° - angle w) - (90° - angle w)
                                            = 90° - angle w- 90° + angle e

      The tilt of the Earth, angle  = angle e- angle w

   As claimed above in #2, the angular tilt of the Earth can be estimated simply by
measuring the height of a gnomon (person, post, upright stick...) and its shadow at solar
noon during the winter solstice and during the equinox, dividing the height of the gnomon
by the length of the shadow (H/L) for each observation, finding the angles for which these
numbers are the tangents, and subtracting the maximum angular altitude of the Sun in the
sky at the winter solstice from the maximum angular altitude of the Sun in the sky at the
equinox.

8. Developing and using a mathematical representation to estimate the Earth's
                    tilt if a location's latitude is not known

Question 5.43 Why does the tilt, angle  =  ?

Although a location's latitude is well known now, ancient astronomers did not need this

information if they were able to measure the maximum angular altitude of the Sun, angle
, during both the summer and winter solstices at the same location.

   Add the equations from summer and winter solstices:
   From #5 above: angle  = angle e- angle w
   From #7 above: angle  = angle s- angle e

            Add: 2 (angle ) = angle e- angle w + angle s- angle e

                                           IX. Estimating the Tilt of the Earth | 651
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

as claimed in #2. It is possible to estimate the tilt of the Earth, angle  (epsilon), by
measuring the maximum angular altitude of the Sun (angle alpha, ) during the summer
and winter solstices at a particular location, subtracting the maximum angular altitude of
the Sun during the summer solstice, angle s, from the maximum angular altitude during
the winter solstice, angle w, and dividing by 2. One does not need to know the latitude of
one's location! This may be the method that the ancient Greek astronomer Eratosthenes
used to estimate the tilt.

  9. Discussing additional effects of the tilt of the Earth's axis on several latitudes

    Question 5.44 What happens at the Tropic of Capricorn, Antarctic Circle, and Arctic
                                              Circle?

As shown in Fig. 5.81, at solar noon on the summer solstice in the southern hemisphere
(December 20, 21, or 22), sunlight shines directly down on a gnomon (a person, post,
upright stick...) that casts no shadow at a latitude that is an angle  below the equator. A
long red dashed line in Fig. 5.81 represents a projection of the Tropic of Capricorn, a line
around the Earth at this latitude of about - 23.4°. This is the farthest south of the equator
that the Sun is ever directly overhead.

   The Tropic of Capricorn was named about 2000 years ago when the Sun was perceived
as being in the constellation with the Latin name for goat horn
(https://www.thoughtco.com/tropic-of-cancer-tropic-of-capricorn-3976951) in its
annual path along the zodiac in the geocentric model of the Sun revolving around the
Earth.

   The lowest latitude at which the Sun never seems to set during the summer solstice in
the southern hemisphere is called the Antarctic Circle. As shown in Fig. 5.81, this occurs
at a latitude of an angle  above the South Pole (about 66.5° below the equator). A short
red line with thick dashes represents the projection of the Antarctic Circle on this cross
section through the middle of a spherical Earth.

   At this same time but known as the winter solstice in the northern hemisphere, no
sunlight reaches the North Pole or areas within the latitude of an angle  below the North
Pole (about 66° above the equator). A line around the Earth at this latitude is known as
the Arctic Circle. A short red line with thin dashes represents the projection of the Arctic
Circle on this cross section through the middle of a spherical Earth in Fig. 5.81.

652 | IX. Estimating the Tilt of the Earth
            This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

FIG. 5.81 Tropic of Capricorn, Antarctic Circle and the Arctic Circle during
the December solstice.

                                                                                                            IX. Estimating the Tilt of the Earth | 653
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

X. Developing and Using Mathematical
Representations to Estimate an
Intriguing Quantity

This section explores ways to visualize what happens as the Moon revolves around the
Earth while the Earth is revolving around the Sun. Acting out such simultaneous motions
can help make visible something surprising about what is happening. Drawing diagrams
and developing mathematical representations can help answer intriguing questions that
emerge from such visual representations of the simultaneous motions of the Moon and
Earth.

  A. Visualizing relationships among the Sun, Earth, and Moon
                             through actions

Question 5.45 How are the motions of the Moon revolving around the Earth related to the
                       motions of the Earth revolving around the Sun?

         1. Acting out the simultaneous motions of the Earth and the Moon

          Equipment: Use the setup for modeling the Earth revolving around the Sun: put a lamp without a shade in
       the middle of the room, with cord taped to the floor to avoid students tripping over the cord. If possible, do
       this activity just before the Moon will be in its third quarter phase. It also can be adapted for use near the
       Moon's first quarter phase.

  · Stand in pairs around the lamp representing the Sun. One person in each pair plays
      the role of the Earth. The other person in each pair plays the role of the Moon.

  · Review the meanings of revolving and rotating.

654 | X. Developing and Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate an Intriguing Quantity
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

  · With the lamp turned off, rehearse how to act out the motion of the Earth during
      one week:
          About how far will the person representing an observer on Earth be moving in
            an orbit around the lamp?
          In what direction will the person representing "Earth" be revolving?
          In what direction with the person representing "Earth" be rotating?
          How many times will the person representing"Earth" be rotating to represent
            one week?

  · With the lamp turned off, rehearse how to act out the motion of the Moon during
      one week:
          Where should the person playing the role of a full Moon stand with respect to
            the lamp and to the person representing an observer on Earth ?
          To where should the person representing a full Moon move to represent the
            third quarter Moon position?
          How will this person move to continue facing the person playing the role of an
            observer on Earth?

  · Turn on the lamp. Sing or count day 1, day 2, day 3, day 4, day 5, day 6, day 7 while the
      person representing an observer on Earth and the person representing the Moon
      model the simultaneous motions of the Moon revolving around the Earth while the
      Earth revolves around the Sun while rotating on its axis during one week between
      the Moon's full and third quarter phases.

  · If you see a third quarter Moon, where are you and everyone else on Earth heading
      next?

  2. Nuances in acting out the simultaneous motions of the Moon and the Earth

This kinesthetic activity engages participants in using their own motions to demonstrate
what is happening. In particular, this activity can help distinguish more clearly between
the specific meanings of revolving, in which one object orbits another object, and rotating,
in which an object spins on its own axis.

   The Earth does not move very far during one week compared to its total orbit around
the Sun. There are about 52 weeks in one year, so the distance that the person playing the
role of the Earth should move would be about 1/52 of the circumference of a circular orbit

                                                    X. Developing and Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate an Intriguing Quantity | 655
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

around the lamp. This is not very far - about a meter if the participants are moving in a
circle about 10 meters away from the lamp. (Circumference/52 = 2R/52 = 2*3*10 m/52
= a little over 1 meter.)

   It is important to model accurately the direction of revolution and rotation. In the
northern hemisphere, the person representing the Earth should revolve counterclockwise
around the lamp while rotating seven times counterclockwise in order to model the Earth's
motion during one week of seven days.

   To start in the full Moon position, the person playing the role of the Moon should stand
facing the person playing the role of the Earth in a line with the lamp as shown in Fig. 5.82.

                        FIG. 5.82 Initial arrangements for students modeling the
                        simultaneous motions of the Moon and Earth.

As shown in Fig.5.83, when moving to the third quarter phase, the person playing the role
of the Moon should move counterclockwise around the "Earth" until forming a right angle
with the "Earth" and the lamp. The "Moon" should continue facing the "Earth" by also
doing a quarter of a rotation while revolving

                FIG. 5.83 Final arrangement in the northern hemisphere for students modeling
                the simultaneous motions of the Moon and Earth.

At the end of modeling the simultaneous motions of the Moon and the Earth between full
moon and third quarter moon phases, the "Moon" person should be standing directly in
the "Earth" person's direction of travel around the lamp. The participants will have acted
out a surprising finding:

                     When looking at a third quarter Moon, one is looking at the

656 | X. Developing and Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate an Intriguing Quantity
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                  "place in space" where everyone on the Earth will soon "be" as
                             the Earth revolves in its orbit around the Sun!

   Acting out these simultaneous motions of the Earth and Moon can enhance students
understanding of the difference between revolving and rotating motions as well as of the
phenomena being modeled. Some students may remember the observations by a child
visiting the southern hemisphere (Figs. 5.36 and 5.37) and wonder about what direction
students in the opposite hemisphere would be revolving and rotating. Depending upon the
time available and the level of understanding evident in class, exploring this issue may be
feasible, particularly with a small group of students who like to pursue details that deepen
their understandings.

   The Sun and Moon appear to rise in the east and set in the west in both hemispheres.
What is different is the direction one is looking when one sees the Moon, which is orbiting
roughly in the plane of the equator (see Fig. 5.47).

   In the northern hemisphere, the Sun and Moon appear mostly in the southern sky.
When one looks south, east is on the left and west is on the right; therefore, both the Sun
and Moon appear to move across the sky from left (east) to right (west) in the clockwise
direction, as shown by the observation reported earlier in Fig. 5.8. In this case, the term
clockwise reflects a geocentric model, with the Sun appearing to revolve daily around
the Earth in a left to right, clockwise motion across the sky. Acting out the simultaneous
motions of the Earth and Moon reflects a heliocentric model, however, with the lamp
representing a fixed Sun and with the "Moon" revolving a quarter turn around the "Earth"
and the "Earth" rotating seven times on an axis and revolving a short distance around the
lamp, all in a counterclockwise direction.

   In the southern hemisphere, the person representing the Earth should revolve clockwise
around the lamp while rotating seven times clockwise to model the Earth's motion during
one week of seven days. To start in the full Moon position, the person playing the role of
the Moon should stand facing the person playing the role of the Earth in a line with the
lamp as in Fig. 5.82

   When modeling moving to the third quarter phase, the person playing the role of the
Moon should move clockwise around the "Earth" until forming a right angle to the lamp.
The "Moon" should continue facing the "Earth" by also doing a quarter of a rotation while
revolving.

                                                     X. Developing and Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate an Intriguing Quantity | 657
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

             FIG. 5.84 Final arrangement in the southern hemisphere for students modeling the
             simultaneous motions of the Moon and Earth.

At the end of modeling the simultaneous motions of the Moon and the Earth between full
moon and third quarter moon phases, the "Moon" person should be standing directly in
the "Earth" person's direction of travel around the lamp. The participants will have acted
out the surprising finding that when looking at a third quarter Moon, one is looking at the
"place in space" where everyone on the Earth will soon "be" as the Earth revolves in its
orbit around the Sun!

   In the southern hemisphere, the Sun and Moon mostly appear in the northern sky.
When one is looking north, east is on the right and west on the left; both the Sun and
Moon appear to move across the sky from right (east) to left (west) in a counterclockwise
direction. In this case, the term counterclockwise reflects a geocentric model, with the
Sun appearing to revolve daily around the Earth in a right to left motion across the sky.
Acting out the simultaneous motions of the Earth and Moon reflects a heliocentric model,
however, with the lamp representing a fixed Sun and with the "Moon" revolving a quarter
turn around the "Earth" and the "Earth" rotating seven times on an axis and revolving a
short distance around the lamp, all in clockwise direction.

  B. Visualizing by drawing a diagram and thinking conceptually
                           about the situation

Question 5.46 When you see a third quarter Moon, you are looking at the "place in
              space" where you and everyone else on Earth will soon "be"!
                               How soon will you get "there"?

  · If you are looking at a third quarter Moon, how soon do you think you and everyone

658 | X. Developing and Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate an Intriguing Quantity
                            This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   else on Earth will "be" at the "place is space" where a third quarter moon "is" now?
· Compare your estimate with those by your group members: are their estimates of

   the time required in minutes? hours? days? weeks? months?
· With your group members consider how you might calculate a numerical estimate:

       What can you draw to help visualize this situation?
       What are some central ideas that might be helpful in developing an equation

         with which to calculate an estimate of the time required for this `trip'?
       What quantities might be relevant to include in such an equation? What

         numerical values might be helpful to know?
       How can you use these insights to develop an equation and calculate an

         estimate?

1. Drawing a diagram that represents the situation and considering relevant
                                 central ideas

The following handout can guide development of a numerical estimate:
                              Where Are All of Us on Earth Heading Next?

   Early one morning you see a third quarter moon.
Sketch a stick figure pointing one arm at the Sun and one arm at a 3rd quarter moon.
About what time is this? (Sketch below is for someone in the northern hemisphere)

_________________________________________

East  S  West

· What if you were able to look down on a third quarter moon from above the solar
   system?

       Sketch the Earth in its orbit around the Sun.
       Sketch the Moon in the third quarter position in its orbit around the Earth.

X. Developing and Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate an Intriguing Quantity | 659
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

  · Where are all of us on Earth heading next?
  · When will we get there?
  · Make an estimate based on your intuition

To make an estimate numerically:

  · What do you know about the physics of this situation?
  · What concepts, for example, are useful in describing motions?

          How are the distance traveled ( x) and the duration of a trip (t) related?

   Use  (Greek letter delta) to represent "change in":

          x is the change in position or distance traveled;
          t is the change in clock-reading or duration of the trip.
  · What two assumptions would be helpful to make in this situation?
          About the Earth's orbit?
          About the Earth's speed in its orbit?

  · What is the key relationship in this situation?

  · Why is this equality justified?
  · How can this equality be stated mathematically in words? In symbols?
  · What is the equation (in symbols) for the unknown?

t =

  · What numerical values do we know or are told?

Round numerical values to ease calculation when making an estimate:
   x = average distance between Earth and Moon = 238,000 miles = about 250,000 miles
   T = duration of one trip of Earth around Sun = one year = 365.25 days = about 400 days
   R = distance from Earth to Sun = 93,000,000 miles = about 100,000,000 miles
   Circumference of orbit = 2R = distance Earth would travel in a circular orbit around the

Sun

660 | X. Developing and Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate an Intriguing Quantity
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

  · How much time (t) would it take for the Earth to move in a circular orbit around
      the Sun from where the Earth is "now" to where the third quarter moon is "now"?

t =
  · Is this a reasonable answer? Explain why.

2. Example of student work about the simultaneous motions of the Earth and
Moon

As shown in FIG. 5.85, a student drew a sketch from the perspective of someone in the
northern hemisphere who is looking south to see the Moon, with east on the left and west
on the right. A third quarter moon is shown high in the sky with the Sun rising in the east
at about 6 am. Two arrows represent the person forming a right angle by pointing one arm
at the Sun and the other arm at the Moon, which is approximately half lit on the left.

                     FIG. 5.85 Student sketches of view of 3rd quarter Moon from Earth and
                     from space.

As shown on the right of Fig. 5.85, this student also drew a sketch of an inferred view from

                                                     X. Developing and Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate an Intriguing Quantity | 661
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

space from the perspective of looking down on the solar system from above. Dashes and
arrows indicate the Earth revolving counterclockwise in its orbit around the Sun and the
Moon revolving counterclockwise in its orbit around the Earth. The Moon, approximately
half lit on the side facing the Sun, is shown in the 3rd quarter position, to the right
of the Earth and located directly in the Earth's orbit. If the Earth continues revolving
counterclockwise around the Sun as shown, how soon will the Earth "be" in the "place in
space" where the Moon "is" now? The student wrote:

               The Earth will be headed to the point where the 3rd quarter moon is currently
           in...space. The Earth has a counterclockwise rotation (although true, the
           appropriate word should be "revolution" here) meaning it is moving right. To
           achieve the appearance of the third quarter moon, the moon has to be forming a
           90-degree angle with Earth in respect to the sun. The moon must also be on the right
           side of the Earth as the left side of the moon appears lit by light from the sun.

               A key concept needed to figure out how soon we will get there is the relationship
           between position, motion, and speed. If one knows their position, then they know the
           distance traveled and the amount of time it took to travel that distance. Knowing
           this it is possible to figure out how fast one got to that position or the speed they
           traveled...

               The key relationship is the assumption that the speed of the time it takes to make
           one full orbit around the sun is the same speed it takes to travel from the earth's
           current position to the position of the 3rd quarter moon.

               The speeds can be set equal because (of the assumption that) the earth travels
           a constant speed when traveling its (assumed circular) orbit around the sun. The
           smaller journey is merely a section of that larger journey, but maintains that
           constant speed.

              This relationship between the speeds leads to the equality that the distance of
           earth's orbit over the time it takes to complete earth's full orbit is equal to the
           distance to the 3rd quarter moon over the time it takes to reach the position of the
           3rd quarter moon.

                                                            (Edits added in parentheses)
   As shown in FIG. 5.86, this student wrote, in both words and symbols, the mathematics
described above based on the assumption that the Earth is moving with constant speed in
a circular orbit so that the speed for the total trip around the Sun is equal to the speed of
the small trip from where the Earth "is" to where the third quarter Moon "is" now:

662 | X. Developing and Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate an Intriguing Quantity
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   The student stated this key relationship both in words and symbols:
   \begin{split}{\text{In words:}}\\\\\frac{\text{Distance of Earth's orbit}}{\text{Time
of Earth's orbit}} & = \frac{\text{Distance to the 3rd quarter moon}}{\text{Time to the 3rd
quarter moon}} \\\\{\text{In symbols:}}\\\\ \frac{2 \pi R}{\Delta T} & = \frac{\Delta
x}{t}\end{split}

                               FIG. 5.86 Student's estimate of time needed for the Earth
                               to move to the "place in space" where a third quarter
                               Moon "is" now.

The total distance traveled around the Earth's assumed-to-be circular orbit would be its
circumference, 2R; x represents the small distance traveled, the distance from where
the Earth is and the "place in space" where the Moon is "now."

   The student used "Time of Earth's orbit" to refer to the duration of the whole trip
around the Sun and "Time to the 3rd Quarter moon" to refer to the duration of the short

                                                    X. Developing and Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate an Intriguing Quantity | 663
     This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

trip. This general language use of the word "time" can be separated into two distinct ideas:
"duration" to refer to how long a trip lasts and "clock-reading" to refer to a particular
instant, such as when a trip started or ended. In this case, "duration" is the meaning
intended. The student used a capital T, T, to refer to the duration of the entire trip
around the Sun and a lower case t, t, to refer to the duration of the short trip from where
the Earth "is" to where the Moon "is" now.

   Next the student solved this equation for the duration (t) for the small trip and
substituted the estimated values provided. These had been rounded to make the
calculation easy without needing a calculator:

   t =

t =

Then the student reduced this equation to: t =

and converted this to hours:  t =               = 4 hours

   to obtain an estimate of about 4 hours for the time for the Earth to move from where
the Earth "is" to the "place in space" where the third quarter Moon "is" now.

   Finally, as shown in Fig. 5.87, the student reflected upon the reasonableness of this
answer:

              I believe this answer is reasonable because when creating another equality which
           puts parts over wholes, it is equal. The equality is the distance to the 3rd quarter
           moon over the distance of earth's rotation (should be revolution) equal to amount
           of time it takes to reach the 3rd quarter moon over the amount of time it takes to
           complete the earth's orbit around the sun. When all the values are substituted in as
           they were for the original problem the values are equal to each other as shown
           below.

                                                                                       (Edit added in parentheses)

664 | X. Developing and Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate an Intriguing Quantity
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                     FIG. 5.87 Student's check on the reasonableness
                                     of the calculated answer.

                                                                                     Physics Student, Winter 2018
   Another student made sense of this answer in another way conceptually, by figuring out
how far the Earth travels around the Sun in an hour and dividing that into the distance
between the Earth and the Moon. This is similar to finding out how much time a 300 mile
trip will take if one is traveling on a freeway at 60 miles/hour: (300 miles)/(60 mile/hour)
= 5 hours.

              I also did this problem using the distance the earth travels in a year, which is 584
           million miles, and divided by 365 days to find out how far the earth travels in a day,
           I then divided this number by 24 to find out how far it travels in a hour. With this
           number I divided 238,900 miles, which is the distance to the moon, by the distance
           the earth travels in an hour to determine how many hours it takes the earth to move
           into the position of the moon. It was found that the earth takes about 4 hours to
           travel the distance to the moon.
   This student apparently used some of the provided information, that the Earth is
93,000,000 miles from the Sun, as well as the assumption of a circular orbit, to estimate
the total distance traveled around the Sun, 2R, as 584,000,000 miles in one year of 365
days. The student next divided these numbers to find the distance traveled in one day,
584,000,000 miles/365 days = 1,600,109 miles/day (wow!) and divided by 24 hours to find
the Earth's orbital speed as 66,671 miles/hour. Then the student divided this number into
the distance traveled from the Earth to the Moon: 238,900 miles/(66,671 miles/hour) =
3.58 hours. So about 4 hours is a reasonable answer, given the rounded numbers used.
   Another way is to look up useful information on the Internet, such as the speed of the
Earth in its orbit (https://astrosociety.org/edu/publications/tnl/71/howfast.html says

                                                    X. Developing and Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate an Intriguing Quantity | 665
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

66,000 miles/hour), calculate how far the Earth would go at this speed in four hours, and
compare that to the given average distance from the Earth to the Moon (238,000 miles).

   (66,000 miles/hour)(4 hours) = 265,000 miles. This is high compared to the given
average distance from the Earth to the Moon but close, given the rounded numbers
provided.

   An additional way would be to figure out how many of the short distances (from Earth
to Moon) fit into the total distance around the Sun:

   Multiply this by the time obtained (t) and see if one gets a "year"
   Using the rounded values provided:

                                      (about 4 hours) = (2 400 )(4 hours ) = 9600 hours
   1 year = (about 400 days) (24 hours/day) = 9600 hours

3. Nuances about working on this question

Another student drew the following sketches on the handout as shown in Fig. 5.88:

                    FIG. 5.88 Another student's sketches for a third quarter moon as seen
                    from Earth and space.

666 | X. Developing and Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate an Intriguing Quantity
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Although the problem statement included the phrase "one morning," this student drew
the Sun in the "noon" position with a setting third quarter Moon. "Noon" was the position
suggested earlier for the Sun in the tables shown in Fig. 5.42 and 5.43 that present views
of the phases of the moon as seen from Earth and from Space. The student also drew
the view from space in the same way as shown in that table. The two views presented
together here in Fig. 5.88 nicely review the connection that the angle formed by pointing
one's arms at the Sun and Moon on Earth is the same as the angle formed by the
arrangement of the Sun, Earth, and Moon in space.

   The reason that this activity suggests sketching the view from Earth in the morning
rather than at noon is that this choice emphasizes that a third quarter Moon is readily
visible high in the sky at about 6 am, and will continue to be visible throughout the
morning if the sky is clear. If one wants to see such a moon, morning is a good time to
look! Also our course meets during the morning, so if the sky is clear, the students can go
outside and see a third quarter Moon in the "place in space" where they and everyone else
on Earth soon will "be."

   This activity also reviews the details expected in sketching such diagrams. This student
correctly drew the Sun and the Moon about the same size as seen from Earth but with a
large Sun, small Earth, and smaller Moon as seen from space. In both diagrams the moon is
shown half lit, with the lit portion facing the Sun. The view from space shows an assumed
circular orbit, with a large arrow indicating the counterclockwise direction of the Earth's
revolution around the Sun and a small arrow indicating the Earth's movement toward the
third quarter Moon along this orbital path as seen from the northern hemisphere. The
arrow pointing from the Earth toward the Sun might be confusing, however, if a viewer
interpreted it as indicating a motion by the Earth directly toward the Sun.

   The format of the handout mirrors the problem-solving processes advocated earlier in
weeks 2 and 4 for pinhole math and thermal math problems:

                    Describe a scenario in words
                 Make a sketch of the situation
                 Review any relevant central ideas that you know
                 Draw a careful diagram if needed
                 Represent the scenario mathematically
                 State and justify an equation in words
                 Define symbols and state the equation in symbols
                 Solve for the unknown in symbols
                 Record given values and estimate any needed

                                                     X. Developing and Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate an Intriguing Quantity | 667
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                 Substitute values and calculate answer
                 Check and reflect on answer
   Checking an answer can take many forms; particularly encouraged is seeking a
conceptually different approach from that used for the calculation. Such sense-making is
more likely to suggest an alternative approach if further thinking is needed.

668 | X. Developing and Using Mathematical Representations to Estimate an Intriguing Quantity
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

XI. Pondering Additional Issues

This section explores several additional issues: how things move and interact, what keeps
the Moon and the Earth in their orbits, why the oceans have tides, and what happens when
objects fall here on Earth and on the Moon?

 A. Reviewing understandings about the Sun, Earth, Moon, and
                                    Stars

   It may be helpful to step back and review before heading into new territory. So far this
course has developed the following understandings about light and shadows as well as
about the Sun, Earth, Moon, and stars:

   What causes shadows? Some shadows occur when an object blocks light and casts a
shadow behind it on something else. Other shadows occur when an object blocks light
from shining on its own back-side. If you stand facing the Sun on a sunny day, for example,
your shadow forms on the ground or a wall behind you; a shadow also forms on your back
because your body blocks sunlight from shining there.

   Why does it get dark at night? The Sun seems to rise in the morning, move high across
the sky during the day, and set in the evening. It gets dark when the Sun appears to sink
below the horizon in the western sky and stays dark until the Sun appears to rise above the
horizon again in the eastern sky. According to this conceptual model, it gets dark at night
because the source of light, the Sun, has moved below the horizon during its apparent
daily journey revolving around the fixed Earth. This Fixed Earth, Revolving Sun model is
easy to envision and believe because that is what one sees: the Sun, as well as the Moon
and many stars, seeming to move daily around a flat motionless Earth.

   An alternative conceptual model, however, is that the Sun, Moon, and stars only appear
to be moving daily around the Earth; instead it is the Earth that actually is moving, a
spherical Earth rotating daily on its axis. According to this conceptual model, it is day on
the front side of the spinning Earth, the side that is facing toward a fixed Sun; it is night
on the back side of the spinning Earth, the side that is facing away from a fixed Sun. It
gets dark at night because the back side of the rotating Earth is in the Earth's own shadow.

                                                                                                                                       XI. Pondering Additional Issues | 669
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

According to this Rotating Earth, Fixed Sun model, the body of the Earth itself is blocking
the Sun's light from shining on the side of the Earth that is facing away from the Sun.

   The Rotating Earth, Fixed Sun model is not as easy to envision as the Fixed Earth,
Revolving Sun model. Acting out these two conceptual models for explaining day and
night, however, can clarify how these models are alike and different. Also seeing a physical
model can help, such as a spinning globe near a lamp in a dark room, particularly if a tiny
flag or stick figure stuck to the globe represents a familiar location on the rotating Earth.
Understanding and accepting the Rotating Earth, Fixed Sun model requires, however,
more detailed observations and intricate reasoning than simply seeing the Sun, Moon, and
stars seem to move across the sky on daily journeys revolving around the Earth.

   Why does the Moon seem to have different shapes at different times? During about a
month, the Moon's shape seems to keep changing, with the lit portion seeming to grow
more and more lit until full and then shrinking back to not being visible at all (see Fig. 5.22).
Many people believe that these changing phases of the Moon are caused by the shadow
of the Earth falling on the Moon. Such a conceptual model matches experiences in which
one often sees an object casting a shadow behind it onto something else.

   An alternative conceptual model is that the lit shape of the Moon appears to change
during about a month, as seen from Earth, because the Moon is revolving around the
Earth. The side of the Moon facing toward the Sun is brightly lit by the Sun; the side of
the Moon facing away from the Sun is dark, in the Moon's own shadow. According to this
Revolving Moon model, the Moon's changing phases as seen from Earth occur because
different portions of the lit side are visible from Earth as the Moon revolves around the
Earth about once a month (See Figs. 5.42 and 5.43).

   Envisioning the Revolving Moon model is easier if one plays with a ball on a sunny day
or in a dark room lit by a single lamp. The ball represents the Moon, the Sun or lamp
represents the Sun, and one's eyes in one's head represent one's eyes here on the Earth.
By holding up the ball and moving it around one's head, one can replicate on the ball the
same pattern of changing phases one can see in the sky on the Moon: "new ball" "waxing
crescent ball" "first quarter ball" "waxing gibbous ball" "full ball" "waning gibbous ball"
"third quarter ball" and "waning crescent ball" positions back to "new ball." Replicating
with a ball here on Earth the same sequence of phases of the Moon that one can see in the
sky suggests that these have the same cause: the Moon is revolving around the Earth just
as the ball is revolving around one's head.

   On-going observations of the Moon can reveal a paradox: Why does the Moon seem to
move east to west over several hours but west to east over several days? (See Figs. 5.31
and 5.32.) One can infer that the Moon appears to move from west to east over several

670 | XI. Pondering Additional Issues
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

days because the Moon actually is moving that way while revolving around the Earth about
once a month. One also can infer that the Moon only appears to move daily across the sky
from east to west because it is the Earth that actually is moving, spinning by the Moon
while rotating daily on its axis. Thus the resolution of this paradox uses and confirms one
of the two models developed earlier for explaining day and night, the Rotating Earth, Fixed
Sun model.

   Why are some constellations of stars only visible during certain seasons? Both ancient
and current conceptual models assume that the daytime sky is too bright for stars located
in the same direction as the Sun to be visible. According to the conceptual model used
by many ancient astronomers (Fixed Earth, Revolving Sun), stars revolve around the Earth
daily on a large crystalline sphere; the Sun revolves around the Earth daily on a smaller
sphere and also moves yearly along a path with respect to the background sphere of the
stars. The Sun's position on this path, called the zodiac (See Fig. 5.67), determines which
stars would be visible, those not in the same direction as the Sun.

   An alternative conceptual model is that some stars are only visible during certain
seasons because a rotating Earth revolves around the Sun. The direction on Earth of facing
away from the Sun determines which stars one sees at night. These change as the Earth
travels in its orbit so that different constellations of stars are visible at different times. This
is based upon the currently accepted conceptual model of a spherical Earth that rotates
daily on its axis while revolving yearly around the Sun.

                        B. Understanding motion

Scientific progress occurs through the processes just described of making observations,
developing possible explanatory models, and thinking about which models together make
the most sense. Typically new questions emerge. If the Moon and the Earth are both
moving, for example, how does that happen?

                   Question 5.47 How are the Moon and the Earth moving?

To explore motion: each group uses a ball.

                                            XI. Pondering Additional Issues | 671
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

  · Place the ball on the floor so that the ball is not moving.
  · Give the ball a push. How does the ball roll along the floor?
  · How can you change the ball's direction of motion while it is moving?
  · How can you make the ball move in a circle?
An English scientist, Sir Isaac Newton, studied motion in the late 1600's and early 1700's.
He summarized his findings in a major work, Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica
published in Latin in 1687 and in English, translated by Andrew Motte, as Mathematical
Principles of Natural Philosophy in 1729.

                                       FIG. 5.89 Front piece of Newton's Principia.
                                       https://library.si.edu/digital-library/book/
                                       philosophiaenat00newt Dibner Library of
                                       the History of Science and Technology,
                                       Smithsonian Libraries.

The Principia included three books. Book 1 focused upon the motion of bodies, Book 2

672 | XI. Pondering Additional Issues
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

upon the motion of bodies in resisting mediums, and Book 3 on the system of the world.
The contents of these volumes have deeply influenced the development of science and
society for more than three centuries.

   Near the beginning of Book 1, Newton stated Axioms or Laws of Motion, including Law I:
                                                            Law I

              Every body perseveres in its state of rest, or of uniform motion in a right line,
           unless it is compelled to change that state by forces impressed thereon.

                                                           (Newton, trans. by Motte, 1729, Book I, Axioms or Laws of Motion)
                                                                                  https://archive.org/details/100878576/page/82

   According to Newton's First Law of Motion, an object at rest stays at rest or if already in
motion, keeps moving at the same speed in a straight line, unless acted on by a force.

   Newton's Second Law of Motion addressed what happens if a force acts on a moving
object: the object changes its speed and/or direction of motion. If the Moon and the Earth
are moving but not in straight lines, what forces might be acting on them to cause their
paths to curve?

                           C. Exploring forces

If one object affects another object in some way, there must be some kind of an interaction
happening between them. In physics, the word force refers to an interaction between
objects, such as pushing or pulling on one another.

   Exploring how things push or pull on one another here on Earth can provide some
experiences on which to base thinking about forces that might be causing the Moon to
revolve around the Earth and the Earth to revolve around the Sun.

     Question 5.48 What keeps the Moon and the Earth revolving in their orbits?

          To begin exploring force and motion, each group uses two magnets and a small ball on a string.

  · Discuss with your group members some experiences that you have had with things
      that are pushing or pulling on one another while:

                                                                                                                                        XI. Pondering Additional Issues | 673
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

          touching
          not touching
          moving
          not moving
  · Play with the two magnets. How do they interact?
  · Play with the ball on a string. How do the ball and the string interact if you swing the
      ball on the string around your head?

                 (Careful! Be sure you have enough space around you to swing the ball without
                 hitting anyone; also take care to swing without hitting yourself.)

  · How would you describe the interaction between the Moon and the Earth as similar
      and/or different from the interactions:
          between the two magnets?
          between the ball and string when you are swinging the ball around your head?

If touching, two magnets may stick together and be hard to pull apart. If brought near
but not touching and then released, two magnets may attract one another and move
closer together. Or they may repel one another and move farther apart. Such observations
indicate that two magnets can interact with one another even though they are not
touching.

   The interactions between the Moon and the Earth as well as between the Earth and
the Sun are similar to the interaction between the magnets in that these bodies also are
not touching. These are examples of forces that act at a distance because the interactions
occur without the objects being close enough to touch one another.

   The forces that two magnets exert on one another can be attractive or repulsive in
effect.

   The interactions between the Moon and the Earth as well as between the Earth and the
Sun are different, however, in that these appear to be only attractive effects; these bodies
do not appear to be pushing one another apart.

   A ball being swung around one's head is pulled inward by the string, which keeps the ball
moving in the curved path of its orbit. The orbital motion of the ball seems to be similar
to the orbital motion of the Moon. This suggests that there is a similar inward pull on the
Moon by the Earth that keeps the Moon moving in the curved path of its orbit.

   This is called the gravitational force by the Earth on the Moon. In the Principia, Newton
expressed this as a Proposition and Theorem:

674 | XI. Pondering Additional Issues
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                         PROPOSITION IV. THEOREM IV.
              That the moon gravitates towards the earth, and by the force of gravity is
           continually drawn off from a rectilinear motion, and retained in its orbit.

                                                                           (Newton, trans. by Motte, 1729, Book III, Propositions)
                                                                                https://archive.org/details/100878576/page/390

   Similarly there is an inward pull by the Sun on the Earth that is keeping the Earth in
its orbit. This is called the gravitational force by the Sun on the Earth. When one object is
revolving around another, the gravitational force by the larger object on the smaller object
keeps the smaller object in its orbit.

   These gravitational forces are similar to the string pulling inward on the swinging ball.
They differ from the force by the string on the ball, however, in that these bodies are not
touching one another; the gravitational forces are acting at a distance without touching.

   This conceptual model of a gravitational force pulling the Moon inward toward the Earth
as the Moon revolves around the Earth raises a new issue: is this interaction between the
Moon and the Earth mutual?

Question 5.49 If the Earth pulls on the Moon, does the Moon pull on the Earth?

  · Explore what happens here on Earth when two spring scales are pulled apart.

          To explore interacting forces, each group uses two spring scales. 10 Newton or 20 Newton scales are
       best.

If you pull on a spring scale, it will measure the force with which you are pulling, usually
either in pounds or in Newtons. A Newton is a unit of force in the metric system, named
after Sir Isaac Newton. The front of the device hides the spring. Spring scales work by
stretching a spring uniformly when the scale is pulled so that the indicator moves a
distance proportional to the force applied. As shown in Fig. 5.90 spring scales may be
circular or rectangular in shape.

                                                                                                                                        XI. Pondering Additional Issues | 675
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                         FIG. 5.90 Two types of spring scales.

  · Play with the spring scales until you understand how they work.
  · Have two members of the group hook the two spring scales together and then pull

      the spring scales apart horizontally. What do you notice?
  · Have every member of the group try this. Are your findings consistent?
  · What happens when the two people both pull on the spring scales?
  · What happens when one person just holds the spring scale that is hooked on to the

      other person's spring scale while the other person pulls?
  · Sketch a picture of what is happening when two people both pull horizontally on

      spring scales that are hooked together.
  · Also sketch what happens when only one person pulls a scale and the other person

      just holds on to the other scale.
  · What do you think would happen if instead of a person just holding on to a scale, the

      scale is hooked to a wall while the other person pulls on the other scale?
  · Can an inanimate object like a wall exert a force?
  · Summarize your findings.
Among the laws of motion that Newton stated was Law III:

676 | XI. Pondering Additional Issues
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                                           Law III
              To every Action there is always opposed an equal Reaction: or the mutual actions
           of two bodies upon each other are always equal and directed to contrary parts.
   He provided an example:
              Whatever draws or presses another is as much drawn or pressed by that other. If
           you press a stone with your finger, the finger is also pressed by the stone...

                                                   (Newton, trans. by Motte, 1729, Book I, Axioms or Laws of Motion, p. 83)
                                                                                  https://archive.org/details/100878576/page/82

   Newton realized that forces come in pairs; if you press on a stone, the stone presses
back with an equal force in the opposite direction. See (http://hyperphysics.phy-
astr.gsu.edu/hbase/Newt.html#ntcon) for additional discussion of Newton's three laws
of motion.

   As shown in Fig. 5.91, two spring scales pulled apart indicate that the force by the left
scale on the right scale is equal to the force by the right scale on the left scale but in the
opposite direction.

            FIG. 5.91 Two spring scales are hooked together and pulled apart horizontally.

This has some surprising consequences.
  · Push straight down on a table. With what force is the table pushing back up at you?
  · How can you justify your response?

                                                                                                                                        XI. Pondering Additional Issues | 677
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

     D. Developing and using mathematical representations of
                           gravitational forces

In addition to formulating and articulating ways to use the three laws of motion, Sir
Isaac Newton also presented a detailed account of interactions between bodies due to
gravitational forces.

Question 5.50 What quantities determine the magnitude of gravitational forces?

In Book III of the Principia, Newton proposed that the Sun's gravitational effect on keeping
the Earth and other planets in their orbits depends upon how far away they are:

                                          PROPOSITION II. THEOREM II.
              That the forces by which the primary planets are continually drawn off from
           rectilinear motions, and retained in their proper orbits, tend to the sun; and are
           reciprocally as the squares of the distance of the places of those planets from the
           sun's center.

                                                                 (Newton, trans. by Motte, 1729, Book III, Propositions, p. 390)
                                                                                https://archive.org/details/100878576/page/390

   Newton specified that this was a reciprocal relationship; the closer a planet to the Sun,
the bigger the gravitational force by the Sun on the planet, keeping that planet in its orbit,
and that mathematically this was a function of the reciprocal of the distance multiplied by
itself (the distance squared).

   In addition Newton proposed that a gravitational effect occurred with all bodies in the
universe and depended upon their masses:

                                        PROPOSITION VII. THEOREM VII.
              That there is a power of gravity tending to all bodies, proportional to the several
           quantities of matter which they contain.

                                                                  (Newton, trans. by Motte, 1729, Book III, Propositions, p. 397)
                                                                                https://archive.org/details/100878576/page/396

   Stated algebraically, this is known as Newton's Law of Universal Gravitation, where the
gravitational force (F) exerted by one mass (M) on another mass (m) depends upon the size
of the masses (M, m) and the inverse square of the distance (r) between them:

678 | XI. Pondering Additional Issues
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

   where G is the Gravitational Constant, G = 6.67430 x 10-11
   This means that the gravitational force by Body A on Body B is equal in magnitude and
opposite in direction to the gravitational force by Body B on Body A.
   This proposition has some startling implications. Not only does the gravitational force
by the mass of the Earth pull on the Moon, it pulls on you as well! The gravitational force
by the Earth on you is what is holding you on the ground rather than floating in space.
You are pushing back on the Earth (the ground) with an equal and opposite force! Not only
that, but as you work together in class, you and your group members also are pulling on
each other with equal and opposite gravitational forces (but not noticeably).

                     E. Explaining the ocean's tides

Newton's Law of Universal Gravitation suggests that the Moon is pulling on the Earth
with a force of the same magnitude as the Earth is pulling on the Moon, although in the
opposite direction. What evidence is there that this is the case?

   Question 5.51 What effect does the gravitational force by the Moon have on the Earth?

People who walk on ocean beaches often notice how far waves are flowing onto shore.
People who work on boats tied up to docks often notice how high the boats are floating
compared to the height of the dock. This sometimes varies by as much as 45 feet. (See:
https://tidesandcurrents.noaa.gov/education.html) Many variables affect tides such as a
location's latitude, the shape of its shoreline, shape of a bay and/or estuaries, nearby
ocean currents, local winds and weather.

   By observing and recording daily tide levels, however, one can identify patterns and
make predictions for future dates. Detailed predictions depend upon repeated
measurements at a tide-monitoring station and upon complex computer modeling of such
data (http://oceanmotion.org/html/background/tides-observing.htm)

   As shown in Fig. 5.92, for example, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA) provides monthly predictions of the variation in water level at the
Yaquina Bay United States Coast Guard station in Newport, Oregon.

                                                                                                                                        XI. Pondering Additional Issues | 679
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

  · Interpret this graph: What does the horizontal axis represent? What does the vertical
      axis represent? What does the line represent? What does the shape of the line
      represent?

  · Discuss with your group members how high and low tides are predicted to vary over
      this month at this tidal monitoring station:

  · When are high tides higher than usual and low tides lower than usual so that there is
      a big difference between high and low tides at this location?

  · When are the high tides not so high and the low tides not so low so that there is a
      smaller difference between high and low tides at this location?

         FIG. 5.92 Predictions for tides at Yaquina Coast Guard Station in Newport for May 2020.
         https://tidesandcurrents.noaa.gov/
         noaatidepredictions.html?id=9435385&units=standard&bdate=20200501&edate=2020053
         1&timezone=LST/LDT&clock=12hour&datum=MLLW&interval=hilo&action=monthlychart

680 | XI. Pondering Additional Issues
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

People who live near the ocean may notice a pattern between tidal phenomena and the
phases of the Moon.

  · Of what connections are you already aware between tidal and Moon phenomena?
  · How might you explore this relationship using additional Internet resources?
  · Do an Internet search, for example, for "moon phases calendar." Websites such as

      https://www.almanac.com/astronomy/moon/calendar or
      https://www.calendar-365.com/moon/moon-calendar.html can provide a monthly
      calendar of the changing phases of the Moon.
  · Enter May 2020 to see the changing phases of the Moon during the same month and
      year of the tide chart shown in Fig. 5.92. Enter the location of Newport, Oregon, if
      the moon calendar website includes an option for entering a location.
  · Discuss with your group members any patterns you see in the tides predicted in Fig.
      5.92 and the predicted phases of the Moon for this time period shown in the moon
      calendar you are viewing online.
  · How are these phases of the Moon related to times of predicted highest high tides
      and lowest low tides evident in Fig. 5.92?
  · How are the phases of the Moon related to times of predicted somewhat high and
      low tides?
  · With your group members, develop a central idea about the relation between the
      phases of the Moon and tides on the Earth, based upon the predictions of the tidal
      patterns shown in Fig. 5.92 and of the phases of the Moon shown in the moon
      calendar you are viewing on the website.

Viewing the entire month of predicted high and low tides, as well as the entire month of
predicted phases of the Moon may seem overwhelming. A way to simplify the task would
be to look at what is happening during only the primary phases of the Moon (first quarter,
full, third quarter, and new).

  · Fig. 5.93 shows predictions for the primary phases of the Moon at, Newport, Oregon
      for the month of May, 2020.

                                                                                                                                        XI. Pondering Additional Issues | 681
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Fig.5.93 Phases of the Moon predicted for May 2020 in Oregon in the northern hemisphere.
https://www.timeanddate.com/moon/phases/usa/newport-or?year=2020

(If you want to compare tide predictions with moon phases for a different place or month,
be sure to obtain the dates for phases of the moon for that location. The Sun, Earth, and
Moon are lined up at the moment of full moon but the name of this moment depends
upon a location's longitude. The predicted time of full moon, for example, in May 2020
is at 3:45 a.m. on May 7 in Newport, Oregon, but at 11:45 a.m., on May 7 universal time
in Greenwich, England, and at 8:45 p.m. on May 7 in Melbourne, Australia. For dates and
times of phases of the Moon at different locations see https://www.timeanddate.com/
moon/phases/ . Enter your location and current date, record the predicted date for the
closest major phase of the moon (new, 1st quarter, full, third quarter). For tidal predictions
elsewhere, see https://tidesandcurrents.noaa.gov/stations.html?type=Water+Levels.)

   Interpreted visually, the calendar for May 2020 at the Yaquina US Coast Guard Station

682 | XI. Pondering Additional Issues
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

in Newport, Oregon, predicts the highest and lowest tides near the middle to the end of
the week of May 3, and somewhat varying high and low tides near the middle to the end
of the week of May 10. A less visually salient pattern is evident during the weeks of May
17 and May 24. Near the middle to the end of the week of May 17, the regular pattern of
very high and very low tides seems similar to near the middle to the end of the week of
May 7 although less extreme. Near the middle to the end of the week of May 24, somewhat
varying high and low tides seem similar to near the middle to the end of the week of May
10.

   First quarter, full, third quarter, new, and first quarter phases of the Moon are predicted
to occur during Thursdays or Fridays during late April and May 2020 (see, for example,
https://www.timeanddate.com/moon/phases/usa/newport-or?year=2020. Using the
information provided in the tide calendar in Fig. 5.92, the predicted high and low tides can
be compared numerically during these phases as shown in Tables V.14 and V.15.

                                                                                                                                        XI. Pondering Additional Issues | 683
                              This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Table V.14 Predicted high and low tides during the predicted dates of full, 3rd quarter, new, and
     1st quarter phases of the Moon during May 2020 at the Yaquina Coast Guard Station, in
                                                        Newport, Oregon

Table V.14 Predicted high and low tides during the predicted dates of full, 3rd quarter, new,
and 1st quarter phases of the Moon during May 2020 at the Yaquina Coast Guard Station, in

                                                     Newport, Oregon

Phase and Date              1st 1st             2nd
Full Moon on May 7          High Low   2nd Low
                            tide tide  High tide
3rd Quarter Moon on May 14             tide
New Moon on May 22
1st Quarter Moon on May 29  9.46 -1.69 7.58 ft ft ft 1.51 ft

                            6.44 0.22           3.21 ft
                            ft ft               (very
                                       6.55 early
                                       ft on
                                                May
                                                15)

                            8.29 -0.71 6.42 ft ft ft 2.81 ft

                                       3.10 ft

                                       (very

                            6.99 -0.38 6.82 early

                            ft ft      ft on

                                       May

                                       30)

A low tide with a negative height, -1.69 feet, is predicted at 6:56 a.m. for May 7. This is
a very low tide, lower than the average low tide for a particular tide-monitoring station,
which is typically set as the zero point for that station. A minus tide means that tide pools
usually under water would be exposed and interesting to explore at low tide early on this
date.

   To simplify looking for patterns, it sometimes helps to combine data such as calculating
average high tides for a given date, average low tides for that date, and then the difference
between the average high and low tides as shown in Table V.15.

  · What patterns are evident when comparing particular phases of the Moon with:
          average predicted high tides

684 | XI. Pondering Additional Issues
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

 average predicted low tides
 bigger differences between the average predicted high and low tides
 smaller differences between the average predicted high and low tides

at the Yaquina Coast Guard Station at Newport, Oregon, during the full, third
quarter, new, and first quarter phases of the Moon during May 2020?

Table V.15 Average predicted high and low tides during the predicted full, 3rd quarter, new, and
     1st quarter phases of the Moon during May 2020 at the Yaquina Coast Guard Station, in
                                                        Newport, Oregon

Table V.15 Average predicted high and low tides during the predicted full, 3rd quarter, new,
and 1st quarter phases of the Moon during May 2020 at the Yaquina Coast Guard Station, in

                                                     Newport, Oregon

Moon Phase and Date         Average    Average                           Difference
                            predicted  predicted                         between
                            high tide  low tide in                       average
                            in feet    feet                              predicted
                                                                         high and
                                                                         low tides

                                                                         8.61

Full Moon on May 7          8.52       -0.09

                                                                         4.70

3rd Quarter Moon on May 14  6.50       1.71

New Moon on May 22

                            7.36       1.05                              6.31

1st Quarter Moon on May 29                                               5.55

                            6.91       1.36

The average highest high tides and lowest low tides are predicted to occur during the full
and new moon phases during May 2020 in Newport. The biggest differences between the
average high and low tides are predicted to occur during these full and new moon phases.

   Smaller average high tides and bigger average low tides are predicted to occur during
third and first quarter moon phases during May 2020 in Newport. The smallest differences
between the average high and low tides are predicted to occur during these third and first
quarter phases.

   These patterns connecting variations in the ocean's tides with the phases of the Moon
support the claim that a gravitational force by the Moon on the Earth exists. A

                                                                                                                                        XI. Pondering Additional Issues | 685
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

gravitational force by the Sun also acts on the Earth's oceans and affects the tides,
depending upon how the Sun, Earth, and Moon are arranged in space.

   Question 5.52 How do gravitational forces by the Moon and by the Sun on the Earth's
                                     oceans affect the tides?

  · Draw the view from space, as in Fig. 5.38, for the arrangements of the Sun, Earth, and
      Moon for new, first quarter, full, and third quarter phases.

  · Discuss with your group members which of these arrangements would produce the
      most effect from gravitational forces by the Sun and by the Moon on the Earth's
      oceans. Which arrangements would affect the Earth's oceans the least?

As shown in Fig. 5.94, during the new and full moon phases, the Sun, Earth, and Moon
are arranged in a straight line, with the moon between the Sun and Earth, or beyond the
Earth:

                                 Fig. 5.94 Arrangements of Sun, Earth, and Moon
                                 associated with maximum high and low tides.

During new and full moon phases, the effects of the gravitational forces by both the
Sun and the Moon contribute to creating bulges of water along this straight line. The
gravitational force by the Sun and the gravitational force by the Moon on the Earth's
oceans are directly in line during new and full Moon and therefore cause the highest
high tides and lowest low tides as the Earth rotates on its axis. These are called spring
tides, not because they occur only in the spring but because they can be considered as
"springing forth" during new and full moons. (For more information about spring tides see
https://oceanservice.noaa.gov/facts/springtide.html)

   As shown in Fig. 5.95, during first and third quarter phases, the Sun, Earth, and Moon
are arranged at right angles with Earth at the vertex, as would be seen from above the
solar system while looking down on the northern hemisphere:

686 | XI. Pondering Additional Issues
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                Fig. 5.95 Arrangements of Sun, Earth, and Moon
                                associated with somewhat high and low tides.

During first and third quarter phases, the effect of the gravitational force by the Sun
on the Earth's oceans causes bulges of water in one direction and the effect of the
gravitational force by the Moon on the Earth's oceans causes bulges of water at right
angles so these effects together produce smaller net bulges of water as the Earth rotates
on its axis. These are called neap tides, a term apparently derived from an old English word
for narrow. (For more information about neap tides see: http://earthsky.org/earth/tides-
and-the-pull-of-the-moon-and-sun#neap-tides).

   There are bulges of water on both sides of the Earth, which in most places produce
two daily high tides as the Earth rotates by a given location. Explanations of the second
bulge refer to the difference in gravitational effects on opposite sides of the Earth and
on the rigidity of land masses such as continents versus fluidity of water. (see
http://earthsky.org/earth/tides-and-the-pull-of-the-moon-and-sun)

   Additional variations in high and low tides occur due to variations in the distances
between the Earth and the Moon and between the Earth and the Sun because the orbits
of the Moon and of the Earth are not perfect circles but ellipses. See http://astunit.com/
astunit_tutorial.php?topic=tides and http://oceanservice.noaa.gov/education/kits/
tides/tides06_variations.html.

                                                                                                                                        XI. Pondering Additional Issues | 687
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                       F. Exploring falling objects

One effect of the Earth's gravitational force on objects is that they fall down if dropped.

   Question 5.53 What happens when heavy and light objects are dropped from the same
                                    height at the same time?

  · Respond to the following diagnostic question to document your initial knowledge
      about falling objects.

              1. Documenting initial knowledge about falling objects

Name_____________________ Date__________
                                       Falling Objects Diagnostic Question

   Two balls are dropped from the same height at the same instant. The balls have the
same diameter but different weights.

   Which hits the ground first, the heavy ball or the light ball? Or do they both land at the
same time? Why?

              2. Role playing Galileo's dialogue about falling objects

A Greek philosopher, Aristotle (384-322 BC), stated that heavier objects fall faster than
light objects. His ideas were influential for about 2000 years. In 1638, an Italian scientist,
Galileo Galilei, wrote a dialogue in which three people discussed this question. In his
Dialogue Concerning Two New Sciences, Salviati, Sagredo, and Simplicio have a
conversation about this topic:

   Excerpt from: Galileo Galilei (1638 /1914). Dialogue concerning two new sciences. H.
Crew & A. de Salvio (trans.), New York: Macmillan.

   SALVIATI, SAGREDO AND SIMPLICIO are discussing motion:

688 | XI. Pondering Additional Issues
                  This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

SALV. ...I greatly doubt that Aristotle ever tested by experiment whether it be true
that two stones, one weighing ten times as much as the other, if allowed to fall, at
the same instant, from a height of, say, 100 cubits, would so differ in speed that
when the heavier had reached the ground, the other would not have fallen more
than 10 cubits.

   SIMP. His language would seem to indicate that he had tried the experiment,
because he says: We see the heavier; now the word see shows that he had made the
experiment.

   SAGR. But I, Simplicio, who have made the test can assure you that a cannon
ball weighing one or two hundred pounds, or even more, will not reach the ground
by as much as a span ahead of a musket ball weighing only half a pound, provided
both are dropped from a height of 200 cubits.

   SALV. But, even without further experiment, it is possible to prove clearly, by
means of a short and conclusive argument, that a heavier body does not move
more rapidly than a lighter one provided both bodies are of the same material and
in short such as those mentioned by Aristotle...

   SALV. If then we take two bodies whose natural speeds are different, it is clear
that on uniting the two, the more rapid one will be partly retarded by the slower,
and the slower will be somewhat hastened by the swifter. Do you not agree with
me in this opinion?

   SIMP. You are unquestionably right.
   SALV. But if this is true, and if a large stone moves with a speed of, say, eight
while a smaller moves with a speed of four, then when they are united, the
system will move with a speed less than eight; but the two stones when tied
together make a stone larger than that which before moved with a speed of eight.
Hence the heavier body moves with less speed than the lighter; an effect which is
contrary to your supposition. Thus you see how, from your assumption that the
heavier body moves more rapidly than the lighter one, I infer that the heavier body
moves more slowly.
   SIMP. I am all at sea because it appears to me that the smaller stone when
added to the larger increases its weight and by adding weight I do not see how it
can fail to increase its speed or, at least, not to diminish it...
   SALV. ...but we have already concluded that when the small stone moves more
slowly it retards to some extent the speed of the larger, so that the combination
of the two, which is a heavier body than the larger of the two stones, would move
less rapidly, a conclusion which is contrary to your hypothesis. We infer therefore

                                                                                                                      XI. Pondering Additional Issues | 689
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

           that large and small bodies move with the same speed provided they are of the
           same specific gravity.

              SIMP. Your discussion is really admirable; yet I do not find it easy to believe that
           a bird-shot falls as swiftly as a cannon ball.

              SALV. Why not say a grain of sand as rapidly as a grindstone? But, Simplicio, I
           trust you will not follow the example of many others who divert the discussion
           from its main intent and fasten upon some statement of mine which lacks a
           hairsbreadth of the truth and, under this hair, hide the fault of another which is as
           big as a ship's cable. Aristotle says that "an iron ball of one hundred pounds falling
           from a height of one hundred cubits reaches the ground before a one-pound
           ball has fallen a single cubit." I say that they arrive at the same time. You find,
           on making the experiment, that the larger outstrips the smaller by two finger-
           breadths, that is, when the larger has reached the ground, the other is short of
           it by two finger-breadths; now you would not hide behind these two fingers the
           ninety-nine cubits of Aristotle, nor would you mention my small error and at the
           same time pass over in silence his very large one.

Galileo's logical argument has three parts:

           Salviati: "If then we take two bodies whose natural speeds are different, it is clear
           that on uniting the two, the more rapid one will be partly retarded by the slower,
           and the slower will be somewhat hastened by the swifter."

              (If tie two bodies together, they should fall slower because light one drags the
           heavier back)

              Salviati: ...the combination of the two, which is a heavier body than the larger of
           the two stones, would move less rapidly, a conclusion which is contrary to your
           hypothesis (that heavy bodies fall faster than light bodies)

              (If tie two bodies together, they should fall faster because combination is
           heavier than heavy body)

              Salviati: ... We infer therefore that large and small bodies move with the same
           speed.

              (The two tied together cannot fall both slower and faster than the heavy body
           alone)

Galileo apparently wrote about this question in dialogue format because he did not feel
free to write directly explaining his views as he was already under house arrest for

690 | XI. Pondering Additional Issues
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

publishing a dialogue about whether the Earth was the center of the universe or revolved
around the Sun.

   In 1543, Nicolaus Copernicus (1473-1543) published De revolutionibus in which he
proposed that the earth revolves around the sun rather than the sun around the earth.

   Ninety years later, in 1632, Galileo published Dialogue on the Two Chief World Systems:
Ptolemaic and Copernican. In 1633 Galileo was tried for heresy by the Holy Office of the
Inquisition of the Catholic Church; Dialogue was prohibited. Galileo was forced to recant
his claim that the Earth was not the center of the universe, which he had claimed based
on his observations with a telescope that the moons of the planet Jupiter revolved around
Jupiter. He had used these observations to support his claim that the Earth moved around
the Sun. He was placed under life-long house arrest. In 1638, his Dialogue Concerning Two
New Sciences was published in Holland. He died in 1642.

   In 1979, Pope John Paul II called for theologians, scholars, historians, to reexamine
Galileo's case. In 1992, Pope John Paul II publicly endorsed Galileo's support of the
Copernican system, that the Earth revolves around the sun
(http://www.accademiascienze.va/content/accademia/en/magisterium/johnpaulii/
31october1992.html and http://www.baskent.edu.tr/~tkaracay/etudio/agora/news/
Galileo.html ).

   For information about Galileo's life see: https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/galileo/
   For a fascinating story based on Galileo's daughter's letters to him, which have survived
and are located at the National Central Library of Florence Italy, see:
Sovel, D. (1999). Galileo's daughter: A historical memoir of science, faith, and love. New
   York: Penguin Books.

                 3. Modeling Galileo's exploration of falling objects

          To explore what happens when a heavy object and a light object of the same shape and size fall from the
       same height at the same time, each group uses : two objects of similar shape, different masses (light and
       heavy object about the same size and shape such as a spool of thread and a rock of similar size and shape),
       board from which to drop them, pad (rug, cardboard) on which they can fall, digital camera (cell phone) with
       which to video their landing.

  · Place two small objects with same shape but different masses on a board

                                                                                                                                        XI. Pondering Additional Issues | 691
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

  · Place a pad (rug or cardboard) on the floor
  · Hold the board high above the pad
  · Turn on a video camera focused on the pad
  · Tip the board so the two objects start falling at the same time from the same height
  · Listen (and watch) to see if they hit at different or the same time
  · What do you observe?

             Question 5.54 Why do light and heavy objects fall the way they do?

          To explore what happens when one pushes a light object and a heavy object, each small group uses light
       and heavy objects of similar shapes and sizes such as a heavy block made of brick or concrete and a light
       block made of an empty plastic or cardboard box, with both blocks covered with duck-tape so that they
       appear the same when sitting at rest on a flat table top

  · Place both blocks on a table top:

Invite each member of the group to push both blocks at the same time

  · Which block is harder to get moving? Why?

The inference is that although the Earth pulls harder on the heavier object, the heavier
object is also harder to get going; it has a bigger inertia. This means that the objects
accelerate at the same rate when falling toward the Earth as long as they do not encounter
differences from air resistance as they fall. A person with a parachute falls slower that the
person would without a parachute, for example, because of the role of air resistance in
slowing the parachute's fall.

   Note that Sir Isaac Newton was apparently sitting under an apple tree while admiring
a moon in the sky. He is said to have had the insight there that the moon was "falling"
toward the earth in the same way that an apple from the tree was falling to the Earth,
both being pulled toward the center of the Earth by a gravitational force by the Earth.
As shown in Fig. 5.96, an object shot out of a canon at various velocities might fall to
the Earth near the canon, fall farther from the canon, `fall' into a circular orbit around
the Earth, `fall' into an elliptical orbit around the Earth, or `fall' away from the Earth into
space.(http://www.thestargarden.co.uk/Newtons-theory-of-gravity.html)

692 | XI. Pondering Additional Issues
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                                            Fig. 5.96 Possible paths of a "falling
                                            object" shot out of a canon at various
                                            velocities.
                                            http://www.thestargarden.co.uk/
                                            Newtons-theory-of-gravity.html
                                            Brian Brondel,
                                            https://commons.wikimedia.org/
                                            wiki/File:Newton_Cannon.svg.
                                            Licensed under an
                                            Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0
                                            International (CC BY-SA 4.0) license,
                                            https://creativecommons.org/
                                            licenses/by-sa/4.0/.

Question 5.55 What happens when heavy and light objects drop from the same height at the
same time on the moon?

  · Watch astronauts dropping a hammer and a feather on the moon at
      https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5C5_dOEyAfk

  · What did they observe?

                                                                                                                                        XI. Pondering Additional Issues | 693
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

· Complete entries in Table V.16. Then write a summary of what you have learned about
the role of gravitational forces in the Sun/Earth/Moon system.

   Exploring the Role of Gravitational Forces in the Sun/Earth/Moon System

694 | XI. Pondering Additional Issues
                     This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Table V.16 Developing Additional Central Ideas about the Sun/Earth/Moon System

Table V.16 Developing Additional Central Ideas about the Sun/Earth/Moon System

URL                                   Sketch of set up  Central Ideas          Vocabulary
                                      Evidence
https://theory.uwinnipeg.ca/
mod_tech/node24.html                                    When two objects       Newton's Third
                                                        interact, each exerts  Law
                                                        an equal but
                                                        opposite force on
                                                        the other.

http://www.physics.uwyo.edu/~davec/                     A gravitational force  Newton's
teaching/Astro1050Summer2013/                           is exerted by one      Universal Law
10_Newton.pdf                                           mass on another        of Gravitation
                                                        mass that depends
                                                        on the size of the
                                                        masses and the
                                                        square of the
                                                        distance between
                                                        them:

                                                        F = GMm/r2

http://scienceline.ucsb.edu/                            When one object is
getkey.php?key=770                                      revolving around
                                                        another, the
http://earthsky.org/earth/tides-and-                    gravitational force
the-pull-of-the-moon-and-sun                            by the larger object
http://oceanservice.noaa.gov/                           on the smaller
education/                                              object is keeping the
kits/tides/tides06_variations.html                      smaller object in its
                                                        orbit.
http://galileo.rice.edu/sci/
theories/on_motion.html                                 Gravitational forces
                                                        from the Moon and
                                                        Sun influence the
                                                        ocean's tides on
                                                        Earth

                                                        Light objects and      Aristotle
                                                        heavy objects speed
                                                        up at the same rate    Galileo
                                                        as they fall near the     inertia
                                                        surface of the Earth.

                                                        XI. Pondering Additional Issues | 695
              This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

https://www.youtube.com/                           Light objects and
watch?v=5C5_dOEyAfk                                heavy objects speed
http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/              up at the same rate
lunar/                                             when falling near
apollo_15_feather_drop.html                        the surface of the
                                                   Moon.

· Diagram arrangements of the Sun/Earth/Moon system that influence tides on
   Earth:

Highest and lowest tides                       Smallest tidal effects

4. Interpreting first grade students' thoughts about falling objects

Question 5.55 What ideas do first grade students have about falling objects?

· Read and discuss Jamie Mikeska's reflection upon engaging first grade students in
   exploring falling objects.

J. Mikeska, "First graders discuss dropping a book and a piece of paper," In Seeing the science in children's

thinking, edited by D. Hammer and E. H. van Zee (Heinemann, Portsmouth, NH, 2006), pp. 71-83.

                                       References

J. Mikeska, "First graders discuss dropping a book and a piece of paper," In Seeing the

science in children's thinking, edited by D. Hammer and E. H. van Zee (Heinemann,

Portsmouth, NH, 2006), pp. 71-83.

I. Newton, The mathematical principles of natural philosopy. Translated into English by

Andrew Motte (London: Printed for Benjamin Motte, at the Middle-Temple-Gate in

Fleetstreet,                           1729).      https://books.google.com/

books?id=Tm0FAAAAQAAJ&printsec=frontcover&dq=Newton+mathematical+principles

+Motte&lr=&as_drrb_is=b&as_minm_is=12&as_miny_is=1720&as_maxm_is=12&as_m

axy_is=1800&num=20&as_brr=3#v=onepage&q=Newton%20mathematical%20principl

es%20Motte&f=false

P. P. Urone, R. Hinrichs, K. Dirks, and M. Sharma, College Physics. ( https://openstax.org/

books/college-physics/pages/4-8-extended-topic-the-four-basic-forces-an-

696 | XI. Pondering Additional Issues
                            This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

introduction and https://openstax.org/books/college-physics/pages/6-5-newtons-
universal-law-of-gravitation )

                                                                                                                                   XI. Pondering Additional Issues | 697
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

XII. Making Connections to
Educational Policies

This section completes this unit. As an informed citizen in your community, you should
become aware of the local standards for teaching science, particularly if you are a teacher,
preparing to become a teacher, or a parent advocating for more science to be taught in
elementary schools.

 Question 5.57 What are the current standards for teaching science at various grade levels
                                         where you live?

  · Contact your local department of education to find out about current standards for
      teaching science at various grade levels in your area. The Oregon Department of
      Education's announcement, for example, is at http://www.oregon.gov/ode/
      educator-resources/standards/science/Pages/Science-Standards.aspx . This state
      has adopted the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS Lead States, 2013,
      https://www.nextgenscience.org.) These standards recommend disciplinary core
      ideas, science and engineering practices and crosscutting concepts that students
      should learn and use at various grade levels.

Question 5.58 How would you use your community's standards for teaching science to
engage children in learning about astronomical phenomena within the Sun/Earth/Moon
system?

A. Learning more about the US Next Generation Science Standards

  · Briefly review the following:
          Disciplinary Core Ideas about Earth and Space Sciences, particularly pages
            380-381 at https://www.nap.edu/read/18290/chapter/11,
          the eight recommended Scientific and Engineering Practices at
            https://www.nap.edu/read/18290/chapter/12 ,

698 | XII. Making Connections to Educational Policies
                            This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

       the seven Crosscutting Concepts recommended for emphasis at
         https://www.nap.edu/read/18290/chapter/13 .

· For each of the three dimensions being advocated, indicate at least one element that
   seems most of interest to you. Why?

· Discuss an example of ways in which you might engage children of the age you want
   to teach in learning about earth and space science by developing a disciplinary core
   idea, using at least one of the science and engineering practices and one of the
   crosscutting concepts that are of interest to you. Or discuss an example drawn from
   the aspects indicated in Table V.17 below.

                                                                                                            XII. Making Connections to Educational Policies | 699
                              This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Table V.17 Dimensions of US Next Generation Science Standards relevant to exploration of Moon
                                                               phases

Table V.17 Dimensions of US Next Generation Science Standards relevant to exploration of
                                                      Moon phases

Dimensions Element            Grades K-2               Grades 3-5             Grades 6-8

Disciplinary  Earth Space     Patterns of              The Earth's orbit and  Solar system
Core Idea     Science ESSI-A  movement of the          rotation, and the      models explain
                              sun, moon, and           orbit of the moon      and predict
                              stars as seen from       around the Earth       eclipses, lunar
                              Earth can be             cause observable       phases, and
                              observed,                patterns               seasons
                              described, and
                              predicted.

Science and   Engaging in     Construct an             Construct and/or       Construct, use,
Engineering   Argument        argument with            support an             and/or present
Practice      from Evidence   evidence to              argument with          an oral and
                              support a claim          evidence, data, and/   written argument
                                                       or a model.            supported by
                                                                              empirical
                                                                              evidence and
                                                                              scientific
                                                                              reasoning to
                                                                              support or refute
                                                                              an explanation or
                                                                              a model for a
                                                                              phenomenon or a
                                                                              solution to a
                                                                              problem

Cross         Patterns        Children recognize       Students...identify    Students... use
Cutting                       that patterns in         patterns related to    patterns to
Concepts                      the natural and          time, including        identify cause and
                              human designed           simple rates of        effect
                              world can be             change and cycles,     relationships, and
                              observed, used to        and to use these       use graphs and
                              describe                 patterns to make       charts to identify
                              phenomena, and           predictions.           patterns in data.
                              used as evidence

700 | XII. Making Connections to Educational Policies
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

B. Reflecting upon watching the sky

Nothing needs to be bought or assembled to engage children anywhere on Earth in
learning about the Earth's Moon. All one needs is the time and intention to look up at
the sky whenever the Moon is visible. A class field trip to the school's playground, a brief
conversation while the children line up to come in from recess, a greeting as students
enter or leave the building all are venues within which one can teach about the Moon and
its relation to the Sun when both are visible in the sky during school hours. Also engaging
families in watching the Moon together at home can be an effective way to establish a
positive home/school connection. It is important, however, to warn students and their
families to protect their eyes by never looking directly at the Sun!

   Students observed and developed understandings about the Moon and the Sun
throughout the course. They began by responding to diagnostic questions that recorded
their initial ideas about why it gets dark at night, why it is cold in the winter and hot in the
summer, and why the moon seems to have different shapes at different times. They also
recorded observations of the Moon and the Sun during class and at home during the first
four weeks, identified patterns in their observations, used these patterns to predict when
each phase of the Moon appears to rise, transit, and set, and responded to homework and
a midterm question that focused on what they had observed but did not yet ask them to
explain the phenomena observed.

   After the midterm, students developed explanatory models for day and night, the
phases of the Moon, and the Earth's seasons. Typically about a third of the students
experience major changes in their understandings about the Sun/Earth/Moon system.
These include that the dark part of the changing phases of the Moon is caused by the
Moon's own shadow rather than the shadow of the Earth and that the Earth's seasons are
caused by the tilt of the Earth's axis as the Earth revolves around the Sun rather than by
how close or far the Earth is to the Sun. When time permits, students also consider the
role of gravitational forces in the Moon's orbital motion around the Earth and in causing
the Earth's tides.

   Acting out the inferred motions of the Moon around the Earth while the Earth moves
around the Sun can lead to a surprising inference: when one is looking at a third quarter
Moon, one is looking at the "place in space" where everyone on Earth is heading next
during the Earth's orbit around the Sun! How soon will we all get there? An estimate
of about 3.5 hours emerges from using the assumption of circular orbits, relevant
mathematics, and information about the distance between the Earth and the Moon as well

                                                                                                                 XII. Making Connections to Educational Policies | 701
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

as the distance between the Earth and the Sun! (When looking at a first quarter Moon, the
inference is that one is looking at the "place in space" where all of us on Earth have just
been!)

   Making observations and consulting Internet resources provided evidence for which
constellations of stars are visible during which seasons. Such evidence provides support
for the inference that the Earth revolves around the Sun each year rather than that the
Sun revolves around the Earth each day. Making observations and consulting Internet
resources also provided evidence for where along the horizon the Sun appears to rise
and set, how the length and direction of a gnomon's shadow changes during a sunny day,
and how high above the horizon the Sun transits as it seems to move across the sky.
Such evidence supported the inference that the Earth rotates on a tilted axis as the Earth
revolves around the Sun.

   An important aspect of this model is that the tilt is always in the same direction
throughout the Earth's journey around the Sun. The northern and southern hemispheres
experience the effects of this tilt, however, in opposite ways. When one hemisphere is
tilted toward the Sun, the other hemisphere is tilted away from the Sun.

   This complex model explains that hot summers occur during the Earth's revolution
around the Sun when a hemisphere's tilt is toward the Sun so that the Sun is high in the
sky at local noon, shines more directly down through the atmosphere, and is visible above
the horizon for more hours than not visible below. Cold winters occur during the Earth's
revolution around the Sun when a hemisphere's tilt is away from the Sun so that the Sun
is low in the sky at local noon, shines at more of an angle through the atmosphere, and is
visible above the horizon for fewer hours than not visible below.

   During spring and fall, neither hemisphere is tilted toward or away from the Sun: one
hemisphere is tilted toward the direction of the Earth's motion around the Sun; the other
hemisphere is tilted away from the Earth's direction of motion around the Sun. Acting
out these aspects of the Earth's revolution around the Sun, by leaning always in the same
direction while revolving around a lamp in a dark room, can be both challenging and fun
for students, whether children or adults.

   The unit closes by making connections to educational policies as articulated in the
US Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS, Lead States, 2013). As a last homework
or question on the final, students use their initial and later responses to the diagnostic
questions as evidence for reflecting upon what and how they learned about the Sun/
Earth/Moon system during this course.

702 | XII. Making Connections to Educational Policies
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

C. Making connections to NGSS understandings about the
nature of science

The Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS Lead States, 2013) recommends that
students engage in three dimensions of learning science by using science and engineering
practices and cross cutting concepts while learning disciplinary core ideas. In this unit,
for example, developing explanatory models for day and night, the phases of the Moon,
and the Earth's seasons are examples of the NGSS science and engineering practice
of constructing explanations. Constructing such evidence-based accounts of natural
phenomena also exemplifies the crosscutting concept of identifying patterns while
learning disciplinary core ideas about the Earth and the solar system.

   Children in grades K-2, for example, should learn that patterns of movement of the sun,
moon, and stars as seen from Earth can be observed, described, and predicted. During this
unit, students predicted rising, transiting, and setting times for each phase of the Moon by
interpreting their observations of the shape of the lit portion of the Moon and the angle
formed by their arms when pointing at the Sun and Moon if both were visible,

   This unit also has provided many examples of the nature of science as articulated
in Appendix H of the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS, Lead States,
2013) https://www.nextgenscience.org/resources/ngss-appendices . Appendix H
includes tables that provide insights about the development of these understandings
about the nature of science across grade spans of K-2, 3-5 (elementary), 6-8 (middle
school), and 9-12 (high school).

   That scientific knowledge is based on empirical evidence, for example, is emphasized
throughout this course. Unit 5 models NGSS recommendations that children in grades
K-2 learn that scientists look for patterns and order when making observations about the
world, that upper elementary students in grades 3-5 learn that science findings are based
on recognizing patterns, that middle school students in grades 6-8 learn that science
knowledge is based upon logical and conceptual connections between evidence and
explanations, and that students in grades 9-12 in high school learn that science arguments
are strengthened by multiple lines of evidence supporting a single explanation.

   That scientific knowledge assumes an order and consistency in natural systems is key to
understanding, for example, the cause of the phases of the Moon. By observing the Moon
during the first four weeks of the course, the students documented how the shape of the
lit portion of the Moon seemed to change. Next, if the Moon were visible during class, they
could go outside, each hold a ball up next to the Moon in the sky, and see that the portion

                                                                                                                XII. Making Connections to Educational Policies | 703
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

of their balls lit by the Sun matched the lit portion of the Moon in the sky (or if inside a
dark room with a single lamp, they could each hold up a ball so that its lit portion would
match the shape of the lit portion of the Moon they expected to see in the sky that day
if the Moon were visible). Then by moving their balls around their heads, they also could
make the changing shape of the lit portion of their balls match the same changing shape of
the Moon they had been observing in the sky. Finally, they used the understanding that the
basic laws of nature are the same everywhere in the universe (grades 3-5) to infer that the
changing phases of the Moon they had seen in the sky were caused by the Moon revolving
around the Earth just as the changing phases of their balls were caused by moving their
balls around their heads.

   This unit illustrated that scientific knowledge is open to revision in light of new
evidence in several ways. When considering two explanatory models for day and night,
for example, an obvious model is that the Sun revolves daily around the Earth. This is
what students can infer when they compare the Sun's changes in position in the sky over
several hours. This geocentric model also is embedded in our language with descriptions
of sunrise and sunset as well as in tools such as analogue clocks, whose hands sweep
clockwise in a circle, like the Sun's apparent daily rising, moving high across the sky, and
setting when viewed from the northern hemisphere.

   Some students initially answer the question, "why does it get dark at night?" with a
version of the "the sun goes down". The alternative model is much harder to envision, of
an Earth rotating daily on its axis so that the side of the Earth facing away from the Sun
is in the Earth's own shadow. Seeing the model of a spinning globe in a dark room lit by
a single lamp helps; in this course, an argument based on evidence occurs in resolving
a paradox. After observing the Moon for several weeks, students start to notice that the
Moon seems to move daily from east to west during several hours, like the Sun, but also
from west to east during several days. They can explain this paradox by understanding
that the Earth's daily rotation on its axis causes the apparent east to west daily motion of
the Moon whereas the apparent west to east motion of the Moon over several days occurs
because the Moon actually is moving that way as it revolves around the Earth.

   Such complex reasoning, based on logic and evidence, is an example of the way
scientists gain confidence in one model versus another in their explorations of the natural
world. One goal of this course has been to foster such understandings of the nature of
science in a context that is familiar and accessible to all.

704 | XII. Making Connections to Educational Policies
                          This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Question 5.59 What have you learned about science learning and teaching from your
                                explorations in this unit?

                                                                                                         XII. Making Connections to Educational Policies | 705
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

XIII. Exploring Physical Phenomena:
Summary of Equipment and Supplies
for Unit 5

706 | XIII. Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 5
                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 5

When used              For instructor and        For each group of 3 For each student
                        demonstrations

Week 1                                           U5H2 Diagnostic
                                                 Questions about
Unit 5.IIA                                       Sun, Moon, and
   Question 5.1 What                             Stars:

do you already know
about the Sun,
Moon, and stars?

Unit 5 IIB                                       Reading: Deborah
                                                 Roberts. The sky's
Question 5.5 How do                              the limit: Parents
people talk together                             and first grade
about the Moon?                                  students observe the
                                                 sky. Science and
                                                 Children, 31(1), 33-37.
                                                 (September, 1999).

Unit 5.III.A,B         Sky Journal               Sky journal

Question 5.6 Where     (If moon is visible       (To make sky
is the Sun in the sky  during class hours, take  journals ahead of
right now?             sky journal and class     class: cut 4 pieces
                       outside to model how to   of paper (8.5"x11")
   Question 5.7        make an observation of    in half to make 8
Where is the Moon      the Sun and Moon.         sheets (8.5"x5.5"),
in the sky right       Warn students to not      fold in half to
now?                   look directly at the      make pages
                       Sun!)                     (4.5"x5.5") and
                                                 staple folded
                                                 pages along the
                                                 edge.)

                       XIII. Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 5 | 707
        This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

        Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 5

When sunny during     Sky Journal  Documenting a                                        Documenting
Week 1, 2, or 3                    student gnomon's                                     sunrise/sunset at
                      Sunny day    shadow during field                                  home: piece of
Unit 5.III.A,B                     trip on sunny day:                                   paper, clipboard or
   Question 5.8 How                Chalk, meter stick,                                  cardboard, pencil.
                                   protractor, digital
does the Sun seem                  camera or cell                                       Reading: Marletta
to move across the                 phone.                                               Iwasyk, "Kids
sky?                                                                                    questioning kids:
                                   Documenting a                                        "Experts" sharing.
                                   pole gnomon's                                        Science and
                                   shadow on a sunny                                    Children, 35(1),
                                   day: chalk, pole;                                    42-47. (September
                                   pencil; or bent                                      1997).
                                   paper clip, paper,
                                   manila folder or                                       U5H3 Shadow
                                   cardboard; or                                        Plot Sketches
                                   pencil, paper, nail
                                   in shadow board

Week 2                Sunny day    Pinhole in sheet of                                  (Part of Unit 1 :
                                   aluminum foil taped
Unit 5.III.B                       in cardboard holder,                                 U1H12 Diameter of
   Unit 1.VI.A                     paper screen taped                                   the Sun
   Question 5.9 How                on cardboard, meter
                                   stick, pencil;                                         U1H13 Solving
big is the Sun?                                                                         Pinhole Math
                                   If not sunny, use                                    Problem
                                   observations made
                                   by students in                                         U1H11 Sun
                                   prior courses                                        Pinhole problem
                                                                                        stated if rainy day)

Unit 5.III.C                       Large white board,                                   U5H4 Questions
                                                                                        about the Moon
Question 5.10 What                 3 white board
questions about the                markers,
Moon do you want
to explore? How will                 3 white board
you do that?                       erasers

Week 3                             Large white board,

Unit 5.III.C                       3 white board
   Question 5.12                   markers,

What new question                    3 white board
do you and your                    erasers
group members
have about the
Moon?

708 | XIII. Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 5
                  This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

        Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 5

Unit 5.III.D                                                                    U5H5 Sun and Moon
                                                                                Calendar Template
Question 5.14 What
have you learned
about the Moon
from your
observations so far?
What do you think
will happen next?

Last session Week 4                                                             U5H6 Predicting 1st
                                                                                Quarter Moon
Unit 5.III E, F
   Question 5.19 How                                                            U5H7 Table.V.1
                                                                                Moon Findings
can you predict
when a phase of the                                                               U5H8 TableV.2
Moon will rise,                                                                 Central Ideas
transit, and set?                                                               about the Moon;

Week 5                Access to Internet to                                     (U5H7 and U5H8
                      discuss website about                                     may extend into this
Unit 5.III E, F       connection between the                                    week)
   Question 5.20      phases of the Moon and
                      days of the week:
What is the
duration of each      https://www.timeanddate.com/
phase of the Moon?        calendar/days/7-days-week.html

Week 6                Day 11: review
                      Day 12: midterm

Week 7                Lamp without a shade to             Access to cell phone  U5H10 Table.V.3 Day
                      represent the Sun,                  with free app         and Night
Unit 5.IV, A, B                                           www.myradar.com,
   Question 5.22      Dark room,
                        Globe to represent                Scroll through
Why does it get                                           "layers" until see
dark at night?        the Earth;                          "wind" for
                        Access to the Internet            worldwide map of
                                                          wind currents
                      for photo of Foucault               showing the
                      pendulum,                           Coriolis effect

                        Wind currents
                      showing Coriolis effect,
                      https:www.myradar.com

                      ,

                        Copernicus quote,
                        Galileo

                      XIII. Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 5 | 709
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 5

Unit 5.V A, B, C      Sunny day or lamp inside                                          Small ball (ping
                      without shade to represent                                        pong, golf, or
Question 5.23 Why     the Sun;                                                          Styrofoam) on stick
does the Moon seem
to have different     dark room                                                         U5H11 Table.V.4
shapes at different                                                                     Moon Phases
times?

Week 8                Lamp without a shade to                                           For pairs of
                      represent the Sun;                                                students;
Unit 5.V D
   Question 5.24      Dark room                                                         Basketball to
                                                                                        represent the Moon
Why does the Moon
seem to move east                                                                         U5H12 Table.V.5
to west over several                                                                    Moon Paradox
hours but west to
east over several
days?

   Question 5.25
Does the Moon
rotate while it
revolves around the
Earth?

Unit 5.V.E                                                                              Reading: Akiko
                                                                                        Kurose,(2000). Eyes
Question 5.26 What                                                                      on Science: Asking
do the phases of the                                                                    questions about the
Moon look like from                                                                     Moon on the
other places on the                                                                     playground, in class,
Earth?                                                                                  and at home.(pp.
                                                                                        139-147). In J.
                                                                                        Minstrell and E.van
                                                                                        Zee (eds.) Inquiring
                                                                                        into inquiry learning
                                                                                        and teaching in
                                                                                        science. Washington,
                                                                                        D.C.: American
                                                                                        Association for the
                                                                                        Advancement of
                                                                                        Science.

                                                                                        https://www.aaas.org/
                                                                                            sites/default/files/s3fs-

                                                                                        public/InquiryPart2.pdf

Unit 5.V.F            Lamp without a shade to
                      represent the Sun;
Question 5.27 How
are the Sun, Earth,   Dark room;
and Moon arranged       Basketball to
in space?
                      represent the Moon

710 | XIII. Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 5
           This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 5

Unit 5.V.F             Wall clock or other object
                       to compareto thumb from
Question 5.28 What     far away
are the relative
sizes of the Sun and
the Moon?

Unit 5.V. F            Need access to the            One piece of 8.5"x11"
                       internet to show and          paper or
Question 5.29 How      discuss various ways of       U5H13 Table.V.6.
does the view of the   showing diagrams of view      Compare
phases of the Moon     from Earth and from above     ViewsU5H14 Tables
from Earth compare     the solar system as shown     V.7 and V8 Eclipses
with the view from     in Fig. 5.44, 5.45, 5.46
above the solar
system?

Unit 5.V.F             Need access to the            Ball on stick to
                       internet to show and          represent the Moon
Question 5.30 Does     discuss various ways of
the Moon revolve       representing the Moon
around the Earth in    revolving around the Earth
the clockwise or       as shown in Fig.5.29, 5.30,
counter-clockwise      5.32, 5.42-5.45, 5.44, 5.45,
direction?             5.46

Unit 5.V, G            Lamp without a shade to       Ball on stick to
                       represent the Sun;            represent the Moon
Question 5.31 What
causes solar and       Dark room
lunar eclipses?

Unit 5.VI              Review of explanatory         Ball on stick to
                       models for day and night,     represent the Moon
                       phases of the Moon

                       Lamp without a shade
                       to represent the Sun;

                       Dark room

Week 9                 4 pieces of chart paper,      U5H15 V.9
                       each with a sketch of a       SeasonalStars
Unit 5.VI.A            constellation (spring,
   Question 5.33       summer, fall, winter),

What seasonal          Masking tape to post on
patterns are evident   four walls of classroom
in the constellations
visible at night?

                       XIII. Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 5 | 711
                   This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 5

Unit 5.VI.B            Sunny day, area outside in    Chalk,                             U5H16 Table.V.10
                       Sun throughout                                                   Seasonal Shadows
Question 5.34 What     classAccess to Internet       Meter stick
seasonal patterns                                                                       U5H17a Table V.11
are evident in how     https://www.timeanddate.com/                                     blank for use
the Sun seems to       sun/                                                             elsewhere;
move across the
sky?                                                                                      Example of solar
                                                                                        data for
                                                                                        Corvallis,Oregon,
                                                                                        during March 2019
                                                                                        equinoxes and
                                                                                        solstices

Unit 5.VI.C            Access to the Internet                                           U5H17b V.12 Seasonal
                                                                                        Sun Apparent
Question 5.35 What                                                                      Motions
is the connection
between seasonal
differences in the
Sun's apparent daily
motion and regional
climates

Unit 5.VII.A           Lamp without a shade,         Circular lid                       U5H18 Table.V.13
                                                                                        Earth's Seasons
Question 5.36 Why      Dark room;
are there seasonal       Masking tape,                                                  Gnomon,
patterns in the          4 seasonal
constellations                                                                          meter
visible at night?      constellations on chart                                          stick,Chalk,Trig
                       paper;                                                           table or calculator
   Question 5.37                                                                        with trig functions
Why is it hot in the     Globe of the Earth                                             or protractor
summer and cold in     with tilted axis
the winter?

Following depend
upon the time
available, especially
if have a semester
rather than a quarter
term

Unit 5.VIII            Globe of the Earth with
                       tilted axis
Question 5.38 How
can one estimate
the tilt of the
Earth's axis of
rotation?

712 | XIII. Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 5
                    This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 5

Unit 5.X A, B                                                            U5H19 Where
                                                                         Heading Next?
Question 5.44 How
are the motions of
the Moon revolving
around the Earth
related to the
motions of the
Earth revolving
around the Sun?

Unit 5.XI.B, C, D, E  2 magnets,                                         U5H20 Tides in
                                                                         Newport, OR
Question 5.47 What    Small ball on string2
keeps the Moon and    spring scalesTide                                  U5.H21 Effect of
the Earth revolving   handoutMoon handout                                Moon on Tides
in their orbits?

Unit 5.XI.F                                       Light and heavy        U5H22 Diagnostic
                                                  objects of similar     Question
Question 5.52 What                                shape such as a
happens when                                      spool of thread and a  U5H23 Galileo
heavy and light                                   rock of similar size   excerpt
objects are dropped                               and shape
from the same                                                              U5H24 Tabl V.16
height at the same                                Board to on which to   Gravity
time?                                             place objects, then
                                                  flip them

                                                     Pad to protect the
                                                  floor

                                                     Cell phone with
                                                  video camera

Unit 5.XI. F          Heavy brick,                                       Reading: Mekeska, J.
                                                                         in Seeing the science
Question 5.53 Why     `Brick' of same size and                           in children's
do light and heavy    shape such as an empty                             thinking,edited by D.
objects fall the way  plastic or cardboard                               Hammer and E. H.
they do?              box,                                               van Zee (Heinemann,
                                                                         Portsmouth, NH,
                         duct tape to wrap both                          2006) ,pp. 71-83.
                      `bricks' so that they look
                      the same

Week 10                                                                  U5H25 V.7 NGSS in
                                                                         this context
Unit 5.XII
   Question 5.56                                                         U5H26 NGSS
                                                                         dimensions in this
What are the                                                             course
current standards
in your area for
teaching about the
Sun/Earth/Moon
system at various
grade levels?

                      XIII. Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 5 | 713
               This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 5

End of Course                                                                           U5H27 End of course
                                                                                        questionnaire

                                                                                        U5H28 Review for
                                                                                        Final

714 | XIII. Exploring Physical Phenomena: Summary of Equipment and Supplies for Unit 5
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

UNITS 1 HANDOUTS

                                                                                                                                                            Units 1 Handouts | 715
                        This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                        Handout Section Page Question # # # # Content

                                      Link       Unit 1
                                                 Handout
                                                 Guide

                                      Link       Unit 1
                                                 Equipment
                                                 List

                        U1H1   First  Link       Example
                               class             Welcome

                        U1H2   First  Link       Example
                               class             Student
                                                 Information
                                                 Form

                        U1H3   Each   Link       Exit ticket
                               class             template

                        U1H4a  III.A  Link       Physics
                                                 Notebook
                               Each              Page with
                               class             Explanations
                                                 (pdf file)

                        U1H4b  III.A  Link       Physics
                                                 Notebook
                               Each              Page with
                               class             Explanations
                                                 (docx file)

                        U1H5a  III.A  Link       Physics
                                                 Notebook
                               Each              Page
                               class             Template
                                                 (pdf file)

                        U1H5b  III.A  Link       Physics
                                                 Notebook
                               Each              Page
                               class             Template
                                                 (docx file)

                                                 Each Group:

                                                 Aspects that

                        U1H6   II.A.  Link  1.1  Foster

                                                 Science

                                                 Learning

                                                 Diagnostic

                                                 Questions

                        U1H7   II.B   Link  1.2  about Light

                                                 and

                                                 Learning

716 | Units 1 Handouts
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

U1H8   Unit 5  Link      5.1     Diagnostic
U1H9   II.A.1  Link    1.3-1.7   Questions
       III.A                     about the
U1H10          Link  1.9 - 1.11  Sun, Moon,
       III.B         1.12        and Stars
U1H11  IV.D    Link
U1H12          Link  1.14- 1.16  Table I.1
U1H13  VI.A.   Link              Explorations
U1H14          Link  1.9 - 1.16  of Light
U1H15  VLA     Link  1.9 - 1.16  Phenomena
U1H16  VLA     Link              (light and
U1H17  VII.A   Link      1.18    shadows)
       VII.B             1.21
       VII.C            1.23     Pinhole
       X                1.25     Phenomena
                                 Handout (2
                                 figures;
                                 Table I.1
                                 (continued)
                                 Table 1.2
                                 Variables in
                                 exploration
                                 of pinhole
                                 phenomena)

                                 Pinhole
                                 Phenomena
                                 Problem:
                                 Estimate of
                                 the
                                 Diameter of
                                 the Sun

                                 Diameter of
                                 the Sun
                                 Handout 2
                                 figures,
                                 Table 1.3,

                                 Solving a
                                 Pinhole
                                 Math
                                 Problem

                                 Table 1.1
                                 (continued)
                                 Reflection

                                 Table 1.1
                                 (continued)
                                 Refraction

                                 Table 1.1
                                 (continued),
                                 Dispersion

                                 Table 1.4
                                 NGSS
                                 practices

                                                                         Units 1 Handouts | 717
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

718 | Units 1 Handouts
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

UNIT 2 HANDOUTS

                                                                                                                                                             Unit 2 Handouts | 719
                       This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                       Handout# Section Page Question # # # Content

                             Ifneeded Link       Physics Notebook Page
                                                 with Explanations (docx
                                                 file)

                             Ifneeded Link       Physics Notebook Page
                                                 with Explanations (pdf
                                                 file)

                             Each    Link        Physics Notebook Page
                             class               (docx file)

                             Each    Link        Physics Notebook Page
                             class               (pdf file)

                                     Link        EPPUnit2equipment

                                     Link        EPPUnit2HandoutGuide

                       U2H1  End of  Link        Exit Ticket Template
                             each
                             class

                       U2H2  II.B Link 2.2 Diagnostic Question about Temperature

                                                 Table II.1 Central Ideas

                                                 about Thermal

                       U2H3  III.B Link     2.4  Phenomena (Exploring

                                                 the difference between

                                                 heat and temperature)

                                                 Table II.1 Central Ideas

                                                 about Thermal

                       U2H4  V.B Link       2.7  Phenomena (continued)

                                                 (graphs of equal,

                                                 unequal temperatures)

                       U2H5  VI.B.2 Link 2.9 Graphs of changes in temperature templates

                                                 Table II.1 Central Ideas

                                                 about Thermal

                                                 Phenomena (continued)

                       U2H6  VI.B.4 Link    2.9  (inverse ratios of

                                                 masses and changes in

                                                 temperature) (students

                                                 create Table II.2)

                       U2H7                                       Table II.3 Developing a
                             VII.A Link 2.11 mathematical expression for change

                                                                  in energy

                       U2H8  VIII.A Link 2.18 Solving Thermal Math Problems

720 | Unit 2 Handouts
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

U2H9  X.A. Link  NGSS Crosscutting
                 Concepts (NGSS Lead
                 States, 2013) during
                 Units 1 and 2)

                                                                         Unit 2 Handouts | 721
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

722 | Unit 2 Handouts
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

UNIT 3 HANDOUTS

                                                                                                                                                             Unit 3 Handouts | 723
                       This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                       Handout Section  Page Question # # Content

                       #     #

                             If needed Link          Physics Notebook Page
                                                     with Explanations (docx
                                                     file)

                             If needed Link          Physics Notebook Page
                                                     with Explanations (pdf
                                                     file)

                       U3H1  Each       Link         Physics Notebook Page
                       U3H2  class                   (docx file)
                             Each       Link
                             class      Link         Physics Notebook Page
                                        Link         (pdf file)
                             End of     Link
                             each                    EPPUnit3equipment
                             class      Link 3.2
                                                     EPPUnit3HandoutGuide
                             II.B
                                                     Template for Exit Ticket
                       U3H3 III.A       Link 3.2
                                                     Diagnostic Question
                       U3H4 III.D       Link 3.6     about Changes in States
                                                     of Matter
                       U3H5 III.D       Link 3.6
                                                     Table III.1 Central ideas
                       U3H6 IV.A        Link 3.7     about changes in states
                                                     of matter
                       U3H7  V.B        Link 3.9
                       U3H8                          Table III.2 Central ideas
                       U3H9  VII        Link 3.13    about the influence of
                                                     light and thermal
                             Feedback in class Link  phenomena on local
                                                     weather, including the
                                                     water cycle

                                                     Water cycle diagram

                                                     Table III.3 Central ideas
                                                     about the properties of
                                                     materials; graph of
                                                     temperature vs time
                                                     changes for sand and
                                                     water

                                                     Sea breeze diagram

                                                     NGSS cross cutting
                                                     concepts

                                                     Example Week 6
                                                     anonymous in class
                                                     questionnaire

724 | Unit 3 Handouts
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

U3H10 Review Link           Table III.5 NGSS
U3H11 Review Link           practices review
U3H12 Feedback online Link
                            Table III.6 NGSS
                            crosscutting concepts
                            review

                            Example Anonymous
                            Online Survey

                                                                         Unit 3 Handouts | 725
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

726 | Unit 3 Handouts
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

UNIT 4 HANDOUTS

                                                                                                                                                             Unit 4 Handouts | 727
                       This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                       Handout Section Page Question # # # # Content

                                        Link             Physics Notebook Page with
                                                         Explanations (docx file)

                                        Link             Physics Notebook Page with
                                                         Explanations (pdf file)

                              Each      Link             Physics Notebook Page (docx
                              class     Link             file)
                              Each      Link
                              class     Link             Physics Notebook Page (pdf file)
                              Weeks     Link
                       U4H1   7-9       Link                EPP5ELessonPlanTemplate.docx
                       U4H2             Link                EPPUnit4equipment.docx
                       U4H3     II.A    Link                EPPUnit4HandoutGuide.docx
                       U4H4     III.A,  Link                Template for Exit Tickets
                       U4H5     III.B            4.1 Diagnostic Question about Global Climate
                                IV.A,   Link  4.4, 4.6 Table IV.1
                       U4H6     IV.B
                       U4H7             Link  4.7, 4.8 Greenhouse gas figures
                       U4H8     V.A.
                       U4H9             Link     4.9     Table IV.2 Central Ideas about
                       U4H10   V.A.1.                    evidence that the Earth's
                       U4H11            Link     4.9     average global temperature is
                                VI.A          4.11-4.12  increasing
                                        Link  4.11-4.12
                                VI.A.   Link             Exploring Internet Resources
                                        Link    4.13     about Evidence Climate Change
                                VI.B             4.14    is Occurring
                               VII.A             4.15
                               VII.B                     Exploring Internet Resources
                                                         about Rising Sea Levels (small
                                                         groups use in class)

                                                         Table IV.3 Central ideas about
                                                         rising sea levels (individuals use
                                                         at end of class or at home)

                                                         Exploring Internet Resources
                                                         for Calculating One's Carbon
                                                         Footprint

                                                         Graph analogy: tossed ball

                                                         Graph analogy: Greenland
                                                         glacier mass loss

728 | Unit 4 Handouts
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

U4H12a VII.C Link 4.16 Table IV.4a Analogy between moving and melting phenomena

U4H12b VII.C Link 4.16 Table IV.4b Analogy between moving and melting phenomena

U4H12c VII.C.2 Link 4.16 Table IV.4b Analogy between moving and melting phenomena

U4H13                                      Exploring Internet Resources
       VIII Link 4.17 for Taking Action about Climate

                                           Change

U4H14                                     Table IV.4 Relevant NGSS
       IX Link 4.18 disciplinary core ideas for

                                          teaching about climate change

                                                                                   Unit 4 Handouts | 729
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

730 | Unit 4 Handouts
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

UNIT 5 HANDOUTS

                                                                                                                                                             Unit 5 Handouts | 731
                       This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

                              Unit 5 Handouts

Name of Section               Page Question # # Content
Handout #

                       If needed Link           Physics Notebook Page with
                                                Explanation (docx file)

                       If needed Link           Physics Notebook Page with
                                                Explanation (pdf file)

                       Each   Link              Physics Notebook Page (docx
                       class                    file)

                       Each   Link              Physics Notebook Page (pdf
                       class                    file)

                              Link              EPPUnit5equipment.docx

                              Link              EPPUnit5HandoutGuide.docx

U5H1                          Link              Exit Ticket Template

U5H2 II.A                     Link 5.1          Diagnostic Questions Sun
                                                Moon and Stars

                       III.A  Link 5.6          Sky Journal (directions are
                                                described in Handout Guide)

U5H3                          Link              Shadow Plot Sketches

U5H4                          Link              Questions about the Moon

U5H5 III.D                    Link 5.15 - 5.18  Sun and Moon Calendar
                                                Template

U5H6 III.F.1                  Link 5.19         Predicting 1st Quarter Moon

U5H7 III.F.1                  Link 5.19         Table V.1 Moon Findings

U5H8 III.F.1                  Link 5.19         Table V.2 Powerful Ideas
                                                about the Moon

U5H9 Feedback in class Link                     Example Week 6 Anonymous
                                                Questionnaire

U5H10 IV.A                    Link 5.22         Table V.3 Explanatory Models
                                                for Day and Night

U5H11 V.C                     Link 5.23         Table V.4 Explanatory Model
                                                for Phases of Moon

U5H12 V.D                     Link 5.24         Table V.5 Moon Paradox

U5H13 V.F.                    Link 5.29         Table V.6 Comparison of
                                                Views

U5H14 V.G                     Link 5.29         Tables V.7 and V.8 Eclipses

732 | Unit 5 Handouts
This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

U5H15 VI.A     Link 5.33  Table V.9 Seasonal
U5H16 VI.B     Link 5.34  Differences in Visible Stars
U5H17a VI.B    Link 5.34
                          Table V.10 Seasonal
U5H17b VI.B    Link 5.34  Differences in Shadow Plots

U5H18 VIII.A   Link 5.37  Table V.12 Solar Data during
               Link 5.46  Equinoxes and Solstices for _
U5H19 X.B.1    Link 5.50
               Link 5.50  Table V.12 Seasonal
U5H20 XI.E     Link 5.52  Differences in Sun's Apparent
               Link 5.52  Motions
U5H21 XI.E     Link 5.52
                          Table V.13 Explanatory Model
U5H22  XI.F.1             for Earth's Seasons
U5H23  XI.F.2
U5H24  XI.F               Where Are We All Heading
                          Next?
U5H25 XII      Link 5.57
                          Tides in Newport, Oregon
U5H26 XII      Link       (Data source for Table V-14)
U5H27          Link
U5H28          Link       Table V.15 Effect of the Moon
                          on Tides

                          Diagnostic Question Falling
                          Objects

                          Galileo Excerpt

                          Table V.16 Gravitational
                          Effects

                          Table V.17 US Next
                          Generation Science
                          Standards in context of Sun/
                          Earth/Moon system

                          US NGSS Dimensions
                          Explored in This Course

                          End of Course Questionnaire

                          Review for Final

                                                                         Unit 5 Handouts | 733
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

734 | Unit 5 Handouts
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

10 week Example Schedule

Example Schedule   link

Detailed Schedule  link

                   10 week Example Schedule | 735
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Example Equipment for Remote
Learning

All units  Task                              Students at home:

           Interact online                   Access to the Internet

              Respond to homework            Ability to use Canvas and
              Read free open source text     Zoom
           and course readings
                                                Ability to download file,
                                             print, respond, scan, upload
                                             responses

                                                Access to the Internet

736 | Example Equipment for Remote Learning
        This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

        Task                          Students at home:

        Exploring light phenomena:

           Make a sky journal to         4 sheets of copy paper
        document observations of Sun  (8.5×11"), scissors or paper
        and Moon                      cutter, 3 staples;

           Explore light and shadows     Dark room, lamp without
                                      shade or flashlight, ball; book
                                      or object as barrier, wall or
                                      cardboard as screen;

                                         (Yard stick or meter stick if
                                      possible)

Unit 1     Explore pinhole phenomena     Dark room, lamp without a
                                      shade or flashlight;
           Explore reflection
        phenomena                        Empty toilet paper roll,
                                      paper towel roll or paper cup;
           Explore refraction
        phenomena                        Square of wax paper or
                                      translucent cereal box liner to
           Explore dispersion         cover one end of roll or top of
        phenomena                     cup

           (Make your own rainbow!)      Square of Al foil or
                                      aluminum candy bar liner to
                                      cover other end of roll;

                                         2 rubber bands or tape to
                                      keep squares on ends of roll;

                                         needle or push pin;
                                         ruler
                                         Mirror, 2 rulers, flashlight,
                                      dark room

                                         2 paper cups, pen, water,
                                      ruler

                                         Prism, crystal, glass dish and
                                      mirror that fits in it, water; or
                                      hose to create a spray of
                                      water; and sunlight or bright
                                      light

                                    Example Equipment for Remote Learning | 737
        This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Unit 2  Task                                 Students at home:
Unit 3  Explore thermal phenomena:
                                             Kitchen or other items made
                                             of steel, aluminum, wood, and
                                             paper or Styrofoam;

                                             Cups of hot and cold water;
                                                Measuring cup; tray; towel if

                                             spills
                                                At least 1, preferably 2,

                                             thermometers to put in cups
                                             of hot and cold water

        Task:                                Students at home:

        Consider influence of light and         Pot, ice cubes, heat source
        thermal phenomena on local           (hot plate or burner on stove),
        weather:                             stirrer;

        a) What happens in context              Liquid water, ice cubes, food
        of the water cycle?                  coloring, plastic or glass bowl,
                                             glass jar,
           b) Why is sand hot but
        water cool at the beach even            Cup with some sand or rice
        though the Sun shines on both        or dried peas or beans,
        in the same way for the same
        time?                                   cup with some water;
                                                2 thermometers; ruler;

           c) Why do cloudy skies               Lamp that can shine on both
        and sea breezes often appear         cups in the same way or 2
        late in the afternoon after a        identical lamps
        sunny day at the beach?
                                                (can use textbook photo and
                                             data if necessary)

738 | Example Equipment for Remote Learning
        This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

        Task                             Students at home:

        Consider influence of light and
        thermal phenomena on global
        climate change in context of:

                                         Slinky (if available)

Unit 4     a) What is the greenhouse        2 identical plastic or glass
        effect?                          containers

           b) What is the evidence          2 thermometers if possible,
        that the global temperature is   2 rulers
        increasing at a much faster
        rate than in the past?              Cover for one container
                                            Sunny day or lamp
           c) What is the evidence          Access to Internet resources
        that sea levels are rising in
        destructive ways?                   Access to Internet resources

           d) What are individuals,         Access to Internet resources
        communities, nations, and           2 identical small trays (such
        world organizations doing to     as frozen dinner trays), flat
        address global climate change    rock that fits in a tray, Ice
        issues?                          cubes, liquid water;
                                            blue food coloring if
                                         available to make blue ice
                                         cubes and blue liquid water
                                            Bulb and tube thermometer
                                         (if available)

                                            Access to Internet resources

              Example Equipment for Remote Learning | 739
        This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Unit 5  Task                                 Students at home:

        Observe Sun and Moon                 Sky journal (4 pieces of paper)

           Make shadow plot                  Monthly calendar (download
           Develop explanations for:         file)
           a) day and night
           b) phases of the Moon                Manila folder, paper clip,
           c) seasonal stars                 paper
           d) Earth's seasons
                                                Lamp without shade in dark
                                             room or sunny day; ball

                                                Access to online
                                             constellation guide

                                                Globe with tilt (if available)

740 | Example Equipment for Remote Learning
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Example Homework

Title                Page #            File
Example Homework 1   link              EPPExampleHomework1.doc
Example Homework 2   link              EPPExampleHomework2.doc
Example Homework 3   link              EPPExampleHomework3.doc
Example Homework 4   link              EPPExampleHomework4.doc
Example Homework 5   link              EPPExampleHomework5.doc
Example Homework 6   link              EPPExampleHomework6.doc
Example Homework 7   link              EPPExampleHomework7.doc
Example Homework 8   link              EPPExampleHomework8.doc
Example Homework 9   link              EPPExampleHomework9.doc
Example Homework 10  link              EPPExampleHomework10.doc
Lesson Plan          link              EPP5ELessonPlan.docx
                     link (docx) link
Reading Strategies   (pdf)             EPPReadingStrategies.docx
                     link (docx) link
Notebook Pages       (pdf)             EPP.notebookpages.docx
                     link (docx) link
Notebook Pages with  (pdf)             EPP.notebookpages.withexplainations.docx
Explanations

                                                                                                         Example Homework | 741
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Creative Commons License

            This work is licensed by Emily Van Zee & Elizabeth Gire (©2019) under a
              Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC BY-SA)
                                                     You are free to:
                Share -- copy and redistribute the material in any medium or format
                          Adapt -- remix, transform, and build upon the material

      The licensor cannot revoke these freedoms as long as you follow the license terms.
                                            Under the following terms:

       Attribution -- You must give appropriate credit, provide a link to the license, and
                                                       indicate if

    changes were made. You may do so in any reasonable manner, but not in any way that
                                                        suggests

                                     the licensor endorses you or your use.
    ShareAlike -- If you remix, transform, or build upon the material, you must distribute

                      your contributions under the same license as the original.

742 | Creative Commons License
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Recommended Citations

APA outline:
   Source from website:
  · (Full last name, first initial of first name). (Date of publication). Title of source.
      Retrieved from https://www.someaddress.com/full/url/

Source from print:
  · (Full last name, first initial of first name). (Date of publication). Title of source. Title
      of container (larger whole that the source is in, i.e. a chapter in a book), volume
      number, page numbers.

          Examples
          If retrieving from a webpage:
            · Berndt, T. J. (2002). Friendship quality and social development. Retrieved from insert link.
          If retrieving from a book:
            · Berndt, T. J. (2002). Friendship quality and social development. Current Directions in Psychological

                Science, 11, 7-10.

   MLA outline:
   Author (last, first name). Title of source. Title of container (larger whole that the source
is in, i.e. a chapter in a book), Other contributors, Version, Number, Publisher, Publication
Date, Location (page numbers).

          Examples

                                                                                                                                                 Recommended Citations | 743
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

            · Bagchi, Alaknanda. "Conflicting Nationalisms: The Voice of the Subaltern in Mahasweta Devi's Bashai
                Tudu." Tulsa Studies in Women's Literature, vol. 15, no. 1, 1996, pp. 41-50.

            · Said, Edward W. Culture and Imperialism. Knopf, 1994.

   Chicago outline:
Source from website:

  · Lastname, Firstname. "Title of Web Page." Name of Website. Publishing organization,
      publication or revision date if available. Access date if no other date is available. URL .

Source from print:
  · Last name, First name. Title of Book. Place of publication: Publisher, Year of
      publication.

          Examples
            · Davidson, Donald, Essays on Actions and Events. Oxford: Clarendon, 2001.

                https://bibliotecamathom.files.wordpress.com/2012/10/essays-on-actions-and-events.pdf.
            · Kerouac, Jack. The Dharma Bums. New York: Viking Press, 1958.

744 | Recommended Citations
                                This text is archived and will not be updated. Content may be outdated.

Versioning

This page provides a record of changes made to this publication. Each set of edits is
acknowledged with a 0.01 increase in the version number. The exported files, available on
the homepage, reflect the most recent version.

Version  Date        Change Made                        Location in text
0.1      06/01/2021  Links to external sources updated
                                                        All
0.11     03/28/2022 Links to external sources updated
                                                        Considering the
                                                        Evidence for
                                                        Global Climate
                                                        Change

0.12     08/01/2025 Archived

                                                                                                         Versioning | 745
