 Fostering Communities of
   Transformation in STEM
        Higher Education

                       A Multi-Institutional
                              Collection

                          of DEI Initiatives

Edited by Jonathan S. Briganti, MS, Jill C. Sible, PhD, & Anne M. Brown, PhD
 Fostering Communities of
  Transformation in STEM

       Higher Education

A Multi-institutional Collection of DEI Initiatives
 Fostering Communities of
  Transformation in STEM

       Higher Education

A Multi-institutional Collection of DEI Initiatives

                   Jonathan S. Briganti
                          Jill C. Sible

                       Anne M. Brown

                  Access the free downloadable PDF:
          hps://doi.org/10.21061/fosteringcommunies

                         Virginia Tech Publishing
                               Blacksburg, VA
Copyright © 2024 by Jonathan S. Brigan, Jill C. Sible, Anne M. Brown

First published in 2024 by Virginia Tech Publishing

Virginia Tech Publishing
University Libraries at Virginia Tech
560 Drillfield Drive
Blacksburg, VA 24061
USA

This work is licensed under the Creave Commons Aribuon 4.0 Internaonal
License. To view a copy of this license, visit
hps://creavecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/deed.en or send a leer to Creave
Commons, PO Box 1866, Mountain View, CA, 94042, USA.

Note to users: This work may contain other components (e.g., photographs, figures,
or quotaons) not covered by the license. Every effort has been made to idenfy
these components but ulmately it is your responsibility to independently evaluate
the copyright status of any work or component part of a work you use, in light of
your intended use. Brand names, trademarks, and service marks in this book are
legally protected and should not be used without prior authorizaon by their
owners. Their inclusion in this book is for analycal, illustrave and pedagogical
purposes only.

Cataloging-in-Publicaon Data
Name: Brigan, Jonathan S. | Sible, Jill C. | Brown, Anne M. - authors.
Title: Fostering Communies of Transformaon in STEM Higher Educaon: A Mul-
instuonal Collecon of DEI Iniaves | Jonathan S. Brigan, Jill C. Sible, and Anne
M. Brown.
Descripon: Blacksburg, VA : Virginia Tech Publishing, 2024. | Includes
bibliographical references. | Summary: "This scholarly work examines
transformave iniaves from Virginia Tech, Radford University, Trinity Washington
University, and Towson University, showcasing their role as catalysts in culvang
inclusive excellence across diverse STEM disciplines." - Back cover.
Idenfiers: ISBN: 978-1-957213-84-2 (PDF) | ISBN: 978-1-957213-83-5 (epub) |
ISBN: 978-1-957213-82-8 (print) | DOI:
hps://doi.org/10.21061/fosteringcommunies
Subjects: Science--Study and teaching (Higher)--United States--Textbooks.
Technology--Study and teaching (Higher)--United States--Textbooks. Engineering--
Study and teaching (Higher)--United States--Textbooks. Mathemacs--Study and
teaching (Higher)--United States--Textbooks. Mulcultural educaon--United
States--Textbooks.

Cover design: Catherine Freed
CONTENTS

Foreword: Curiosity, Courage, and Community                   vii

David J. Asai

Acknowledgments                                               xii

About the Editors and Contributors                            xiii

Reviewing, Adopting, or Adapting This Book                    xxiii

1. Preparing STEM Teachers to Be Change Makers                1

Kimberly Corum and Lynn Nichols

2. Resequencing the Chemistry Curriculum to Retain            15

Chemistry Majors

Optimizing connections between general and organic chemistry

Michael D. Shulz

3. Delayed Enrollment in General Chemistry Recitation         27

Patricia Amateis

4. Assessing Changes in Student Engagement Using a            41
Mixed-Methods Approach

Jamie K. Lau; Jeanne Mekolichick; Amanda C. Raimer; and

Sarah A. Kennedy

5. Development and Assessment of a Four-Week Summer           59
Research Experience for Undergraduates

Deborah J. Good and Erica Echols-Miller

6. Creating Impactful Moments                                 81

Using Peer Role Models to Build Community and Sense of

Belonging in STEM

Amanda C. Raimer; Kristina Stefaniak; Kaitlyn Edwards;

Jynna Harrell; Trerese Roberts; and Sandra Liss
7. Community, Curriculum, and CUREs                                   101

Transformations in the Physics Department at Radford University

Shawn M. Huston; Sandra Liss; Brett Taylor; and Rhett Herman

8. We're All in This Together                                         119

Fostering a sense of community within a biochemistry department

Anne M. Brown and Sasha C. Marine

VIGNETTE: Reflecting on the Impact of Engelpalooza                    133

Erin Drolet

9. Teaching to Make Math Resonate                                     139

Including Social Justice in a Graduate Course for Teachers

Diana S. Cheng and John B. Gonzalez Jr.

10. Strategies for Creating and Sustaining Inclusive                  171

Makerspaces

Lynn Nichols and Kimberly Corum

11. Creating a Space in the Curriculum for Effective                  193

Mentoring to Foster Student Connections and Agency

Cynthia A. DeBoy; Patrice E. Moss; and Kaitlin R. Wellens

12. Gunpowder Code Club                                               213

Bringing elementary school students' interests and passions into the

classroom through coding

Wendy Gibson and Kimberly Corum

13. Using Departmental Book Clubs to Bridge the Faculty-              223

Staff-Student Gap

Deborah J. Good and Debbie Pollio

14. Institutionally Advancing Inclusive Excellence                    237

Leading from the middle in times of transition

Jeanne Mekolichick; Jamie K. Lau; and Sharon Blackwell Jones

15. From the Soul                                                     251

Learning and Leading Together toward Inclusive Excellence

Cynthia A. DeBoy; Laura Gough; Sarah A. Kennedy; Amanda C.

Raimer; and Jill C. Sible
FOREWORD: CURIOSITY, COURAGE, AND
COMMUNITY

DAVID J. ASAI

All persons deserve the opportunity to experience the process and
language of scientific thinking. A key element of social justice, STEM
literacy is the gateway to personal agency and empowerment in every
aspect of our lives, including healthcare, the environment, energy,
artificial intelligence, communications, and transportation. Just as
important is that all of us, regardless of our profession, be able to apply
the critical thinking skills that are at the core of the scientific process as
we make decisions about ourselves, our families, and how we participate
as citizens of our planet.

The undergraduate years present the best opportunity to engage large
numbers of students in learning the process of science. Every year in
the U.S., about three million students enter college for the first time,
and most of them will take at least one course in a STEM discipline as
part of a general education requirement. And nearly one million first-time
students plan to major in a STEM discipline.

More than half of the students who enter planning to study STEM do
not leave with a STEM degree. Much more troubling are the gaping
economic, generational, and racialized disparities in the success of
students in STEM. Students who are first in their family to attend college,
who begin at a community college, or who identify as belonging to
populations excluded because of ethnicity or race are far less likely to
complete a STEM degree than their counterparts who come from families
with a parent who has a bachelor's degree, who begin at a four-year
school, or who are white or Asian.

For decades, our community's response has mainly been to "fix the
student." We have created an impressive array of student-centered
interventions including outreach to K-12 students, pre-college summer
bridge programs, special tutoring and advising, undergraduate research

   FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION vii
opportunities, post-baccalaureate programs, and "minority" supplements
to federal research grants. These interventions can help the assimilation
of the students who participate in the programs, but they almost never
change the educational system. The continuation of any positive
outcomes depends on the continuous influx of money, energy, and time.
This is a fragile and unsustainable strategy, because when the financial
support ends, so too does the intervention and the system reverts back
to where it was before. Student-centered programming is not a viable
strategy for lasting culture change.

EXCELLENCE

"Excellence" is a word frequently used but infrequently understood: we
all want to be it but we can't quite explain what it is. Look up online the
strategic plan of your favorite college or university and then search the
text for "excel." Almost certainly you will find the word or its derivatives
"excellent" and "excellence." But does the document explain what they
mean by "excellence?"

We often think excellence is an objective measure of quality - for
example, "Maria is an excellent student," or "University X is the home
of unprecedented excellence in research and teaching." But excellence
is neither immutable nor absolute. According to the Merriam-Webster
online dictionary "excellent" is defined as first-class and superior, and to
"excel" is to be superior, to surpass others. Thus, "excellence" is not a
stand-alone measure of quality; instead, it is a claim that one is better
than everyone else. Unfortunately, we can't all be Number One, despite
what we might claim in our strategic plans.

Rather than vying for empty superiority, an educational institution should
aspire to creating a learning environment that encourages and nurtures
what Eric Weiner refers to as "genius," born from a convergence of
disorder, discernment, and diversity (Weiner, 2016). STEM is all about
problem-solving, and diversity is essential to successful problem-solving.
As Scott Page demonstrates, innovative and creative problem-solving
emerge when we embrace divergent thinking; a group's ability to solve
difficult problems increases as its diversity increases (Page, 2007). But
diversity without inclusion is an empty gesture. Diversity will have its

viii
positive impact only when the system ensures that every person feels
that they belong and will be successful.

INCLUSIVE EXCELLENCE

That student success depends on where a student comes from rather
than where they want to go is the greatest challenge in American higher
education. Instead of only pursuing interventions aimed at fixing the
students, it is time for a new approach, and this movement is called
Inclusive Excellence.

The term "inclusive excellence" was introduced in 2002 by Alma Clayton-
Pedersen and colleagues at the Association of American Colleges and
Universities (AAC&U) (Clayton-Pedersen & Clayton-Pedersen, 2008).
Inclusive excellence shines a light on the truth that inclusion and
excellence are inextricably intertwined: there is no "excellence" without
inclusion. Inclusive excellence is a dynamic stance and not an endpoint:
individuals and institutions committed to inclusive excellence
continuously and forever strive to create structures and behaviors
centered on equity (The Inclusive Excellence Commission, 2018).

The HHMI Inclusive Excellence initiative challenges colleges and
universities to think differently about student success by pivoting from
student-centered activities to a commitment to increase their
institutional capacity for inclusion. The Inclusive Excellence grants
support faculty and staff learning and professional development which, in
turn, will lead to new ways to teach science, changes in the curriculum
and course content including laboratory courses, better ways to evaluate
and reward teaching effectiveness and inclusivity, and greater
transparency and attention to inclusion when a student transfers from
one institution to another.

Inclusive Excellence is based on three foundational values: curiosity,
courage, and community.

Let us be curious about institutional culture and how it affects our
students, identifying the institutional barriers to inclusion, and learning
the skills of inclusion which include listening to understand and guided
reflection.

   FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION ix
Let us be courageous, calling out the problems of our current culture,
confronting head-on the barriers to inclusion, and engaging in the hard
work of dismantling - and not simply by-passing - those barriers to
inclusion. And let us have the courage to try, to sometimes fall short, and
to rise up and try again.

Let us embrace the power of community in which no one person or one
institution has all the answers. By sharing with humility what we've tried
and what happened - successful or otherwise - we all benefit because
the ideas will be remembered and the good ideas amplified.

This book presents the stories of four universities that were organized
into an Inclusive Excellence Peer Implementation Cluster (PIC). Before
the PIC was formed, the four likely did not know one another well, nor had
they collaborated much. The purpose of the PIC is simple: to provide a
safe forum in which the members can share their ideas, talk about what
they're trying on their respective campuses, and serve as critical friends
to one another.

The fifteen chapters comprising this volume are the stories of campus
champions, each of whom is pursuing in their way the stance of Inclusive
Excellence. Each exploration of an idea represents a contribution to
overall culture change. The ideas summarized here include course re-
design, organization of the curriculum and sequencing of courses,
creating ways for students to engage in research, instructor professional
development in the skills of inclusion, effective mentoring, and leveraging
institutional change. As we read their stories, let us see how each is
driven by curiosity, recognize the courage required to try new ideas,
and appreciate that these progress reports are being shared with the
community. Let these stories inspire us to join the movement of Inclusive
Excellence.

- David J. Asai, the Senior Director for Science Education at the Howard
                              Hughes Medical Institute.

x
REFERENCES
Clayton-Pedersen, A., & Clayton-Pedersen, S. (2008). Making Excellence

   Inclusive, in Education and Beyond. Pepperdine Law Review 35(3).
   http://digitalcommons.pepperdine.edu/plr/vol35/iss3/3
The Inclusive Excellence Commission (2018). Excellence: A Renewed
   call for Change in Undergraduate Science Education, Association of
   American Colleges and Universities. https://www.aacu.org/publication/
   excellence-a-renewed-call-for-change-in-undergraduate-science-
   education
Page, S. E. (2007). The Difference. Princeton University Press.
Weiner, E. (2016). The Geography of Genius. Simon & Schuster.

   FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION xi
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

EDITORIAL
Graphics and Cover Design: Catherine Freed
Citation Editorial Support: Amanda MacDonald
Layout, Accessibility, and Typesetting: Truitt Elliott
All contributors provided peer review during the review process.
This program is supported in part by a grant to Virginia Tech from the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute through the Inclusive Excellence Grant.

xii
ABOUT THE EDITORS AND CONTRIBUTORS

In the ever-evolving landscape of STEM education, the call for inclusivity
and equity has never been more resounding. In the following chapters
of "Fostering Communities of Transformation in STEM Higher Education:
A Multi-institutional Collection of DEI Initiatives" we are guided by the
belief that participation in the scientific process is not only a
fundamental right but also a cornerstone of social justice that paves
the way for personal agency and empowerment across diverse spheres,
from healthcare to artificial intelligence, from energy to environmental
sustainability, and throughout the breadth of STEM.

Much like tending to a garden, in STEM education we recognize that
we must both serve the individual and the whole, understanding that
all individual elements are essential to the flourishing ecosystem of
knowledge. Our book highlights transformative initiatives from Virginia
Tech, Radford University, Trinity Washington University, and Towson
University that serve as the fertilizer nurturing the garden of inclusive
excellence in STEM.

Within the pages of our book, you will discover fifteen chapters that delve
into the roots of inclusive excellence. These chapters are the stories of
campus champions, each pursuing the stance of Inclusive Excellence in
their own way. These explorations encompass an array of initiatives, from
course redesign to curriculum revision, from increasing students' access
to research to building instructors professional skill in inclusion, from
effective mentoring to institutional change.

In this edited collection, we place a spotlight on the critical role of
students as participants in reshaping the STEM landscape. They are not
passive recipients but dynamic agents of progress, akin to the role any
one plant plays in promoting a strong supportive ecosystem necessary
for a thriving and diverse garden.

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION xiii
Through these initiatives that impact students, faculty, and all members
of the university ecosystem, we seek to inspire you to join the movement
of Inclusive Excellence, where curiosity, courage, and community
converge to create a brighter future in STEM education. Adapt our ideas,
materials, and lessons learned to aid your own STEM programs.
"Fostering Communities of Transformation in STEM Higher Education:
A Multi-institutional Collection of DEI Initiatives" is not just a book; it's
a call to action, an exploration of possibilities, and a testament to the
power of unity in fostering a more inclusive and equitable academic
community.

THE EDITORS

Jonathan S. Briganti works in the Virginia Tech University Libraries
as the manager of the DataBridge program, which trains undergraduate
students from across all disciplines in applied data science and consults
with partners across and beyond campus to improve the quality of their
data and its outputs. He received both his BS and MS from Virginia
Tech and has since found passion in creating open-source educational
resources and accessible research environments to bring a more
engaged and diverse pool of researchers to the table.

Jill C. Sible serves as Associate Vice Provost for Undergraduate
Education and Professor of Biological Sciences at Virginia Tech where
she has worked since 1998. She is the Program Director of Virginia Tech's
Inclusive Excellence project, which has empowered science faculty and
departments to apply a learning mindset and data-informed approach to
changing classes, curricula, and culture to be inclusive of all students,
especially those historically marginalized in science and higher
education.

Anne M. Brown is an Associate Professor and Associate Director in
Research and Informatics under University Libraries, Virginia Tech and
is an Affiliate Professor in the Biochemistry Department. As a
computational biochemist, her research focuses on computer-aided drug
discovery and the aggregation process of amyloids. She is committed
to undergraduate research and outreach. Today, she continues in her
lifelong mission to create and expand opportunities for students of all

xiv
backgrounds and provide them with mentorship to facilitate their
success.

CHAPTER CONTRIBUTORS

Patricia G. Amateis graduated with a B.S. in Chemistry Education from
Concord University in West Virginia and a Ph.D. in Analytical Chemistry
from Virginia Tech. She was on the faculty of the Chemistry Department
at Virginia Tech for 38 years, until her retirement in September 2022.
She taught General Chemistry and Analytical Chemistry and served as
the Director of General Chemistry and as the Director of Undergraduate
Programs. She taught thousands of students during her career and was
awarded the University Sporn Award for Introductory Teaching, the
Alumni Teaching Award, the Jimmy W. Viers Teaching Award, and the
William E. Wine Award for a history of university teaching excellence.

John Bernard Gonzalez Jr. is an applied mathematician at the United
States Department of Defense. He earned his Ph.D. and M.S. in
mathematics from Northeastern University, and S.B. in mathematics from
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He served as guest co-editor
with his wife Diana, of a 2022 special issue of The Mathematics
Enthusiast focused on course-based undergraduate research
experiences. He and Diana have co-authored manuscripts on data
science projects related to figure skating scoring and presented this
work at mathematics conferences organized by the Association of
Mathematical Society and the Mathematical Association of America.
Outside of work, he has earned USA Dance national adult ballroom
titles at the championship level with his wife Diana in 2021, 2022, and
2023. Their biggest lifelong social justice passion project is raising an
internationally adopted child.

Sharon Blackwell Jones is an Assistant Teaching Professor of
Counselor Education at Wake Forest University. She a Licensed
Professional Counselor and CEO of Jones Consulting and Counseling
where she provides DEI Trainings, Diversity Consulting as well as
Counseling Services. For the past 20 years she has worked in Institutes
of Higher Education across the South East United States and K-12
Schools both teaching and providing training for both faculty and Staff
in the areas of Appreciating Cultural Differences and building common

  FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION xv
ground. Dr. Blackwell Jones graduated from Howard University with a
Bachelors Degree in Psychology. She went on to earn a Masters Degree
in Counseling from The George Washington University and holds a Ph.D.
from Penn State University in Counseling Psychology. She lives in
Greensboro and St. Simons Island.

Diana S. Cheng is a Professor in the Department of Mathematics at
Towson University, Maryland, and serves as the Graduate Program
Director for the Masters of Science degree program in mathematics
education. She earned her Ed.D. in Curriculum and Instruction from
Boston University, M.Ed. in Learning and Teaching from Harvard Graduate
School of Education, and S.B. in mathematics from the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. In the past year, her work on justice-centered
pedagogy was supported by the Mathematical Association of America
for community outreach activities, Howard Hughes Medical Institute for
undergraduate courses for pre-service teachers, and the National
Science Foundation for development of graduate courses and
professional learning experiences for in-service teachers. She hopes to
help teachers shape the world to be a more inclusive environment for all
and to empower students with a sense of agency to enact change.

Kimberly Corum is an Associate Professor in the Mathematics
Department at Towson University. She earned her B.A. in English
Language and Literature from the University of Virginia. As a Math for
America fellow, she earned her M.A.T. in Mathematics from Bard College
and spent four years teaching mathematics and science at a small public
high school in the South Bronx, NYC. She then returned to the University
of Virginia, where she earned her Ph.D. in Mathematics Education. Her
research interests include mathematics teacher preparation,
mathematical problem solving, and the use of technology in the teaching
and learning of mathematics.

Cynthia A. DeBoy is a Professor of Biology at Trinity Washington
University. She has been the project director for the HHMI Inclusive
Excellence grant with which Trinity implemented a curriculum revision to
include a course-based mentor structure and faculty learning community
initiatives, all aimed to support student belonging and success. Cynthia
has taught a variety of courses at Trinity including newly designed
molecular biology and microbiology courses. With previous research

xvi
focused in neuroimmunology, Cynthia has taken a keen interest to
expand research related to creating inclusive learning environments that
support student belonging, self-efficacy, learning and success in science.

Erin Drolet is a PhD student in the Biochemistry Department at Virginia
Tech. She is currently a Graduate Teaching Scholar through the College
of Agriculture and Life Sciences, and is researching how to improve the
universal accessibility of STEM laboratory courses.

Erica Echols-Miller serves as the Evaluation Manager for the National
Institute for Synergy Evaluation Institute at the University of Tennessee,
Knoxville. Her research interests include evaluation in higher education
with special interest in diversity, equity, and inclusion impacts on student
success and building diverse workforces. Erica graduated with her Ph.D.
in Educational Psychology and Counseling with a concentration in
Evaluation, Statistics, and Methodology from the University of Tennessee,
Knoxville. She also earned her B.S. in Chemistry from North Carolina A&T
State University and an M.S. in Environmental Science and Policy from
the University of South Florida St. Petersburg.

Deborah J. Good is a first-generation college student raised in upstate
NY in a small town of under 10,000 residents and by lower income
parents. My high school guidance counselor advised me to go into
medical technology since I liked science, but after doing undergraduate
research both at SUNY-Fredonia and during a summer research
internship at the Lovelace Inhalation Toxicology Research Institute in
Albuquerque, NM, I knew I wanted to become a professor and help others
discover research as well, as I understand first-hand how undergraduate
research and involvement in experiential learning can change one's
trajectory. I credit my professors at SUNY College at Fredonia for
allowing me to do undergraduate research in their laboratories, and
Sigma Xi, the Scientific Research Honor Society for recognizing me as
a young scientist and inducting me into their organization. I have run
four undergraduate research programs -USDA Scholars, HNFE Scholars,
TOUR Scholars, and IE Scholars as a faculty member at Virginia Tech.
My translational research laboratory is interested in identifying basic
biological pathways and nutraceutical compounds that can be used to
understand and treat genetic disease. While we have focused on adult
obesity in general, our laboratory has also worked in the area of Prader-

FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION xvii
Willi Syndrome. Since starting my independent laboratory in 1997, I have
successfully trained 3 postdoctoral fellows, 25 graduate students, and
50+ undergraduate students. My current and past collaborations span
the translational spectrum from basic cellular and molecular biologists,
to neurobiologists, to economists and clinicians, and 6 of my
undergraduate students have published with me based on their
independent undergraduate projects. This book and the programs that
are described in my two chapters represents one way for me to pay it
forward for those who gave me a chance as an undergraduate, including
Dr. John Pickrell (LITRI, deceased) and Dr. William Staaz (SUNY
Fredonia) and Dr. Patricia Astry (SUNY Fredonia), for each of whom these
chapters are dedicated.

Wendy Gibson graduated from Towson University with a degree in
Elementary Education and a graduate degree in Reading. She currently
teaches fifth grade in Baltimore County Public Schools and is a graduate
student in Mathematics Education at Towson University.

Laura Gough is Professor and Chair of Biology at Towson University.
She is a plant ecologist with expertise in wetland and tundra community
and ecosystem ecology. At Towson she has been the PI of the HHMI
IE project developed to create Course-Based Undergraduate Research
Experiences (CUREs) and support faculty in learning about CURE
pedagogy and inclusive teaching. She continues to explore ways in which
her department and college can ensure STEM student success.

Rhett Herman received his B.S. in Physics and Chemistry from Wake
Forest University, and his M.S. and PhD from Montana State University.
His original research field was in semiclassical gravity, the uneasy
alliance of General Relativity and Quantum Mechanics, studying the
highly-curved spacetimes of charged black holes. At Radford University,
his research has evolved into areas of near surface geophysics as a
venue to involve undergraduates. He works closely with his students as
they develop their own microcontroller-based sensor systems that they
deploy in many locations, but especially on the arctic sea ice in Utqiagvik,
Alaska, in an every-other year full academic year research experience.

xviii
Shawn M. Huston earned his bachelor's degree (2006) and PhD (2012)
in physics from Ball State University and North Carolina State University
respectively. After completing his doctorate he was a Visiting Research
Professor at Appalachian State University before beginning his tenure in
the physics department at Radford University in 2013. He is passionate
about the success of his students.

Sarah A. Kennedy is an Associate Professor of Chemistry at Radford
University, where she currently serves as the Program Director for both
REALISE-Radford's HHMI Inclusive Excellence grant and the university-
wide quality enhancement plan RISE-Realizing Inclusive Student
Excellence. Both programs aim to increase students' academic success
and belongingness through faculty development and student support. Her
scientific areas of interest include chemical education, green chemistry,
and biomolecular structure.

Jamie K. Lau is an aquatic ecologist at Radford University in Southwest
Virginia and serves as the Chair of the Department of Biology. Jamie
teaches courses in scientific communication, introductory and upper-
level ecology courses, and senior seminar. Her main teaching goal is
to facilitate the development of a student's science identity through
authentic research experiences, both in the classroom and in her
research program. She was part of the REALising Inclusive Science
Excellence (REALISE) leadership team, active in the assessment of the
program's outcomes.

Sandra Liss is an Assistant Professor of Physics and Director of Selu
Observatory at Radford University in Radford, VA. She obtained her B.A.
in Physics from Swarthmore College in 2011 and her M.S. and Ph.D
in Astronomy from the University of Virginia (UVa) in 2014 and 2018,
respectively. Her dissertation research at UVa focused on star formation
in nearby interacting dwarf galaxies using large ground-based optical
telescopes and space-based optical and infrared telescopes. In addition
to teaching at Radford, Sandra is involved in implementing inclusive
science education initiatives, developing a diverse and active astronomy
research group, and restoring the telescope at Selu Observatory.

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION xix
Sasha C. Marine is a Collegiate Assistant Professor with the Department
of Biochemistry at Virginia Tech. Her primary teaching responsibilities
are: general non-majors biochemistry (undergraduate), analysis of
primary literature (undergraduate), and scientific communication
(graduate). She is currently conducting research on the influence of topic
order on student learning and success. Prior to joining the Department
of Biochemistry in 2017, she was a postdoctoral associate with the
University of Maryland and an adjunct instructor at the University of
Maryland Eastern Shore.

Jeanne Mekolichick is Associate Provost of Associate Provost of
Research, Faculty Success & Strategic Initiatives and Professor of
Sociology at Radford University. She provides strategic leadership and
direction for the research and creative scholarship enterprise, online
education, faculty success, global education and engagement,
experiential learning and strategic initiatives. During her tenure at
Radford University, Dr. Mekolichick has served in a variety of leadership
roles, winning awards for both teaching and leadership. Her work has
been funded by public and private agencies for mission-central efforts
including inclusive excellence initiatives, community-based research,
and undergraduate research programming. Dr. Mekolichick earned her
doctorate of philosophy in sociology also from Kent State University and
is President Emerita of the Council on Undergraduate Research.

Patrice E. Moss is a Clare Boothe Luce Associate Professor of
Biochemistry at Trinity Washington University (Trinity), where she also
serves as the Biology Program chair. Dr. Moss's platform at Trinity has
been focused on increasing women in color in STEM programs and
careers by providing undergraduate research and experiential learning
opportunities to students; thereby, broadening participation of
minoritized groups in science disciplines. Dr. Moss is a proud graduate
of the University of Maryland Eastern Shore (B.S., Biology) and Meharry
Medical College (Ph.D., Biochemistry/Cancer Biology).

Lynn Nichols earned a B.A. in Mathematics and a master's in teaching
from the University of Virginia. She is currently pursuing a Ph.D. in
Instructional Technology at the College of Education at Towson
University. Lynn is a PreK-12 Instructional Technology Coach and
robotics, technology, and mathematics teacher. In addition to coaching

xx
faculty on traditional and maker-based pedagogies, Lynn creates STEM
enrichment programming on robotics, laser cutting, 3D printing, digital
citizenship, and computational thinking for PK-12 students. Her research
interests include justice-centered learning and fostering inclusivity in
makerspaces and using Arduinos to leverage computational thinking.

Deborah Pollio lives in the mountains of southwest Virginia. She is a
retired instructor and advisor from Virginia Tech, where she worked in the
engineering college as well as with pre-health students from the college
of life sciences. Deborah has spent decades learning to connect with
college-aged students. She has taught classes in a variety of styles and
mediums, and is most interested in helping students engage with course
material and connect back with faculty and with each other. Empowering
students to succeed at the college level and to become part of the
university culture has been a major focus of her work.

Amanda C. Raimer is a Postdoctoral Teaching Fellow and Program
Manager within Radford University's HHMI IE program, Realising
Inclusive Science Excellence (REALISE). She received her Ph.D. in
Genetics and Molecular Biology from UNC Chapel Hill. At Radford,
Amanda teaches in the Biology Department and engages undergraduates
in course-based undergraduate research experiences (CUREs) as well
as independent research through HHMI's SEA-PHAGES/SEA-GENES
program. Through REALISE, Amanda mentors peer role models and
develops inclusive programming for faculty and students with the goal of
strengthening institutional practices that lead to success for all students.

Mia Ray is an Associate Professor of Biology at Trinity Washington
University, specializing in the area of anatomy and physiology (A&P).
She completed her undergraduate degree in Mathematics from Spelman
College in Atlanta, GA and earned a doctorate in Anatomy from Howard
University in Washington, DC. Dr. Ray has been teaching in the area
of anatomy and physiology since 2008 and joined the faculty of Trinity
Washington University in the fall of 2012.

Michael D. Schulz is an Assistant Professor in the Department of
Chemistry at Virginia Tech, and a member of the Macromolecules
Innovation Institute, the Center for Emerging, Zoonotic, and Arthropod-
borne Pathogens, and the Virginia Tech Center for Drug Discovery. He

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION xxi
received his Ph.D. in 2014 in organic and polymer chemistry and an
M.S. in Pharmaceutical Science at the University of Florida under the
supervision of Prof. Ken Wagener. After conducting research at the Max
Planck Institute for Polymer Research as a Fulbright Scholar in the group
of Prof. Klaus Müllen, he was a postdoctoral scholar in the group of Prof.
Robert Grubbs at Caltech. He began his independent career at Virginia
Tech in 2017.
Kristina Stefaniak is an Associate Professor in the Department of
Chemistry at Radford University in Radford, VA. She obtained her B.S.
in Chemistry from Temple University and her Ph.D. from Virginia Tech
in 2017. Her research is focused on analytical chemistry and local
environmental chemistry questions. Kristina works to develop inclusive
curriculum in her general, analytical, and instrumental chemistry courses.
Brett Taylor, PhD, is a professor of physics and the department chair at
Radford University. He has taught courses in General Physics I, General
Physics II, Introductory Physics Seminar, Physics I, Physics II, Physics of
Sound, Mathematical Methods in Physics, Numerical Methods in Physics,
Electromagnetic Theory I, and Electromagnetic Theory II.
Kaitlin R. Wellens received her B.S. in Biology from Bates College
and her PhD in Hominid Paleobiology from The George Washington
University. She is currently a Clare Boothe Luce Assistant Professor of
Biology at Trinity Washington University where her work focuses on both
wild chimpanzee behavior and inclusive pedagogy in STEM.

This program is supported in part by a grant to Virginia Tech from the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute through the Inclusive Excellence Grant.

xxii
REVIEWING, ADOPTING, OR ADAPTING THIS BOOK

If you are an instructor reviewing, adopting, or adapting this book, please
help us understand a little more about your use by filling out this form:
https://bit.ly/interest_fosteringcommunities. Instructors selecting the text
are encouraged to fill out this form in order to stay up to date regarding
collaborative development or research opportunities, errata, new volumes
and editions, supplements and ancillaries, and newly issued print
versions. Additional suggestions or feedback may be submitted via email
at: publishing@vt.edu.

ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
These following resources for Fostering Communities of Transformation
in STEM Higher Education are available at https://doi.org/10.21061/
fosteringcommunities

     · Free and openly licensed downloadable PDF documents
     · Free and openly licensed EPUB
     · A link to purchase a print copy (sold at cost)

WHAT IS AN OPEN TEXTBOOK?
Open textbooks are complete textbooks that have been funded,
published, and licensed to be freely used, adapted, and distributed.
As a particular type of open educational resources (OER), this open
textbook is intended to provide authoritative, accurate, and introductory
level subject content at no cost, to anyone including those who utilize
screen reader technology to read and those who cannot afford traditional
textbooks. This book is licensed with a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International license, which allows it to be adapted, remixed, and shared

FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION xxiii
with attribution. Professors and others may be interested in localizing,
rearranging, or adapting content, or in transforming the content into other
formats which meet the goal of better addressing student learning needs,
and/or making use of various teaching methods.
Open textbooks are available in a variety of disciplines via the Open
Textbook Library: http://open.umn.edu/opentextbooks.

xxiv
CHAPTER 1.

PREPARING STEM TEACHERS TO BE CHANGE
MAKERS

KIMBERLY CORUM AND LYNN NICHOLS

ABSTRACT

In this chapter, we will share an instructional technology graduate course
designed to introduce teachers to emerging technologies commonly
found in makerspaces and how making can be used to understand and
address complex social justice problems. Analysis of students' submitted
coursework and their post-course reflections revealed that exposure to
social justice mathematical making lessons supported a shift in their
beliefs about incorporating both technology and social justice contexts
into their classrooms.

Broadly defined, a makerspace is a physical space with the necessary
tools and materials to encourage creative design (Cavalcanti, 2013).
It is estimated that there are more than two thousand makerspaces
across the United States (Nation of Makers, 2022) and these spaces are
becoming increasingly present in K-12 schools (Peppler & Bender, 2013).
Makerspaces have the potential to transform STEM education because
they provide students with opportunities to investigate authentic
mathematical and scientific questions that arise organically through
project design and development (e.g., Blikstein, 2013; Martin, 2015). As
further explained by Blikstein (2013), "Abstract ideas such as friction and
momentum become meaningful and concrete when they are needed to
accomplish a task within a project" (p. 18). Makerspaces can also be
leveraged to promote equity in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) education, particularly when coupled with justice-
centered pedagogies (e.g., Barton, Tan, & Greenberg, 2017; Vossoughi,
Hooper, & Escudé, 2016). In order for makerspaces to be realized to
their full potential, teachers need professional development focused on
integrating emerging technologies with teaching for social justice.

   FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 1
Otherwise, the warning issued by Seymour Papert nearly thirty years ago
will still hold true: "The phrase `technology and education' usually means
inventing new gadgets to teach the same old stuff in a thinly disguised
version of the same old way" (Papert, 1980, p. 1).
INCLUSIVE MAKERPACK
Effectively integrating new technologies into classroom practice requires
teachers to have a specialized knowledge known as technological
pedagogical content knowledge (TPACK). Building Shulman's (1986)
pedagogical content knowledge framework, TPACK describes the
integration of technological expertise with an understanding of how
technology can support content-specific learning (Koehler & Mishra,
2009). However, the TPACK framework attends to technological
knowledge more broadly and does not consider practices typically
associated with making (e.g., design thinking, problem solving). The
MakerPACK framework (Figure 1.1; Corum, Spitzer, Nichols, & Frank,
2020) builds on the TPACK framework by considering the novel features
of emerging technologies commonly found in makerspaces (e.g., digital
fabrication, coding, robotics, microcontrollers) and how these
technologies work in conjunction with design thinking.

                     Figure 1.1: MakerPACK Framework
2
Given the potential of makerspaces to increase student engagement
and participation in STEM fields, it is paramount that these spaces
are inclusive for all students and that teachers are equipped to meet
this need. Unfortunately, not all students feel as if they belong in
makerspaces. A study of makerspaces across the United States that
offered K-12 educational programming revealed a pervasive gender bias
in these spaces. For example, researchers found that the identity markers
most often used by instructors to describe male students included
"geeks," "builders," "designers," and "engineers," whereas the identity
markers most often used to describe female students included "girls"
and "helpers" (Kim, Edouard, Alderfer, & Smith, 2018). The fact that these
identity markers were used by educators in these spaces is particularly
problematic. For an in-depth discussion of Black, Indigenous, and people
of color (BIPOC) students' experiences in makerspaces, please refer
to the chapter, "Strategies for Creating and Sustaining Inclusive
Makerspaces" later in this book. In response to these concerns, we
offer an extension of the MakerPACK framework that integrates teacher
knowledge of the needs of students who identify as BIPOC (Figure 1.2;
Nichols & Corum, 2023).

                 Figure 1.2: Inclusive MakerPACK Framework
   FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 3
While there is limited research regarding how to best support teachers
in utilizing makerspaces in their classroom instruction, there is evidence
that meaningful professional development is critical in supporting
teachers' development of TPACK, and their ability to integrate technology
into the classroom requires meaningful professional development (e.g.,
Wenglinksy, 1998; Koehler & Mishra, 2005; Bos, 2011). Guided by the
Inclusive MakerPACK framework, we considered how to prepare teachers
to integrate making and makerspaces to support mathematics teaching
in a way that centers equity and access. In the following sections, we will
share our approach and our findings.

COURSE DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT

Using Makerspace Technology in School Mathematics is an instructional
technology course that is offered to students enrolled in the Mathematics
Education M.S. degree program at Towson University. The course is
organized around five technologies commonly found in makerspaces:
paper circuitry, three-dimensional (3D) design and fabrication, coding,
robotics, and Arduino microcontrollers (Corum et al., 2020). The course
was first offered in Fall 2019 and since then, the course has been offered
an additional five times across three different semesters (Spring 2020,
Fall 2021, Fall 2022).

Prior to the Fall 2022 offerings, the course content was redesigned to
highlight how both making and mathematics could be used to address
social justice issues. Five social justice-centered mathematical making
(SJMM) lessons were developed to complement the five central
technologies of the course (Nichols & Corum, 2023) and to demonstrate
authentic applications of making to understand and solve real-world
problems. These lessons are described below.

4
SEA LEVEL CHANGE AND PAPER MATHEMATICS

Adapted from Archey's (2019) "Sea Level Change and Function
Composition" activity, this lesson explores the impact of sea level change
on our planet. After analyzing National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA) interactive data to visualize the current and future
impacts of sea level change, learners create paper models (Figure 1.3) to
demonstrate the relationship between changing sea levels and remaining
land. In the model shown in Figure 1.3, the triangular prism represents
land, and the overlaid paper (which can be manipulated) represents sea
level.

Figure 1.3: Paper model to represent sea level change

MONUMENT STORIES AND 3D PRINTING

This lesson investigates the         Figure 1.4: Student-designed monument to
Daughters of the Confederacy's       honor Claudette Colvin
influence on our nation's
monuments. After analyzing
findings of the National
Monument Lab audit, learners use
3D design to create their own
monuments to celebrate unsung
heroes in our nation's history
(Figure 1.4) and apply proportional
reasoning to consider a full-scale
model of their designs.

FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 5
MODELING FOOD ACCESSIBILITY WITH PROGRAMMING IN
SCRATCH

This lesson examines the issue of food security in Baltimore. After
deciding on their preferred location for a grocery store in a neighborhood
that has been classified as a healthy food priority area, learners use
Scratch (a block-based coding language) to model walking and driving
conditions to evaluate the accessibility of their proposed grocery store
location (Figure 1.5).

Figure 1.5: Scratch program shell

LEGO PROSTHETICS AND ROBOTICS

This lesson considers the challenges of
accessing and receiving prosthetic limbs.
After seeing examples of prosthetic limbs
constructed from LEGO robotics pieces,
learners prototype their own prosthetics
using LEGO pieces and determine the
torque needed to stall the motor of their
builds (Figure 1.6).

                                           Figure 1.6: Model used to determine
                                           stalled torque of LEGO prosthetic arm

6
WATER CONSERVATION WITH ARDUINO
This lesson studies the issue of water loss in farming. After learning
about vertical farming as an alternative farming method that minimizes
water loss, learners program an Arduino with a moisture sensor to create
a device that can monitor soil water levels (Figure 1.7).

Figure 1.7: Wiring diagram and code for building a moisture sensor

DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS
To understand how participating in the redesigned Using Makerspace
Technology in School Mathematics course supported teachers'
development of an Inclusive MakerPACK, we developed a post-course
survey (adapted from Enterline et al., 2008, Appendix A) that asked
participants to reflect on how their course experiences impacted their
attitudes toward incorporating justice-centered mathematics and/or
mathematical making in their own classroom practice. Our participants
included graduate students enrolled in one of the two sections of the
course offered during the Fall 2022 semester. This section included
graduate students in the Mathematics Education M.S. degree program
who are not part of a school district partnership which allowed for greater
diversity in participants' teaching contexts. Of the fourteen students
enrolled in this section of the course, seven students submitted survey
responses.

   FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 7
During the first round of data analysis, we established a list of a priori
parent codes (e.g., impactful activities, new beliefs, prior beliefs,
obstacles, solutions) and then recorded child nodes (e.g., 3D design,
coding, importance of social justice, limited experience) associated with
each parent code during the initial pass (Merriam & Tisdell, 2015;
Saldaña, 2021). Prior to the second round of data analysis, the parent
codes were refined or redefined based on themes observed during the
first round of data analysis. During the second round of data analysis,
the existing child nodes were redefined, regrouped, and refined, and
additional child nodes were identified based on patterns observed in the
data. We then discussed our findings before the third and final round of
data analysis to confirm that the most salient themes in the data were
identified (see Table 1.1).

FINDINGS
Analysis of survey results revealed that participating in Using
Makerspace Technology in School Mathematics course impacted
graduate students' beliefs about incorporating social justice-centered
mathematical making activities in their own classrooms. All participants
who submitted the survey indicated that at least one of the SJMMs from
the course truly resonated with them and that they intended to apply what
they learned from the course in their own practice. The main themes that
emerged from students' post-course surveys are summarized in Table 1.1.
These themes were consistently present across all participants' survey
responses and often referenced multiple times.

8
Table 1.1: Main themes from post-course surveys (n = frequency count)

Theme       Explanation                               Example

Prior       Participants shared that they had not     "I have never seen SJ [social
Beliefs     previously integrated making and/or       justice] integrated within a math
(n = 14)    social justice into their own practice    classroom and did not think it was
            and attributed this to their own limited  possible to do so."
            experience with these concepts.

Impactful   Participants shared that the most         "...being more aware of
Activities  impactful SJMMs were those that           marginalized populations and
(n = 15)    centered promoting equity and those       making mathematical connections
            that made technologies that               for the classroom was refreshing."
            previously seemed too advanced given      "[Robotics] seems intimidating
            their current expertise more              but is actually very accessible and
            accessible.                               user friendly"

New         As a result of their course               "I enjoyed learning how SJ [social
Beliefs     experiences, participants shared that     justice] can be incorporated into
(n = 35)    SJMMs helped them realize the value       the math classroom and plan on
            of integrating social justice contexts    incorporating SJ into my
            into their classrooms and the benefits    classroom and instruction."
            of using technology to make content       "...using the Ozobotos may help
            more accessible for all learners.         some of my students on the
                                                      spectrum engage with math using
                                                      colors and shapes..."

Obstacles   Participants anticipated pushback         "Students must grapple with
and         from students and administration          certain data that is intentionally
Solutions   related to the perceived political        misleading, which causes
(n = 9; n   nature of SJMMs and concerns with         cognitive dissonance when they
=17)        maintaining fidelity with assigned        already had false beliefs from
            curricula/pacing guides as potential      similar data."
            obstacles to implementing SJMMs in        "Trying to convince planning group
            their own contexts, but found that        with the curriculum time
            purposeful professional development       constraints."
            related to this approach to teaching
            and learning could provide a solution.

Graduate students' coursework provides additional evidence of the
impact of the course on their professional development, particularly
related to applying their experiences to support their own classroom
instruction. For each technology explored in the course, graduate
students were asked to design and develop their own lessons
that incorporated the specified technology. It was not a requirement for
students to also incorporate a social justice context in these lessons.
However, several teachers chose to develop SJMMs.

FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 9
   These lessons included:

          · Addressing inequitable access to resources and using triangle
              paper constructions to identify the equitable placement of cellular
              towers and grocery stores;

          · Understanding the experiences of environmental refugees
              impacted by climate change and using quadratics to model land
              loss of Tangier Island;

          · Investigating redistricting through a socio-economic and racial lens
              and using geometry and proportional reasoning to develop a scale
              model of a school building to meet the evolving demands resulting
              from redistricting in Montgomery County, Maryland

CONCLUSION

Analysis of post-course reflections and submitted coursework revealed
that exposure to social justice mathematical making (SJMM) lessons
in the Using Makerspace Technology in School Mathematics course
supported a shift in graduate students' beliefs about incorporating both
technology and social justice contexts into their classrooms.
Participating in the SJMM lessons allowed our graduate students to
experience firsthand how mathematics and technology can be used to
understand and address social injustices. For many of our graduate
students, this was a transformative experience as it was the first time
they had considered incorporating social justice into a mathematics
classroom. While we were able to redesign our graduate course to center
social justice, we recognize that others may not be able to do the same.
However, teacher educators can still find opportunities to incorporate
social justice topics into their content and methods courses. Modeling
how to incorporate issues related to diversity, equity, inclusion, and
justice into classroom practice can be a valuable first step when
preparing teachers to be change makers.

10
 Acknowledgments

 This project is based upon work supported by the National Science
 Foundation under Grant No. 2243461. Any opinions, findings, and
 conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of
 the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the view of the National Science
 Foundation.

           APPENDIX A
        Using Makerspace Technology in School Mathematics Post-
        Course Survey

                  1a) Before this course, what were your beliefs and/or prior
                  experiences with justice-centered mathematics?
                  1b) Share which lesson and/or class experience had the
                  greatest impact on your beliefs about incorporating
                  justice-centered lessons in your mathematics classroom?
                  Why were these impactful? The social justice mathematics
                  lessons we explored this semester included Sea Level
                  Change (Paper Engineering), Monument to an Unsung
                  Hero (3D Design), Food from Scratch (Coding), LEGO
                  Prosthetics (Robotics), and Water Conservation (Arduino).
                  1c) Discuss how your thinking about justice-centered
                  mathematics has changed since participating in the five
                  social justice mathematics lessons. What do you believe
                  now and why did your thinking change?
                  2a) What topic did you choose? Why did you choose this
                  topic?
                  2b) How might you include this topic in your curriculum?

FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 11
                   2c) Discuss what hurdles you anticipate encountering when
                   incorporating this justice-centered lesson into your
                   curriculum.

                   2d) What are some possible solutions to overcome these
                   hurdles?

                   3a) Before this course, what were your beliefs and/or prior
                   experiences with mathematical making or making in
                   general?

                   3b) Share which lesson and/or class experience had the
                   greatest impact on your beliefs about mathematical
                   making in the classroom. Why were these impactful?
                   Examples of the mathematical making lessons we explored
                   this semester include finding the volume of the origami
                   cube, designing the equal probability dice, writing a Python
                   program to draw a polygon, and collecting data with
                   Spheros.

                   3c) Discuss how your thinking has changed since
                   participating in the mathematical making lessons. What do
                   you believe now and why did your thinking change?

                   (Optional) Do you have any additional comments?

REFERENCES

Barton, A. C., Tan, E., & Greenberg, D. (2017). The makerspace movement:
   Sites of possibilities for equitable opportunities to engage
   underrepresented youth in STEM. Teachers College Record, 119(6),
   1-44.

Blikstein, P. (2013). Digital fabrication and `making' in education: The
   democratization of invention. In J. Walter-Herrmann & C. Büching

12
   (Eds.), FabLabs: Of Machines, Makers, and Inventors. Bielefeld,
   Germany: Transcript Publishers.

Bos, B. (2011). Professional development for elementary teachers using
   TPACK. Contemporary Issues in Technology and Teacher
   Education, 11(2), 167-183.

Cavalcanti, G. (2013). Is it a Hackerspace, Makerspace, TechShop, or
   FabLab? Makezine. https://makezine.com/2013/05/22/the-difference-
   between-hackerspaces-makerspaces-techshops-and-fablabs/

Corum, K., Spitzer, S., Nichols, L., & Frank, K. (2020). Developing TPACK
   for makerspaces to support mathematics teaching and learning.
   Mathematics Education Across Cultures: Proceedings of the 42nd
   Meeting of the North American Chapter of the International Group for
   the Psychology of Mathematics Education, 2193-2197. https://doi.org/
   10.51272/pmena.42.2020-374

Enterline, S., Cochran-Smith, M., Ludlow, L. H., & Mitescu, E. (2008).
   Learning to teach for social justice: Measuring change in the beliefs of
   teacher candidates. The New Educator, 4(4), 267-290. https://doi.org/
   10.1080/15476880802430361

Kim, Y. E., Edouard, K., Alderfer, K., & Smith, B. K. (2018). Making culture:
   A national study of educational makerspaces. Drexel University ExCITe
   Center. https://drexel.edu/~/media/Files/excite/making-culture-full-
   report.ashx?la=en

Koehler, M., & Mishra, P. (2005). Teachers learning technology by design.
   Journal of Computing in Teacher Education, 21(3), 94-102.

Koehler, M., & Mishra, P. (2009). What is technological pedagogical
   content knowledge (TPACK)? Contemporary Issues in Technology and
   Teacher Education, 9(1), 60-70.

Martin, B. (2015). Successful implementation of TPACK in teacher
   preparation programs. International Journal on Integrating Technology
   in Education, 4(1), 17-26.

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 13
Merriam, S. B., & Tisdell, E. J. (2015). Qualitative research: A guide to
   design and implementation (Fourth edition). John Wiley & Sons.

Nation of Makers (2022). Making the Case.
   https://www.nationofmakers.us/makingthecase.

Nichols, L., & Corum, K. (2023). Increasing teacher commitment to
   justice-centered mathematics through maker-enhanced social justice
   activities. In E. Langran, P. Christensen, & J. Sanson (Eds.),
   Proceedings of Society for Information Technology & Teacher
   Education International Conference (pp. 411-416). New Orleans:
   Association for the Advancement of Computing in Education (AACE).
   https://www.learntechlib.org/p/221891/

Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas.
   New York, NY: Basic Books, Inc.

Peppler, K., & Bender, S. (2013). Maker movement spreads innovation
   one project at a time. Phi Delta Kappan, 95(3), 22-27. https://doi.org/
   10.1177/003172171309500306

Saldana, J. (2021). The coding manual for qualitative researchers (4th
   ed). SAGE Publishing.

Shulman, L. S. (1986). Those who understand: Knowledge growth in
   teaching. Educational Researcher, 15(2), 4-14.

Vossoughi, S., Hooper, P. K., & Escudé, M. (2016). Making through the lens
   of culture and power: Toward transformative visions for educational
   equity. Harvard Educational Review, 86(2), 206-232.

Wenglinsky, H. (1998). Does it compute? The relationship between
   educational technology and student achievement in mathematics.
   Educational Testing Service. https://www.ets.org/Media/Research/pdf/
   PICTECHNOLOG.pdf

This program is supported in part by a grant to Virginia Tech from the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute through the Inclusive Excellence Grant.

14
CHAPTER 2.
RESEQUENCING THE CHEMISTRY CURRICULUM TO
RETAIN CHEMISTRY MAJORS

Optimizing connections between general and organic chemistry
MICHAEL D. SHULZ

ABSTRACT
Why do students become chemistry majors? Why do they stay chemistry
majors? The answers to these questions vary by student, but themes do
emerge. Often, an inspirational teacher in high school plants an idea in
a student's mind that they could become a scientist, perhaps specifically
a chemist. Once that student arrives in college, however, that idea too
often withers, and the student leaves for another discipline. What can we,
the Chemistry Department faculty, do to nurture that burgeoning interest
in our field? Again, the answers vary. Often, the answers are different
for students from underrepresented groups. At Virginia Tech, a larger
R1 institution, we decided to try an experiment: We would give students
as wide a perspective on chemistry as possible by moving our Organic
Chemistry 1 course into the freshman year of our curriculum. This change
would expose students to both the quantitative aspects of chemistry
typically presented in the General Chemistry curriculum, as well as the
more qualitative thinking embedded in Organic chemistry.

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 15
INTRODUCTION

OUR HYPOTHESIS

Our faculty generally fall into two camps: those who like organic chemistry
and those who don't. Students are arguably the same. Granted, this
distinction isn't hard and fast--many of my colleagues like all areas of
chemistry, and most excelled in every chemistry course they took. But
still, this distinction remains perceptible. Countless students and faculty
alike can share stories of almost leaving chemistry either until they
reached their first Organic Chemistry class and discovered a new passion
for the discipline, or they reached their first Organic Chemistry class and
couldn't wait to be done with it. To reveal my own allegiance, I fall into
the former camp, having had only a vague interest in general chemistry
but thoroughly enjoying my organic chemistry courses and research in a
synthetic chemistry lab.

The existence of this dichotomy surprises few chemists. In fact, I've
occasionally heard senior students advise freshmen to "wait until you've
had Organic" before making any definitive judgement on pursuing a
career as a chemist. Whether this advice is encouraging or foreboding
depends on the context.

Like many institutions, we followed a course structure that featured a year
of General Chemistry--introducing foundational concepts, but largely as
preparation for analytical and physical chemistry courses--followed by
a year of Organic Chemistry: General Chemistry 1, General Chemistry
2, Organic Chemistry 1, Organic Chemistry 2. Many students, however,
do not remain chemistry majors long enough to experience Organic
Chemistry. Many students leave our major after the first year (or even the
first semester). The causes of these departures are multifaceted, but we
hypothesized that perhaps we are losing some students who would have
discovered that they liked organic chemistry, if they had the opportunity
to take it as a freshman. We wanted to make an effort to retain these
students.

16
CONSIDERING A CHANGE

We began exploring a reorganization of our Chemistry Majors curriculum,
specifically moving Organic Chemistry into the freshman year. The new
course order would then be Gen Chem 1, Organic 1, Organic 2, Gen Chem
2, an order that is sometimes referred to as "1-2-2-1". Several advantages
to this curriculum structure soon became obvious:

   Advantages to this Curriculum Structure:

          · A broader spectrum of chemical topics could be covered in the
              freshman year, thereby exposing students to some of the less
              quantitative organic chemistry concepts that many students find
              more enjoyable.

          · Gen Chem 2 would immediately precede Analytical and Physical
              Chemistry, which would ideally enable the students to have key
              concepts from Gen Chem fresh in their minds as they start learning
              the more advanced topics. In the original curriculum, the entire
              sophomore year would elapse between Gen Chem and Analytical
              chemistry, producing a "great forgetting" among the students. As
              Organic is not a prerequisite for either Physical or Analytical
              Chemistry, this change would potentially group similar material
              together more effectively.

          · Gen Chem 2 could potentially function as a sophomore-level course,
              perhaps better preparing students for the upper-division chemistry
              classes.

This curriculum reorganization offered us the opportunity to address
at least one feature of the curriculum that seemed suboptimal, but
persisted partly due to institutional inertia: the relationship between the
Organic Chemistry Lecture and Organic Chemistry Lab.

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 17
Our Organic Chemistry Lecture and Organic Chemistry Lab courses are
separate entities, completely independent of each other and typically
taken off-sequence (i.e., Organic Lab 1 is typically taken in the second-
semester sophomore year, during the Organic 2 Lecture course; Organic
Lab 2 is then taken as a junior with no accompanying Organic Chemistry
Lecture class). Thus, reorganizing the curriculum offered us the
opportunity to align Organic Chemistry Lecture and Lab so that they
could mutually reinforce themes and concepts. Our students had long
requested this integration, and here was our opportunity to do so.

Another factor also featured prominently in our thinking: We wanted to
better support our students in achieving the math readiness needed to
succeed in chemistry. More and more students needed additional math
courses before taking calculus, which is our assumed starting point for a
freshman chemistry major. Additionally, many Gen Chem students could
grasp the chemistry concepts being taught, but sometimes struggled
with the math component on exams. A fascinating discussion may be had
on the extent to which General Chemistry exam questions should require
mathematical manipulations, but the bottom line was nonetheless clear:
Students needed more time in the curriculum to reach the math
proficiency required to succeed in chemistry. Pivoting to a more organic
chemistry-focused freshman year would allow that space for students to
build their math skills, thereby better setting them up for success in the
more quantitative elements of Gen Chem 2.

Having determined that some benefits might result from such a
curriculum, we started gathering perspectives on what such a curriculum
revision might entail, what challenges might arise, and whether the
potential advantages were worth the cost.

18
GATHERING PERSPECTIVES

Who else has done something like this? The answer, it turns out, is
complicated. Several institutions employ the 1-2-2-1 curriculum structure,
but each used it for different reasons, and each had different strengths
and challenges. Some had used this course sequence since time
immemorial, and it was accepted by their students as "normal". In our
research, we didn't find an institution that had tried such a course
resequencing for our specific reasons. Nevertheless, we had some
conversations.

Early on, we talked with a chemistry faculty member at a peer institution
that employed the 1-2-2-1 course structure. Their reasons for adopting
this approach were quite different from ours, however. First, a large
percentage of their students had high scores on AP Chemistry exams,
which enabled them to bypass a portion of the Gen Chem curriculum. The
1-2-2-1 course structure solved certain scheduling issues. Second, most
of their chemistry students were pre-med, and they wanted to get them
into Organic Chemistry earlier with the belief that the Organic content
is perceived to be more medicine-relevant by the pre-med students.
Additionally, this institution did not have separate Gen Chem and
Organic classes for their chemistry majors. This set-up is partly because
their students do not declare majors immediately upon matriculation,
so everyone takes the same sequence of chemistry classes, which are
designed to serve all majors.

Our situation was different in several respects. While many of our
incoming students arrived with AP credit, including several with strong
scores on the AP Chemistry exam, we generally advise everyone to
take our regular Gen Chem sequence. We reasoned that this approach
would enable us to establish a common knowledge baseline across
all students. However, we also observed a strong predictive quality to
students' previous experience with AP Chemistry--students with AP
Chemistry credit generally do well in our Gen Chem class, while students
without such AP experience often struggle. An argument can be made
that our approach was producing classes populated with students with
wildly different levels of preparation, thereby setting some students up
for failure despite our best efforts to help everyone succeed. We were
concerned that continuing this approach might perpetuate disparities.

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 19
Pre-med students, of course, take General and Organic Chemistry, but
few of them are chemistry majors at Virginia Tech. However, while our
pre-med student numbers are low (perhaps unusually low), we typically
have many students interested in engineering. Virginia Tech has long
had a strong engineering program, and often students are interested
in chemistry, but with an eye toward engineering applications. These
students plan to pursue the engineering-adjacent aspects of chemistry,
which are sometimes not obviously connected with organic chemistry.
As we contemplated the curriculum reordering, we often considered
potential effects on these groups of students.

Beyond our colleagues at other institutions, we also had conversations
with our current chemistry majors. These conversations confirmed many
of our assumptions about the perception of our program--that it was
incredibly challenging, that pre-med students opted for perceived
"easier" majors, that the underlying themes of Gen Chem were
sometimes lost on the students, which produced a disjointed feel to the
class. We asked if moving Organic 1 into the first year of the curriculum
would be useful, and the responses seemed to follow the same dichotomy
we had among the faculty: The students who loved organic thought it was
a good idea, the students who hated organic wondered why we would
ever consider doing such a thing.

ANALYZING OUR CURRICULA

Recognizing that our curriculum may not be attracting key groups of
students who could benefit from our program, we had recently introduced
two new chemistry majors: Medicinal Chemistry and Polymer Chemistry.
The thought was that Medicinal Chemistry could attract the chemistry-
inclined pre-med students, while the Polymer Chemistry degree might
attract those with an interest in engineering. Consequently, when we
started thinking about resequencing our curriculum, we had four majors
to consider, each with its own requirements: Chemistry (BS), Chemistry
(BA), Medicinal Chemistry (BS), and Polymer Chemistry (BS). Any
curriculum changes would affect only the relatively small number of

20
chemistry majors; the non-majors curriculum would remain unchanged
because we couldn't accommodate a large-scale course-sequence
switch due to limited lab capacity. But first we had to decide what part
of Gen Chem was absolutely required before students start learning
Organic.

We started by asking, "What are students currently taught in Gen Chem?"
We got a list, which we analyzed with regard to organic chemistry
relevance. Some judgements were easy: Structure and bonding are
critical concepts for organic chemistry, radiochemistry probably less so.
Other content produced mixed opinions. In general we thought it was
desirable to make few large changes so as to streamline any potential
resequencing; however, we struggled in making a distinction between
topics that "are relevant to" organic chemistry at the sophomore level
versus topics that are "essential to understand" organic chemistry at the
sophomore level.

This discussion was complicated by the fact that closely related concepts
often appear quite different to students in the context of organic
chemistry versus general chemistry. Acids and bases are a prime
example: Much of organic chemistry can be described in terms of acid-
base reactions (e.g., Lewis acid/base in Gen Chem becomes
electrophile/nucleophile in Organic), but students see the aqueous
inorganic acids/bases of Gen Chem as a distinctly separate topic. Still, is
half a lecture on polyprotic acids foundational to understanding organic
chemistry? On the other hand, having Gen Chem 2 after the organic
sequence offers untapped possibilities to use organic examples when
teaching concepts, possibly reducing the compartmentalization of
knowledge that many students seem to develop as they treat each class
as unrelated to any others.

Beyond the specific ordering of the course content, a general consensus
emerged that we were trying to teach too much--the students would
be better served by presenting fewer topics but in greater depth. Said
differently, we would prefer to have students master the truly foundational
content rather than have a vague awareness of a greater breadth of
topics. Of course, which content is "truly foundational" is often in the eye
of the beholder.

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 21
Ultimately, we decided that the specific course content will need to be
coordinated by the actual course instructors. With judicious but relatively
minor adjustments to Gen Chem 1 and Organic 1, we thought that these
two courses could function as the freshman chemistry majors
introductory curriculum. Since the change was limited to the chemistry
majors curriculum only (i.e., other majors would continue to take the
regular non-majors course sequence), each course had only a single
instructor, which we anticipated would facilitate coordination. Despite
some well-founded reservations, we decided to reorganize our
curriculum.

TAKING THE PLUNGE

Change of any kind inevitably foments complaints, many legitimate but
some less so. We knew that an adjustment of this scale would cause
problems of various kinds and would be compared unfavorably to the
way things used to be. Consequently, we planned to maintain the new
curriculum structure for at least six years, so as to erase the institutional
memory (in the students at least) that there was once a different
curriculum. To make an apples-to-apples comparison, this new course
sequence had to be perceived as "normal."

Of course, the first year would be the most challenging. We would have
freshmen on the new sequence and sophomores on the old sequence.
Simultaneously, we would have to teach both sequences, effectively
doubling our teaching load, particularly in the transition year. Two
additional factors introduced further complications: COVID-19 and
significant changes in our organic faculty.

We began discussing these curriculum changes in 2019, not knowing
that in a few months our curriculum, teaching experiences, and lives
would radically change. As COVID-19 triggered radical changes in higher
education (and everything else), we continued our discussions and
planning, knowing that our ability to make clear before-and-after
comparisons was now compromised. The new curriculum took effect in

22
Fall 2022, arguably a time when "normal" had returned. My own opinion,
however, is that the ripple effects of the pandemic will continue for years,
both in higher education and elsewhere. Deconvoluting the effects of our
curriculum reorganization from the ongoing effects of COVID-19 may not
be possible.

Like all departments, we have faculty joining and leaving the department
most years. As chance would have it, our curriculum reorganization
coincided with relatively significant changes in our organic faculty, with
multiple retirements, departures, and new hires happening within the
span of a couple years. Consequently, much of the increased teaching
load associated with the curriculum transition fell on faculty who weren't
a part of the department when these discussions first took place. Ideally,
the same faculty that taught Gen Chem and Organic before the
curriculum resequencing would also teach it after the resequencing to
enable more accurate comparison. Unfortunately, that approach wasn't
possible.

CHALLENGES, FORESEEN AND UNFORESEEN

While the official curriculum change started in Fall 2022, the real
changes didn't start taking place until Spring 2023. At that point, we
had freshmen taking Organic 1, sophomores taking Organic 2, and both
taking Organic Lab. Much of our focus in the planning stage had been
on the Gen Chem content and how it prepared students for Organic.
Comparatively less attention was paid to the connections between
Organic Lecture and Organic Lab.

We had hoped that this curriculum revision would enable better
integration between the lecture and lab content, a change that students
had requested for years. But as the Spring semester began, we quickly
realized that the lecture-lab offset had a key advantage: Students starting
the lab had already had a semester of organic chemistry. Consequently,
a considerable amount of conceptual knowledge was already in place
on Day 1 of the lab, and the course was designed with much of this

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 23
knowledge assumed. We were now in a situation where the lab course
was filled with double the usual number of students, comprising both
freshmen taking organic for the first time and sophomores who were
already in the second semester of the organic chemistry sequence.

While this challenge was not entirely unforeseen--we had discussed at
length the necessity of revising the lab course to account for the fact
that it would now be a freshman class--it was perhaps under appreciated.
Consequently, the lab and lecture were not as coordinated as we had
hoped. Lab content that built on Organic 1 Lecture content had to be
taught in greater detail to the freshmen who were seeing it for the first
time. Lab-related questions came up in Organic 1 Lecture that required
knowledge of Organic 2 content. Freshman students felt underprepared
at times for the lab content relative to the sophomores in the course.

On top of these challenges, the current freshmen now look forward
to a sophomore year that looks quite different from what the current
sophomores are experiencing. In the past, different classes (e.g.,
freshmen and sophomores) had relatively limited interactions, but this
year they're all in the same lab, so the students talk. The rumored
consensus is that the sophomores are glad they went through their
classes on the old sequence, as now the freshmen are anticipating a
sophomore year that looks particularly daunting. Many faculty generally
agree that it is daunting, but the sophomore year was always daunting in
our curriculum. We don't think the difficulty changed (it's arguably easier),
but that perception is not necessarily shared by our students.

From the beginning, we tried to get broad buy-in for this plan at each
stage of the process. For example, we discussed the proposed changes
at meetings of the full faculty and the organic division specifically. We
got the opinions of current students (and discarded several curriculum
possibilities based on their feedback). Nevertheless, these efforts were
imperfect, and as the curriculum changes were implemented, we heard
complaints of poor planning leading to foreseeable problems. On the
whole, though, major disasters have so far been averted--a particularly
noteworthy accomplishment given the double enrollment in the lab
course. Planning, implementation, and coordination across multiple
courses continues to develop as we progress through this curriculum
revision, but discovering the full impact of these changes will require

24
a few years of data and perspective. Whether we will realize our stated
goals remains to be seen.

LESSONS LEARNED AND FUTURE OUTLOOK

So, what have we learned? Perhaps the biggest lesson has been the
importance of involving the people actually teaching the courses
throughout the planning process from the very beginning. While various
factors made that approach impossible in our case, we can see in
retrospect that planning and implementing must go hand in hand, and
that imperative is greatly facilitated when the same group of people are
involved in both.

Additionally, we perhaps relied too much on informal coordination
between the various faculty members involved in teaching these classes.
Our faculty is highly collegial and collaborative, and such informal
coordination is often sufficient (or even preferred). In this case, however,
we may have benefited from also including a more formalized
coordination effort, even if it only served to provide a designated space
and time for discussing and planning. With the benefit of recent
experience, we are now evaluating how we can best redesign and
coordinate the courses (particularly Organic Lab) to better teach our
students. I expect next year (and later years) will be better, as we
continually refine our curriculum.

This chapter tells a story without an end. The value of this approach,
however, is that our thinking can be captured without the bias of
hindsight. At the time of this writing, we're still in the midst of the
curriculum transition. While many of the challenges inherent in
reorganizing a curriculum have already manifested, our hoped-for gains
are still in the future. Consequently, the final success or failure of this
experiment is unclear. Time will tell.

This program is supported in part by a grant to Virginia Tech from the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute through the Inclusive Excellence Grant.

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 25
26
CHAPTER 3.
DELAYED ENROLLMENT IN GENERAL CHEMISTRY
RECITATION

PATRICIA AMATEIS

ABSTRACT
Due to the large size (three hundred students per section) of General
Chemistry classes at Virginia Tech, these freshman-level classes have
generally been taught using a traditional lecture format because it is
difficult to incorporate meaningful active learning in the class meetings.
Many students do not respond well to traditional large lecture settings; to
reach these students, we want to use small group recitations to provide
opportunities for one-on-one instructor-student interactions, active
learning, and a community learning environment. The large number of
students taking General Chemistry in the Fall semesters prohibits us
from providing small group recitations for all students. The challenge is
identifying the students who most need the extra help provided in the
recitations. To do this, we used the grades on the first exam in the class
to identify a target group to receive an invitation for enrollment in a
recitation class in the sixth week of the semester. Undergraduate science
majors, supervised by a faculty member, were the recitation instructors.
Analysis of grade data revealed marked improvement for the students
who enrolled in the recitations. Grade data and student opinions about
the recitation in the Fall 2020 and Fall 2021 semesters will be discussed.

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 27
INTRODUCTION

General Chemistry (CHEM 1035) at Virginia Tech is a large service course
that presents challenges to both students and instructors. First, the
students in CHEM 1035 represent a wide variety of majors and a wide
range of academic backgrounds and math preparedness. Approximately
half of our CHEM 1035 students are General Engineering majors and the
other half have majors in Biological Sciences, Biochemistry, Animal and
Poultry Sciences, Dairy Science, Human Nutrition, Food, and Exercise,
Geoscience, Neuroscience, Horticulture, Environmental Science,
Forestry, Wildlife, Nanoscience, and Natural Resources. Some students
have strong backgrounds in calculus, while others begin their college
careers in college algebra.

Secondly, class sections are large, with about 300 students in each of
several sections for a total of about 2500 students each semester. Due
to the large class size, a traditional lecture style has been implemented.
Many students do not learn well in this type of teaching environment.

It has been shown that providing small group recitations in large lecture
General Chemistry courses can improve student success with higher
grades, a higher pass rate, and increased retention (Perera et al., 2019;
Mahalingam et al., 2008). Further, it has been shown that recitations
can be especially valuable for underrepresented students (Stanich et al.,
2018). Virginia Tech has for many years utilized peer-led, small group
recitations in CHEM 1036, our second semester General Chemistry
course. These recitations provide active learning, an opportunity for
one-on-one instructor-student interactions, and a community learning
environment; our research over numerous semesters has shown that
students performed better in CHEM 1036 after the introduction of the
recitations. However, resources such as classroom space and funding for
recitation instructor salaries are insufficient to include similar recitations
for all CHEM 1035 students in the fall semester when our enrollment is
50% higher.

Efforts were therefore focused on using available resources to offer a few
sections of a new course, CHEM 1034 General Chemistry Recitation. This
one credit, pass/fail course, taken in conjunction with CHEM 1035, offers
the advantages of the small group recitation. While any student may self-

28
enroll in CHEM 1034 at the beginning of the semester, we found that the
majority of students do not anticipate a need for the extra help provided
by the recitation. The challenge, therefore, is identifying the students who
will most need and benefit from participating in the recitation course. To
do this, we used grades on the first test in CHEM 1035 to identify a target
group of students who were invited to enroll in CHEM 1034 in the sixth
week of the semester.

METHOD
ENROLLMENT PROCEDURE

The first test in CHEM 1035 is given during the fifth week of the
semester. Students whose Test 1 scores were in the range of thirty-
seven to sixty-five received an email invitation from their professor to
join a CHEM 1034 General Chemistry Recitation section. We found that
students whose Test 1 score was above sixty-five would usually succeed
in General Chemistry without the recitation course and that students
whose scores were below thirty-seven on Test 1 usually immediately
dropped the course. Those students who wanted to join the recitation
course were added to a section by our Dean's office because students
may not add a class themselves after the first week of the semester. The
availability of four sections at different times in the late afternoon meant
that most students could fit a section into their already established class
schedules. In the Fall 2020 semester, the CHEM 1034 sections were
taught in a synchronous, on-line format due to pandemic restrictions,
while the Fall 2021 CHEM 1034 sections met in person. The enrollment
of each recitation section was capped at a maximum of thirty students.
We were able to accommodate all students who wanted to join a CHEM
1034 recitation.

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 29
RECITATION DESIGN

Each recitation section is taught by an undergraduate science major who
has very successfully completed at least three semesters of chemistry
(general and organic chemistry). The undergraduate recitation instructors
are paid and are supervised by a faculty member.

The CHEM 1034 recitation class met once a week for seventy-five
minutes. The focus of the weekly meeting was structured problem solving
with students completing a worksheet in recitation under the guidance
of the instructor; students were encouraged to engage each other and
the instructor during this activity. A quiz with problems similar to those
on that week's worksheet was given so students could gauge their
understanding of the material. Worksheets and quizzes were written by
the supervising faculty member.
A N A LY S E S

Data for both the Fall 2020 and Fall 2021 semesters were analyzed. We
compared subsequent CHEM 1035 test grades and overall course grades
of CHEM 1034 students (with recitation) to students in the same Test 1
grade range who elected not to enroll in CHEM 1034 (without recitation).
In the Fall 2020 semester, a total of three tests were given, while four
tests were given in the Fall 2021 semester.

A five-question evaluation survey was administered to the CHEM 1034
Recitation students in the Fall 2020 semester to solicit their opinions on
the value of the recitation class.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

GRADE STATISTICS

We followed the progress of CHEM 1034 recitation students during the
Fall 2020 and Fall 2021 semesters, comparing their subsequent test
grades in CHEM 1035 General Chemistry with those students who scored

30
in the same grade range (>37 to < 65) on Test 1 and opted not to enroll
in CHEM 1034 recitation. As a result of pandemic policies during the Fall
2020 semester, only three tests were given in General Chemistry CHEM
1035. During the Fall 2021 semester, a total of four tests were given.

Table 3.1, Table 3.2, and Figure 3.1 compare the test averages of students
scoring greater than 65 on Test 1 in CHEM 1035 with the students whose
Test 1 score was in the range of > 37 to < 65 and who either opted to
enroll in CHEM 1034 recitation or opted out of the recitation.

     Table 3.1: Comparison of fall semester CHEM 1035 test averages (2020)

Cohort (2020) Test 1 Average Test 2 Average Test 3 Average Test 4 Average

Students
scoring  65 on Test 1 (N = 83.2 77.5 75.5 NA

1670)

Students with

recitation (N = 60.0  70.3  70.4  NA

93)

Students
without recitation (N = 53.2 57.1 62.1 NA
704)

     Table 3.2: Comparison of fall semester CHEM 1035 test averages (2021)

Cohort (2021) Test 1 Average Test 2 Average Test 3 Average Test 4 Average

Students
scoring  65 on Test 1 (N = 84.4 78.5 80.0 66.9

1803)

Students with

recitation (N = 50.4  59.5  69.8  62.4

85)

Students
without recitation (N = 54.1 59.6 65.5 58.9
410)

FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 31
Figure 3.1: CHEM 1035 test averages for students whose Test 1 scores were 65 or higher, students
whose Test 1 scores were in the range of >37 to <65 and who opted to enroll in the CHEM 1034
recitation class after Test 1 (With Recitation), and students whose Test 1 scores were in the range
of >37 to <65 and who did not enroll in CHEM 1034 after Test 1 (Without Recitation)

In the Fall 2020 semester:

     · 12% of the CHEM 1035 students who were eligible to enroll in
         CHEM 1034 recitation on the basis of their CHEM 1035 Test 1
         score opted to do so.

     · The Test 2 and Test 3 averages were significantly higher for
         students with recitation compared to students without recitation.

Test average for students with Test 1 score  Test average for students with Test 1 score 
    65 - Test average for students with         65 - Test average for students without
                                                                    recitation
                     recitation

Test 1: 23 points                             Test 1: 30 points
Test 3: 5 points                             Test 3: 13.4 points

In the Fall 2021 semester:

     · 17% of the CHEM 1035 students who were eligible to enroll in
         CHEM 1034 recitation on the basis of their Test 1 score opted to
         do so.

     · The Test 1 average was lower for students who enrolled in
         recitation (after Test 1) than for the students without recitation, but
         by Tests 3 and 4, the recitation cohort earned higher test averages
         than the students without recitation.

32
Test average for students with Test 1   Test average for students with Test 1
    score  65 - Test average for       score  65 - Test average for students
        students with recitation
                                                    without recitation
             Test 1: 34 points
                                                     Test 1: 30 points
            Test 4: 4.5 points
                                                      Test 4: 8 points

The subsequent CHEM 1035 test grades for the students whose CHEM
1035 Test 1 scores were >37 and <65 were examined to determine the
amount of progress or lack of progress for students enrolled in the CHEM
1034 recitation versus the students who opted not to enroll in recitation.
Test 2, Test 3 (and for Fall 2021, Test 4) grades were compared to Test
1 grades for each student. The results are shown in Table 3.3, Table 3.4,
and Figure 3.2.

Table 3.3: Comparison of fall semester CHEM 1035 test grades for students with
                           recitation versus without recitation (2020)

Cohort (2020)         Test 2 - Test 1  Test 3 - Test 1  Test 4 - Test 1
                      Grades           Grades           Grades

                      Average change:  Average change:

Students with +10.3 pts +10.3 pts recitation (N = 93) Test 2  Test 1: Test 3  Test 1: NA

                      79.6%            79.5%

                      Average change:  Average change:

Students without +3.9 pts -2.8 pts recitation (N = 704) Test 2  Test 1: Test 3  Test 1: NA

                      66.2%            55.1%

Table 3.4: Comparison of fall semester CHEM 1035 test grades for students with
                           recitation versus without recitation (2020)

Cohort (2021)         Test 2 - Test 1  Test 3 - Test 1  Test 4 - Test 1
                      Grades           Grades           Grades

Students with         Average change:  Average change:  Average change:
recitation (N = 85)   +9.3 pts         +18.0 pts        +10.1 pts
                      Test 2  Test 1:  Test 3  Test 1:  Test 4  Test 1:
                      82.2%            89.8%            76.5%

Students without      Average change:  Average change:  Average change:
recitation (N = 410)  +5.8 pts         +11.4 pts        +4.6 pts
                      Test 2  Test 1:  Test 3  Test 1:  Test 4  Test 1:
                      68.5%            81.6%            62.2%

FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 33
Figure 3.2: The percentage of students whose subsequent test scores were greater than or equal to
their CHEM 1035 Test 1 scores

A larger percentage of students in recitation had an increase in
subsequent test scores than did the students who were not in recitation
in both the Fall 2020 and Fall 2021 semesters. It is important to note
that, as shown in Table 3.1 and Figure 3.1, CHEM 1035 test averages
for students scoring  65 on Test 1 typically decrease as the semester
progresses.

In the Fall 2020 semester, students in the CHEM 1034 recitation
increased their CHEM 1035 Test 2 and Test 3 scores by an average of
10.3 points, while students who were not enrolled in the CHEM 1034
recitation had an average increase of 3.9 points on Test 2 and an overall
average decrease of 2.8 points on Test 3.

In the Fall 2021 semester, students in the CHEM 1034 recitation
increased their CHEM 1035 Test 2, Test 3, and Test 4 scores by an
average of 9.3, 18.0, and 10.1 points respectively, while students who were
not enrolled in the CHEM 1034 recitation had an average increase of 5.8,
11.4, and 4.6 points on Test 2, Test 3, and Test 4, respectively.

The overall letter grade and pass rate of the two cohorts of students,
those in CHEM 1034 recitation and those who were not, were compared.
Since C- is the minimum acceptable grade in CHEM 1035 for several
majors at Virginia Tech, the percentage of students earning that
minimum grade is also reported. The results are shown in Table 3.5 and
Table 3.6.

34
Table 3.5: Comparison of fall semester CHEM 1035 final grades (2020)

Cohort (2020)  Average CHEM 1035 % Passed CHEM          %  C-

               Grade                        1035 ( D-)

Students with recitation (N = 93) 1.91      77.4%       57%

Students without recitation (N = 704) 1.19  77.5%       21%

Table 3.6: Comparison of fall semester CHEM 1035 final grades (2020)

Cohort (2021)  Average CHEM 1035 % Passed CHEM          %  C-

               Grade                        1035 ( D-)

Students with recitation (N = 85) 1.72      91.0%       66%

Students without recitation (N = 410) 1.43  82.2%       48%

A higher percentage of students who enrolled in the CHEM 1034
recitation completed CHEM 1035 with a passing grade (D-) and with
the minimum grade of C- required by several majors at Virginia Tech,
than students who were not enrolled in the recitation course. Recitation
students also earned a higher average letter grade in CHEM 1035.

STUDENT PERCEPTIONS

A five-question evaluation survey was administered to CHEM 1034
recitation students to solicit their opinions on the value of the recitation
course. Figure 3.3 displays the results of the surveys.

FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 35
 Figure 3.3: Summary by percent of the 76 responses to the CHEM 1034 Survey questions

Written student comments on the evaluation survey indicated a high
level of satisfaction with the CHEM 1034 recitation course, as seen in a
representative sample of the comments:

36
 Sample of student comments

         · "I believe this recitation course helped me get a passing grade in
             CHEM 1035 and I would absolutely recommend it to all students in
             that course. A lifesaver!"

         · "The course was very helpful to me because it reinforced material
             that I had learned in the lectures and gave me a chance for extra
             practice. I would not change anything, I really enjoyed how I had the
             ability to ask any questions and that my instructor would help with
             it."

         · "At first, I was not sure if I wanted to enroll in CHEM 1034 and
             commit to the "extra" work every week. However, I knew it would
             be good for me and I decided to enroll in the class. I am beyond
             grateful of this decision. The worksheets and recitations were easy
             to complete and took little time in comparison the tremendous
             amount of help I received. I enjoyed having scheduled study times
             and the additional exposure to more chemistry material every
             week."

         · "The course was extremely helpful and definitely contributed to my
             improvement in Chem 1035. I will recommend this to anyone I meet
             who is going to take chemistry or is struggling in chemistry. I would
             not change anything about the course, I believe it is designed very
             well."

         · "Helpful: - Walking through many practice problems step by step -
             Accepting questions at any step in a process - Verbally explaining
             each step. I went from a 60%ish on test 1 stressing if I would even
             pass chem but got above an 80% on test 2 and 90% on test 3. I'd
             say anyone can improve their chem 1035 grade with chem 1034."

FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 37
CONCLUSION
CHEM 1035 students who enrolled in the CHEM 1034 recitation course
after earning a low grade on the first test in CHEM 1035 had overall
higher averages on subsequent tests and a higher overall average letter
grade in CHEM 1035 at the end of the semester than CHEM 1035
students with a low first test grade who opted not to enroll in CHEM 1034.
Furthermore, a higher percentage of the students in the recitation course
earned the minimum grade of C- that is required by several majors at
Virginia Tech, with the result that fewer of the students in recitation had
to repeat General Chemistry to progress in their majors.
Survey responses and comments indicated a high level of satisfaction
with the CHEM 1034 recitation course. It is troublesome that less than
20% of the eligible students chose to enroll in CHEM 1034. In the email
invitation to join CHEM 1034, we told the students that we had noticed
that they had struggled on Test 1, and they could take advantage of
an opportunity to improve their grades on future tests. We presented
data from the previous year that illustrated the increase in test grades
and letter grades that many CHEM 1034 students experienced. However,
this information did not seem to motivate the majority of the eligible
students. Several sections of CHEM 1034 were offered in a variety in time
slots; while some students may not have been able to fit the course into
their class schedules, many students who opted not to enroll indicated
that they thought the recitation course would be extra work and that they
could improve their performance in CHEM 1035 on their own.

38
REFERENCES
Mahalingam, M., Schaefer, F., & Morlino, E. (2008). Promoting student

   learning through group problem solving in general chemistry
   recitations. Journal of Chemical Education, 85(11), 1577-1581.
Perera, V. L., Wei, T., & Mlsna, D. A. (2019). Impact of peer-focused
   recitation to enhance student success in general chemistry. Journal of
   Chemical Education, 96(8), 1600-1608.
Stanich, C. A., Pelch, M. A., Theobald, E. J., & Freeman, S. (2018). A
   new approach to supplementary instruction narrows achievement and
   affect gaps for underrepresented minorities, first-generation students,
   and women. Chemistry Education Research and Practice, 19(3),
   846-866.

This program is supported in part by a grant to Virginia Tech from the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute through the Inclusive Excellence Grant.

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 39
40
CHAPTER 4.

ASSESSING CHANGES IN STUDENT ENGAGEMENT
USING A MIXED-METHODS APPROACH

JAMIE K. LAU; JEANNE MEKOLICHICK; AMANDA C. RAIMER; AND
SARAH A. KENNEDY

ABSTRACT
Our Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI) Inclusive Excellence
program, REALising Inclusive Science Excellence (REALISE), focuses
strategically and simultaneously on faculty development, curricular
reform, student support, and institutional change. Assessment of our
program is instrumental in determining the program's success in
changing student perceptions of themselves as scientists. We employed
a mixed-methods approach to explore how REALISE changes the ways
in which Biology, Chemistry, and Physics students perceive their ability
uncertainty, science identity, sense of belonging, and institutional
commitment. First, we quantitatively explored the relationship between
ability uncertainty and science identity as they predict sense of
belonging. Then, we had an opportunity to qualitatively explore how
the COVID-19 pandemic may have exacerbated any differences among
underrepresented groups for these constructs. We found that female
students were more uncertain in their abilities during the pandemic.
Further, the relationship between sense of belonging and institutional
commitment was weaker during the pandemic. Interestingly, few
students felt like their campus belonging was affected by the pandemic.
Our chapter provides successes and lessons learned while we developed
and used our Student Engagement Survey.

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 41
INTRODUCTION

Unfortunately, between 48 and 56% of students who enter post-
secondary education as a science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) major do not earn a STEM degree (Chen, 2013).
This attrition is not a reflection of our incoming students, but instead a
reflection of what typically greets them - a cold social and professional
networking environment (Lane, 2016) or unconscious bias toward
students' perceived ability to succeed (Steele, 2010). Like other
environments, science contexts and cultures are constructed via implicit
and explicit signals of exclusion or welcoming. We shape, and are shaped
by, the contexts within which we live. Science identities, and decisions
tied to the development of those identities, are cultivated (or not) within
these environments via various social psychological constructs (Mead,
1934). As we strive to support all of our STEM students from their first
day on campus to graduation, STEM education research continues to
explore the social environment in which students engage with their peers
and faculty, including the impact that these experiences have on sense
of self, belonging, and success (Merolla et al., 2012; Merolla and Serpe,
2013; Stets et al., 2017). Indeed, cultivating a science identity and sense
of belonging can be critically important drivers of success for all STEM
students (Lane, 2016; Stets et al., 2017; Nunn, 2021). Because faculty,
staff, and students create and maintain the social environment, there
is opportunity for us to change ourselves, our culture and structures to
ensure an inclusive, welcoming science context, engaging classrooms,
and supportive faculty mentors.

Radford University is a mid-sized public university that primarily serves
undergraduate students. At the time of writing our HHMI-IE proposal,
31.7% of our 2014-2015 graduating class entered as a STEM major
but did not graduate with a STEM degree (personal communication, Dr.
Timothy Millard, Radford University Institutional Research, 6/21/2023),
which does contribute to the low percentage (40%) of STEM degrees
earned nationwide (Toven-Lindsey et al., 2015). In an attempt to reverse
this trend, our HHMI-IE-funded REALising Inclusive Science Excellence
(REALISE) program (Wojdak et al., 2020) focused strategically and
simultaneously on faculty professional development on inclusive
pedagogies (Kennedy et al., 2022), curricular reform (Lau et al., 2019; see

42
also chapter "Community, Curriculum, and CURES" in this book), student
support (see the chapter Amplifying Student Voice and Vignette later
in this book), and institutional change (see the chapter "Institutionally
Advancing Inclusive Excellence" in this book) in the Biology, Chemistry,
and Physics departments. These aspects of the program aimed to reduce
student ability uncertainty in their courses, while developing a science
identity and sense of belonging to Radford University, especially among
our underrepresented students. Assessment is instrumental in
determining the program's success in changing student perceptions
of themselves as scientists. Thus, we designed a Student Engagement
Survey (SES) to explore:

    1. How the REALISE program changed the ways in which students
         perceive their ability uncertainty in their major, science identity,
         sense of belonging to the university, and institutional
         commitment; and

    2. How students' social, academic, and college sense of belonging
         was affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.

To our knowledge, our model is one of the first to analyze the complex
interactions among student demographics, uncertainty, science identity,
belonging, and commitment within the context of assessing a program
designed to change the students' perceptions of their abilities and
science identity. We expected to see a reduction in ability uncertainty
leading to an increase in science identity, sense of belonging, and
institutional commitment. This chapter provides the successes and
lessons learned while we developed and used the SES to measure the
effect of REALISE on students in these three departments.

THE STUDENT ENGAGEMENT SURVEY (SES)

Quantitative and qualitative data are instrumental when thinking about
student engagement. Quantitative data give us "what is happening,"
while qualitative data tell us "why" is the pattern is happening. Drawing
on extant literature, we designed our Student Engagement Survey (SES)
to include five constructs (i.e., concepts): ability uncertainty, science
identity salience, science identity prominence, sense of belonging, and
institutional commitment. We selected published instruments because

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 43
the reliability in measuring each construct was validated. This kind of
validation allowed us to immediately begin collecting data and assessing
our program's outcomes (versus designing a new instrument that can
take years to validate). Further, aligning our SES to the published
instruments gave us the ability to compare our results to other studies at
different institutions.

We used Lewis and Hodges's (2015) ability uncertainty (AU) scale
to measure the degree of uncertainty about one's status as an able,
competent member in a group. This instrument consists of twelve
statements (e.g., I'm not sure that I'm cut out for my major) rated on
a six-point Likert scale; higher scores equal more uncertainty about one's
ability.

The science identity salience (SIS) scale came from Merolla et al.
(2012), Piatt et al. (2019), and Stryker (2003), which measures the ranking
of an identity on an internal hierarchy (e.g., how likely are you to tell a
coworker, friend, or family member about the desire to be a scientist);
more meaningful identities are more salient and more likely to be
invoked in more situations. The SIS consists of four statements that
are ranked on an 11-point Likert scale (from zero to ten); higher scores
indicate higher SIS.

We used Stets' et al. (2017) science identity prominence (SIP) scale to
measure the degree to which a science identity is a fundamental, central,
or peripheral part of the self (e.g., I have come to think of myself as a
"scientist"). The SIP consists of four statements that are rated on a five-
point Likert scale of agreement; higher scores indicate higher SIP.

We modeled the sense of belonging (SoB) scale after Hausmann et
al. (1990), which measures the degree to which individuals feel valued,
needed, and significant in a group, system or environment (e.g., I feel
a sense of belonging to Radford University). The SoB consists of
four statements that are rated on a five-point Likert scale, from which we
separated the institutional commitment measure (i.e., I am confident
I made the right decision to attend Radford University). Higher scores
indicate higher SoB.

44
During the height of the COVID-19 pandemic, we asked an additional
question: how has the pandemic impacted your college experience? We
framed the qualitative analysis of the participants' responses in three
ways: social, academic, and college belonging (Nunn, 2021). We classified
statements that disrupted social belonging if the participant mentioned
student-led organizations or friendships with shared experiences/
interests. Disruptions of academic belonging were classified when
participants mentioned study groups, engaging with professors, or
academic challenges. We classified statements about the physical
environment, university-wide programming, or climate as a disruption of
campus belonging.

DATA COLLECTION

Students' perceptions on each construct were collected via an
Institutional Review Board (IRB)-approved instrument created from the
scales listed above and delivered electronically using Qualtrics software.
A link to the SES survey was distributed to faculty in our College via
email during the mid-point of each semester. Faculty then shared the
survey link with students in their courses. This method provided a cross-
sectional collection of the data, from students taking science courses
in that semester. As such, we did not necessarily sample the same
students each semester. For example, the percentage of females and
white participants represented in our sample was the highest in Fall
2022 (10% higher than in Fall 2020, Table 4.1a and Table 4.1b). First-
generation participants fluctuated between 5 and 7% each sampling
year. The percentage of REALISE department participants was similar to
non-REALISE participants in Fall 2022, unlike previous sampling years.
We used a pathway analysis to determine the relationships among the
identity constructs over time using data from three semesters: Fall 2018
(pre-REALISE), Fall 2020 (height of COVID-19), and Fall 2022
("post"-REALISE). These years are being used as a demonstration of
the analytical capability of this survey; we also collected the data in the
Spring semesters as well.

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 45
METHODS

The faculty distributed our SES with an added bonus (determined by the
faculty) to ensure a better response rate (preferably at least two hundred
participants; Baldwin, 1989). As a result, some students may have taken
the survey multiple times to earn the bonus points for multiple classes.
Therefore, we removed repeated submissions, keeping the participant's
first submission.

Participants may not always respond to each statement for a number
of reasons (Byrn, 2016). Rather than exclude their voice based on a few
missing responses (< 5% missing per participant), we decided to impute
the data to ensure an inclusive dataset. This statistical method uses the
relationships among the variables (including demographic data, Table
4.1a-Table 4.1d) to predict the likeliest response for the participant's
missing data (Byrn, 2016). We recognize that our demographic data
excludes some information about students (e.g., Pell-eligibility, transfer
status, number of credits earned, among others); however, these
demographics were available to us at the time of sampling. We imputed
the dataset five times with twenty iterations per imputation, and the final
"likeliest" response was averaged across the five imputations; the mice
package in RStudio was used to complete the imputation (van Buuren
and Groothuis-Oudshoorn, 2011).

Gender               Table 4.1a: Participant gender demographics                    Fall  Fall
                                                                                    2020  2022
                                                                              Fall
                                                                              2018

Sample Size (count)        269 291 79

Female (%)                 63.4 60.8 70.9

Male (%, Reference Group)  36.6 38.1 29.1

46
              Table 4.1b: Participant ethnicity demographics

Ethnicity                                      Fall           Fall       Fall
                                               2018           2020       2022
                                                              291        79
Sample Size (count)                            269            0.3        0.0
                                                              3.1        0.0
American Indian or Alaska Native (%)           0.4            14.1       10.1
                                                              6.9        7.6
Asian (%)                                      2.6            0.0        2.5
                                                              0.3        0.0
Black or African American (%)                  10.4           4.1        2.5
                                                              7.2        3.8
Hispanic (%)                                   7.1            62.9       73.4

Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander (%)  0.4

Nonresident Alien (%)                          1.1

Race and Ethnicity Unknown (%)                 2.2

Two or more races (%)                          4.8

White (%, Reference Group)                     68.4

Table 4.1c: Participant first generation college student demographics

First Generation College Student               Fall           Fall       Fall
                                               2018           2020       2022

Sample Size (count)                            269 291 79

Yes (%)                                        34.6 27.5 32.9

No (%, Reference Group)                        62.8 71.5 67.1

         Table 4.1d: Participant REALIZE department member demographics

REALIZE Department                             Fall           Fall       Fall
                                               2018           2020       2022

Sample Size (count)                            269 291 79

Yes (%)                                        65.1 53.6 50.6

No (%, Reference Group)                        32.3 45.4 49.4

FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 47
THE PATHWAY ANALYSIS
A pathway analysis allows us to look at both direct and indirect
relationships among multiple variables. Our analyses were guided by the
literature, which shares that female students are often more uncertain in
their abilities than male students (Lewis & Hodges, 2015). Further, female
or Black, Indigenous, and people of color (BIPOC) students identify
less as scientists because of underrepresentation in the field (Piatte et
al., 2019) or satisfying social relationships in STEM (Merolla & Serpe,
2013). Therefore, these demographic variables are predicting AU and
both science identity measures (Figure 4.1). However, the literature is not
definitive about how ability uncertainty, science identity, and sense of
belonging relate.
One critical aspect of the REALISE program was faculty professional
development in inclusive pedagogy (Lau et al., 2019; Kennedy et al.,
2022). To the degree faculty are able to create a more welcoming
environment by reducing ability uncertainty, students' science identity
may increase. Further, the development of a science identity should
increase a student's sense of belonging and subsequent institutional
commitment (Figure 4.1). Thus, we tested this pathway using the lavaan
package in RStudio (Rosseel, 2012); however, the AMOS software is a
known, user-friendly program for pathway analyses. See Byrne (2016) as
a guide. We analyzed the pathway for Fall 2018, Fall 2020, and Fall 2022
separately to understand any changes in the relationships over time.

Figure 4.1: Simplified pathway analysis using our Student Engagement Survey

48
R E S U LT S

We can conclude that the direction of our proposed pathways is
supported by the data by looking at the model fit statistics: comparative
fit index (CFI), Tucker-Lewis index (TLI), and root mean square error of
approximation (RMSEA). A pathway analysis is deemed a "good fit" when
the CFI and TLI are greater than 0.95, and the REMSEA is less than 0.06.
See Hu and Bentler (1999) for more information.

The data supported our proposed pathway analysis for Fall 2018 and
Fall 2020 (Table 4.2). In other words, we can reliably interpret the
relationships. However, the pathway for Fall 2022 is less reliable (Table
4.2). Unfortunately, the sample size was too small; we are interpreting the
relationships with caution.

        Table 4.2: Summary of model fit statistics per collection year

Metric       Fall 2018  Fall 2020  Fall 2022

Sample Size  269        291        79

CFI          0.966      0.968      0.907

TLI          0.960      0.961      0.891

RMSEA        0.046      0.047      0.080

WHAT INFORMATION CAN BE GATHERED FROM THE
PATHWAY ANALYSIS?

Generally, our analysis confirms that an increase in students' ability
uncertainty in their major reduces their science identity, and
subsequently affects students' sense of belonging and commitment to
the University - at least in Fall 2018 and 2020. Only during the height of
the pandemic did female students have a 9% higher ability uncertainty
(Table 4.3; 0.563/6-point scale) than male students. In Fall 2018 (pre-
REALISE), students in Biology, Chemistry, and Physics (REALISE
departments) had a 26.4% higher SIS (Table 4.3; 2.906/11-point scale).
Interestingly, this relationship decreased at the height of the pandemic
and decreased further in Fall 2022. Also, REALISE department students

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 49
had a 16.5% higher SIP (Table 4.3; 0.823/5-point scale) than those
in other departments. This relationship declined during the pandemic
but seemed to recover in Fall 2022. This trend may have occurred
because students were able to "do science" again in their coursework.
Pre-REALISE, ethnically underrepresented students had an 8.5% lower
SIS; however, this difference was not significant in Fall 2020 or Fall
2022. Only science identity prominence increased a student's sense of
belonging by 4.9% (Table 4.3; 0.287/6-point scale) in Fall 2018 and 5.2%
in Fall 2020. Interestingly, the relationship between sense of belonging
and institutional commitment weakened during the pandemic (from
0.885 to 0.743) and began to strengthen again in Fall 2022 (from 0.743
to 0.755; Table 4.3).

        Table 4.3a: Summary of pathway analysis; ability uncertainty
                        (* P < 0.05; ** P < 0.01; *** P < 0.001)

Ability Uncertainty          Fall  Fall                                     Fall
                             2018  2020                                     2022

Gender                       0.220 0.563** -0.506

First Generation             0.287 0.262 0.235

REALISE Department           0.074 -0.043 0.150

Ethnically Underrepresented  0.184 0.106 -0.320

        Table 4.3b: Summary of pathway analysis; science identity salience
                             (* P < 0.05; ** P < 0.01; *** P < 0.001)

Science Identity Salience    Fall  Fall                                     Fall
                             2018  2020                                     2022

Gender                       0.448 0.083 0.172

First Generation             -0.112 -0.640 0.392

REALISE Department           2.906*** 2.288*** 2.151**

Ethnically Underrepresented  -0.933* -0.116 0.783

Ability Uncertainty          -0.352* -0.395** -0.508

50
Table 4.3c: Summary of pathway analysis; science identity prominence
                       (* P < 0.05; ** P < 0.01; *** P < 0.001)

Science Identity Prominence  Fall 2018 Fall 2020                     Fall
                                                                     2022

Gender                       0.118  0.074 0.439

First Generation             0.038 -0.048 0.140

REALISE Department           0.823*** 0.673*** 0.889***

Ethnically Underrepresented  -0.213 -0.127 0.266

Ability Uncertainty          -0.160*** -0.178*** -0.075

        Table 4.3d: Summary of pathway analysis; sense of belonging
                         (* P < 0.05; ** P < 0.01; *** P < 0.001)

Sense of Belonging           Fall   Fall                                   Fall
                             2018   2020                                   2022

Science Identity Salience    -0.032 -0.010 -0.015

Science Identity Prominence  0.287** 0.309*** -0.190

        Table 4.3e: Summary of pathway analysis; institutional commitment
                             (* P < 0.05; ** P < 0.01; *** P < 0.001)

Institutional Commitment     Fall   Fall                             Fall
                             2018   2020                             2022

Sense of Belonging           0.885*** 0.743*** 0.755***

WHY DO SOME OF THESE TRENDS EXIST?

The changes in science identity were likely the result of students being
removed from the campus environment and disconnected from their
peers and academics. We were able to discover the "why" by framing
our content analysis using Nunn's (2021) concepts of social, academic,
and college belonging. Comments in bold relate to social belonging;
comments in purple (underlined) relate to academic belonging;
comments in orange (non-italicized in quotes) relate to campus
belonging.

FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 51
For example (quotes from STEM majors),
         I already have a really hard time making friends and with the
         pandemic it has made it even harder. Sometimes I have no
         motivation to do anything since I do not have anyone to talk to and
         that has affected my school work (Female, White, Freshman, Pell-
         eligible).
         I feel that the pandemic has negatively impacted student
         engagement in a few of my courses. I do feel that there is a
         disconnect between classmates and professors, but I appreciate
         how Radford has tried to hold socially-distanced events and
         has encouraged us to do our best to be a part of the Radford
         community. Sometimes, I do feel isolated from peers and in-
         person learning would be more ideal for my learning experience,
         but I think that online courses make me feel safer than I would if I
         were solely on campus (Female, Biracial, Senior).
         I feel extremely limited socially. I would have loved to have
         a normal first year, and I am anxious for my future at Radford
         University as I do not see the pandemic disappearing in the near
         future (Male, White, Freshman, Pell-eligible).
         I'm new here. I think the professors and admin have done a good
         job. I'm glad to have class in person and to be able to study with
         my classmates while distanced. I don't prefer online learning (Male,
         Black, Junior).
         I am the type of student that learns more by being in class rather
         than online. My grades have been impacted (not in a good way)
         and I haven't learned much this semester (Female, Hispanic, Pell-
         eligible, First-gen, Junior).

52
Interestingly, most of the

participants mentioned a

disruption in academic belonging,

followed by social belonging. Only

four participants felt like all three

were disrupted (Figure 4.2). We

were not surprised by the

pandemic's ability to disrupt

academic and social belonging -

two of the primary reasons why

students attend post-secondary

education. Although post-

secondary education is a time for      Figure 4.2: Venn diagram quantifying the types of
academics, we were surprised           college belonging that our participants
that participants rarely mentioned     mentioned in their responses

campus belonging. The "college

experience" stereotypically includes school pride (e.g., "go Highlanders",

sporting events, intramural sports) and social engagements across

campus (e.g., student clubs and organizations). Radford either did well at

maintaining campus belonging during the pandemic or campus

belonging is not cultivated in Radford students. We were not able to tease

out this aspect of campus belonging from our dataset.

CONCLUSION

Our Student Engagement Survey aimed to capture the complexity of
the student experience in our courses by blending ability, identity, and
belonging into one theoretical framework (Lane, 2016). We were able to
see who was affected most by the pandemic (female students) and how
the relationships between ability uncertainty, science identity, and sense
of belonging declined and cautiously recovered after the pandemic.
Unfortunately, we cannot comment specifically on the success of
REALISE using the survey because the pandemic introduced many
factors unrelated to the aims of REALISE. However, given data on the
positive impacts of implementing inclusive pedagogies, we hope that
faculty who engaged in our program were able to reduce the pandemic's
potential to exacerbate inequity in our STEM courses. Excitingly, the
sense of belonging scale is being used as an assessment tool for

FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 53
Radford's Quality Enhancement Program (QEP) that arose out of the
REALISE program successes.
LESSONS LEARNED

In evaluating our approach to the data collection process and the content
of the student engagement survey instrument, we recognize a few
lessons learned. First, we should have measured the same students
before and after implementation of an initiative to ensure a longitudinal
collection of the data that better measures change in the participants
over time. Second, in a future effort we would deploy the survey across
the college or university to ensure that students taking the survey are
not limited to the faculty who provide incentives for survey completion.
Our deployment approach limited our ability to assess change at college,
department, and class levels. As part of this approach, designing sense
of belonging questions as they relate to the major in addition to the
university (e.g., I feel a sense of belonging to my [insert major].) would
have allowed for a more granular assessment of belonging. Ultimately,
the pandemic created an enormous and disruptive challenge for our
faculty and students in the middle of our grant program. We approached
this unexpected event as an opportunity and modified our original SES
to help gain information about how the pandemic was affecting our
students. This pivot allowed us to learn new and different perspectives
from our students.

   Acknowledgements

   We thank the Howard Hughes Medical Institute's Inclusive Excellence in
   STEM Education Grant (#52008708) for funding our REALISE program.
   Thank you to the faculty who distributed our SES and to the students who
   completed the SES. Thank you also to our anonymous reviewer for their
   comments that allowed us to clarify our work.

54
REFERENCES

Baldwin, B. (1989). A primer in the use and interpretation of structural
   equation models. Measurement and Evaluation in Counseling and
   Development, 22(2), 100-112.

Byrn, B. M. (2016). Structural equation modeling with Amos (3rd ed.).
   Routledge.

Chen, X. (2013). STEM attrition: College students' paths into and out
   of STEM fields. Statistical Analysis Report. NCES 2014-001. National
   Center for Education Statistics. https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/
   ED544470.pdf

Hausmann, L. R., Ye, F., Schofield, J. W., & Woods, R. L. (2009). Sense
   of belonging and persistence in White and African American first-year
   students. Research in Higher Education, 50(7), 649-669.

Huston S., Herman R., Liss S., & Taylor B. (2023). Community, curriculum,
   and CUREs: Transformations in the physics department at Radford
   University. In J. Briganti, J. Sible, & A. M. Brown (Eds.), Fostering
   communities of transformation in STEM higher education: A multi-
   institutional collection of DEI initiatives (pp 103-118). Virginia Tech
   Publishing.

Kennedy, S. A., Balija, A. M., Bibeau, C., Fuhrer, T. J., Huston, L. A., Jackson,
   M. S., Lane, K. T., Lau, J. K., Liss, S., Monceaux, C. J., Stefaniak, K. R., &
   Phelps-Durr, T. (2022). Faculty Professional Development on Inclusive
   Pedagogy Yields Chemistry Curriculum Transformation, Equity
   Awareness, and Community. Journal of Chemical Education, 99(1),
   291-300.

Lane, T. B. (2016). Beyond academic and social integration:
   Understanding the impact of a STEM enrichment program on the
   retention and degree attainment of underrepresented students. CBE
   Life Sciences Education, 15(3), ar39.

Lau, J. K., Paterniti, M., & Stefaniak, K. S. (2019). Crossing floors:
   Developing an interdisciplinary CURE between an environmental

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 55
   toxicology course and an analytical chemistry course. Journal of
   Chemical Education, 96(11), 2432-2440.

Lewis, K. L., & Hodges, S. D. (2015). Expanding the concept of belonging
   in academic domains: Development and validation of the ability
   uncertainty scale. Learning and Individual Differences, 37, 197-202.

Mead, G.H. (1934). Mind, self, and society from the standpoint of a social
   behaviorist. University of Chicago Press.

Mekolichick J. (2023). Institutionally advancing inclusive excellence:
   Leading from the middle in times of transition. In J. Briganit, J. Sible, &
   A. M. Brown (Eds.), Fostering communities of transformation in STEM
   higher education: A multi-institutional collection of DEI initiatives (pp
   219-230). Virginia Tech Publishing.

Merolla, D.M., & Serpe, R.T. (2013). STEM enrichment programs and
   graduate school matriculation: The role of science identity salience.
   Social Psychology Education, 16(4), 575-597.

Merolla, D.M., Serpe, R.T., Stryker, S., & Schultz, P.W. (2012). Structural
   precursors to identity processes: The role of proximate social
   structures. Social Psychology Quarterly, 75(2), 149-172.

Nunn, L. M. (2021). College belonging: How first-year and first-generation
   students navigate campus life. New Jersey: Rutgers University Press.

Piatt, E., Merolla, D., Pringle, E., & Serpe, R.T. (2019). The role of science
   identity salience in graduate school enrollment for first-generation,
   low-income, underrepresented students. The Journal of Negro
   Education, 88(3), 269-280.

Robinson, K. A., Perez, T., Carmel, J. H., & Linnenbrink-Garcia, L. (2019).
   Science identity development trajectories in a gateway college
   chemistry course: Predictors and relationship to achievement and
   STEM pursuit. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 56, 180-192.

Rosseel, Y. (2012). lavaan: An R package for structural equation modeling.
   Journal of Statistical Software, 48(2), 1-36.

56
Steele, C. M. (2010). Whistling Vivaldi: How stereotypes affect us and
   what we can do. W. W. Norton & Company.

Stets, J.E., Brenner, P.S., Burke, P.J., & Serpe, R.T. (2017). The science
   identity and entering a science occupation. Social Science Research,
   64, 1-14.

Stryker, Sheldon. [1980] (2003). Symbolic interactionism: A social
   structural version. Blackburn.

Toven-Lindsey, B., Levis-Fitzgerald, M., Barber, P.H., & Hasson, T. (2015).
   Increasing persistence in undergraduate science majors: A model for
   institutional support of underrepresented students. CBE Life Science
   Education, 14(2): ar12.

van Buuren, S., & Groothuis-Oudshoorn, K. (2011). mice: Multivariate
   imputation by chained equations in R. Journal of Statistical Software,
   45(3), 1-67.

Wojdak, J., Phelps-Durr, T., Gouch, L., Atuobi, T., Deboy, C., Moss, P.,

Sible, J., & Mouchrek, N. (2020). Learning together: Four institutions'

collective approach to building sustained inclusive excellence

programs in STEM. Transforming institutions accelerating systemic

change  in  higher  education.  Pressbooks.

http://openbooks.library.umass.edu/ascnti2020/chapter/wojdak-etal/

This program is supported in part by a grant to Virginia Tech from the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute through the Inclusive Excellence Grant.

FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 57
58
CHAPTER 5.

DEVELOPMENT AND ASSESSMENT OF A FOUR-WEEK
SUMMER RESEARCH EXPERIENCE FOR
UNDERGRADUATES

DEBORAH J. GOOD AND ERICA ECHOLS-MILLER

INTRODUCTION

Implementing and sustaining undergraduate research programs is a top
priority for higher education, as such programs contribute to short- and
long-term student success (Eagan et al., 2013). Many experts suggest
that significant improvement in undergraduate education and graduate
school enrollment would come from requiring undergraduate research
and inquiry-based learning (Eagan et al., 2013). Furthermore, multiple
lines of evidence suggest that summer research programs can
specifically increase the number of underrepresented minority students
entering graduate programs and health professions ((Bruthers & Matyas,
2020; Prince et al., 2023; Quintana, 2021). Most summer research
programs are nine to twelve weeks in duration. However, during the
summer 2022 period, we piloted a unique four-week summer experience
for six undergraduate students from varying science, engineering,
technology, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. The program was called
the Inclusive Excellence (IE) Fellows. Student selection was based on
those individuals who had traditionally been underrepresented in
summer experiences and who had barriers to participating in longer
summer research programs. Pre- and post-survey data showed that IE
Fellows had self-perceived gains in communication skills, creativity,
autonomy, dealing with obstacles, inquiry, and disciplinary knowledge,
although the sample size was too low to have statistical significance.
IE mentors agreed with self-perceived Fellow results for communication,
inquiry, and disciplinary knowledge gains. Analysis of open responses
from a focus group of participants found that use of a weekly elevator
pitch practice allowed students to improve their communication skills,

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 59
and confidence in their research project, which complement the gains
in skills measured in the survey. In summary, even though the four-week
period was short, the IE Fellows program can serve as a model for a short,
inclusive summer research immersion for students and faculty who have
barriers to longer-term summer programming.

   After reading this chapter, individuals will:

          1. Have the tools to implement a 4-week summer research
              immersion.

         2. Understand the advantages and challenges of short-duration
              summer research programs.

BACKGROUND

The opportunity to do undergraduate research in the sciences literally
changed my life (D.J.G). Throughout my academic career, an ongoing
goal has been to provide more undergraduate research opportunities
for students--especially those who may not get the chance to engage in
authentic research experiences, due to various barriers, including those
whose socioeconomic status prevented the extra time for undergraduate
research, minoritized students who may not feel like undergraduate
research programs were for them, or students from first-generation, or
non-traditional backgrounds who did not know how an undergraduate
research experience may benefit them. The Inclusive Excellence (IE)
Fellows program was started with these thoughts in mind, following an
unexpected windfall of money from the Office of Research at Virginia
Tech, which "had to be spent" that year. By combining this windfall
with money from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI) Inclusive
Excellence program sub-fund for the Department of Human Nutrition,
Foods, and Exercise, we were able to come up with a program where five
students could be given a $2,000 scholarship for the spring semester,
and a $1,000 fellowship for the four-week program. Additional money
was set aside to induct each student who presented into the Sigma Xi
Scientific Research Honor Society (www.sigmaxi.org) ($60 each).

60
Finding money to fund these types of programs without a federal or
foundation grant can be easier than one might imagine, but one must
have a budget ready, and a need articulated when money becomes
available. As an example, in past years, I (D.J.G.) found funds for another
10-week summer program that I run (now as an National Institutes of
Health-funded program) through university institutes and department
"slush" funds. Institutes and departments generally have programmatic
money and your pitch for getting this money for your undergraduate
research program should include information on your target student
group, your program milestones, how you will track or report the
outcomes of the program, and whether there are plans to seek federal or
foundation funding in the future. The institute or department then knows
how your program's outcomes will benefit their reporting requirements. A
good approach is to be specific in providing the dollar amounts needed
for your program (including other sources of support), and to not be
afraid to approach any group on campus that might be willing to support
your program from their coffers. Generally, those groups, institutes and
departments have money that they must distribute and need to find
good programs to give to. Programs increasing experiential learning
opportunities for undergraduates have always been readily supported
when the funds available signify a win-win for both sides.

The short-term nature of the IE Fellows was developed for three reasons.
First, the money we had available would not be sufficient to match
that of the longer-term programs (usually $5000 or more per student
over a ten-week program). Second, I (D.J.G.) wondered if a short-term
summer research program would be appealing to students who had not
had an opportunity to participate in a program prior to this, or who had
time limitations, or other barriers to undergraduate research program
participation. There are no other short-term undergraduate research
programs (less than five weeks) that have been described and published
based on searches of the ERIC or PubMed databases. However,
McLaughlin et al. (2018) showed significant impacts for a short-term
research experience embedded in a seventeen-day study abroad
program. Third, my colleague and I who run a ten-week program were
feeling the pain of "mentor-burnout", and wondered if a shorter program
may also benefit mentors. Mentor burnout syndrome is a documented
psychological condition in university professors caused by a combination

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 61
of emotional exhaustion, depersonalization, and low professional
accomplishment (Redondo-Florez et al., 2020). Interestingly, a search of
the ERIC and PubMed databases for information on mentor burnout in
undergraduate research programs did not reveal any published studies
on the issue. However, anecdotally, we have heard from mentors that the
issue is real. As the academic calendar tends to leave summer session
open for many faculty to focus on their own research or personal pursuits,
shorter summer research programs may help provide that time for faculty
mentors.

Diversity, in the context of the IE Fellows program included differences
and variables among participants including, but not limited to race,
ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation, socioeconomic status, age, ability,
religion, culture, and nationality. It also encompassed the unique
characteristics, experiences, and perspectives that IE Fellows brought
to the community of scholars. This program strived to recognize that
every person is different and value those differences as important
contributions to the program (and more broadly the campus community
and society). As shown in Table 5.1, Embracing Diversity was one of
the first topics discussed in the program. To us, "Embracing Diversity"
meant fostering an inclusive and equitable environment where everyone
is respected, valued, and given the opportunity to succeed and
contribute.

When mentoring across cultural boundaries, it is important to recognize
commonalities and differences in the mentor/mentee relationship.
Cross-cultural mentoring strategies in higher education are crucial for
promoting diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) on college and university
campuses. Mentoring relationships between individuals from different
cultural backgrounds can provide opportunities for sharing knowledge
and increasing mutual understanding. Some effective cross-cultural
mentoring strategies include building trust through open and honest
communication, providing training and resources to develop the
mentee's skills and competencies, and setting clear goals and
expectations that support the mentee's personal, professional, or
academic development (Chan, 2010). By implementing each of these
strategies, higher education institutions can promote cross-cultural

62
understanding and help students from diverse backgrounds succeed
academically and professionally.

I M P L E M E N TAT I O N

Recruitment of interested students from Virginia Tech STEM disciplines
occurred using email list-servs and by word of mouth. All undergraduates
in Inclusive Excellence Departments at Virginia Tech (College of Science,
College of Natural Resources and the Environment, and College of
Agriculture and Life Sciences) were invited to apply. Funds to support
this program were obtained from the Office of Research ($2,000 Spring
scholarship per student, $10,000 total), the HHMI grant ($1,000 summer
fellowship per student, $5,000 total), and induction into the Sigma Xi
Research Honor Society ($60 per student, $300 total). While there was
no formal requirement for the program in the spring, the source of
the monies determined when they were distributed. In total, students
directly received a $3000 stipend for their four-week program. There
was a very short turnaround time between announcement of the program
and application deadline (six days) due to the nature of the Spring
scholarship funds which had to be distributed during the Spring
academic semester. Students had to have identified a research mentor in
advance, with the mentor writing a short statement agreeing to host the
student for the program if they were selected. To identify students who
might benefit from the IE Fellows program, emails were sent specifically
to faculty currently participating in the HHMI-funded Inclusive Excellence
program, as well as to the list-serv for the Office of Undergraduate
Research (OUR). Students participating in a department DEI book club
were personally invited to apply by D.J.G. Eight students representing all
three STEM colleges applied, and six students were selected by a team
of two faculty reviewers, including D.J.G., using a ranking rubric (available
on request). D.J.G. excused herself from ranking her own student during
this process.

The program ran from July 5, 2022-July 29, 2022, culminating in the
(OUR) Summer Research Symposium, on July 28th, 2022. Students were
expected to spend eighty hours doing research, participating in weekly
group meetings (two hours per week), completing surveys (pre/post),
participating in one focus group, and presenting a poster at the full
day OUR Summer Research Symposium. The scheduled topics for the

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 63
weekly group meetings are shown in Table 5.1. Each IE Fellow and mentor
pair was asked to complete a survey prior to the start of the program
and within one week of the end of the program. In addition, IE Fellows
participated in a one-hour focus group the one week after completing
the program. The surveys and focus group questions were approved as
"exempt" by the Institutional Review Board.

Table 5.1: Weekly meeting topics. References and videos used to facilitate some of
                                         these topics are included.

Week Number Topics

Week 1  · Introductions

        · Group icebreaker (https://www.thoughtco.com/
            ice-breaker-the-name-game-31381)

        · DEI in science-what does it mean, how do we obtain it? (Levin, 2021;
            Urbina-Blanco et al., 2020)

        · Elevator pitch discussion and practice (LetPub)

Week 2  · Science Communication and Networking (LinkedIn, Twitter,
            ResearchGate discussion)

        · Elevator pitch practice

        · Abstracts and conference registration due

Week 3  · Elevator pitch practice

        · Present draft posters to group (discussion based on (Hess, 2013;
            Toven-Lindsey et al., 2015; Urbina-Blanco et al., 2020))

        · Final poster due for printing

Week 4  · Practice poster presentation

        · Sigma Xi Scientific Research Honor Society Membership Application

        · Office of Undergraduate Research Summer Research Symposium, full
            day

64
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Participant demographics: There was a short application period of ten
days, based on the timing of receiving information about the extra money
and confirmation that we could go ahead with the proposed plan.
Students were also required to identify a mentor and provide a short
letter from this individual stating that if they were accepted to the
program, the mentor would provide a summer research experience for
them in July. Due to the short application time frame, only eight
individuals applied to the program. The program applicants represented
diverse majors, including Nutrition, Biochemistry, Biology, Sustainable
Biomaterials, Animal Science, and Wildlife Sciences. A total of six
students were selected as IE Fellows, based on a scoring rubric that took
into account diversity status (race, ethnicity, gender, sexuality, disability
status, veteran status, economic status, first-generation status), previous
research experience, any self-reported barriers to undergraduate
research (including not being previously selected for research positions,
work during the summer etc.), and reasons for wanting to join the
program. Grade point average or academic honors were not collected
in the application. Table 5.2a outlines the self-reported participant
demographics for the IE Fellows. As shown, the IE Fellows were diverse
in several categories, with each student having at least one demographic
that designated them as part of an underrepresented group in
undergraduate research programs (Cooper et al., 2019; Gin et al., 2022;
Sellami et al., 2021; Singer & Weiler, 2009; Toven-Lindsey et al., 2015).
The relatively high number of underrepresented individuals in this group
were likely due to the "call for applications" document which required
the student to have at least one demographic that put them in a
underrepresented minority (URM) category.

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 65
                         Table 5.2a: Participant demographics

Participant 1  Participant 2 Participant 3 Participant 4 Participant 5     Participant 6
female                                                                     female
junior         female         transgender    female         female         senior
                              male

               freshman       senior         freshman       junior

white          mixed race white              mixed race white              white

not first gen  Not first gen  first gen      parents were   parents were   first gen
                                             first gen      first gen
doing          not doing      not doing                                    doing
research       research       research       not doing      doing          research
                                             research       research

not disabled not disabled disabled           not disabled not disabled not disabled

veteran        not a veteran  not a veteran  not a veteran  veteran        veteran
status-parent                                               status-parent  status-parent

economically   not            not            not            parents were   economically
               economically   economically   economically   economically
disadvantaged disadvantaged disadvantaged disadvantaged disadvantaged disadvantaged

                         Table 5.2b: Mentor demographics

Mentor 1       Mentor 2       Mentor 3       Mentor 4               Mentor 5

mentor to      mentor to      mentor to      mentor to              mentor to
participant 1  participant 2  participant 3  participant 4          participant 5
                                                                    and 6
female         male           male           male
white                                                               female
first gen      Asian          Hispanic       white
not a veteran                                                       white
not            not first gen  first gen      not first gen
economically                                                        first gen
disadvantaged  not a veteran  not a veteran  not a veteran
                                                                    not a veteran
               parents were   not            not
               economically   economically   economically           not
               disadvantaged  disadvantaged  disadvantaged          economically
                                                                    disadvantaged

          Mentor demographics were also surveyed. Mentors (N=5, with
one mentor having two IE Fellows) were white (3), Hispanic (1), and Asian
(1); male (3) and female (2), with three mentors reporting that they were
first generation college students. None of the mentors indicated that they
or their parents were veterans. One mentor self-reported that they came
from an economically disadvantaged background. Sexuality data was not
collected from mentors.

66
Survey Findings: During the application process, participants described
their barriers to conducting research as financial limitations, time, and
access, including, "I do not receive any financial aid for courses during
the summer"; "I use the summer to get extra hours at my job to cover
expenses during the semester"; "Transphobia [in my discipline leads to]
social and mental barriers to my authentic participation in research";
and finally, "There have been times I have nearly had to quit doing my
research in order to get a job, but have continued doing my research
because I am so passionate about it. I hope that through this [program]
I will not have to worry about my financial situation so much and will be
able to focus on my schooling and research more."
Once accepted to the program, IE Fellows were given a pre-survey.
The pre-survey re-asked the demographic questions (Table 5.2a) and
asked them to comment on their expectations for the program. For
the expectations questions (open comments), participants indicated that
they wanted to "become a more proficient communicator"; "learn from
others in the program", "meet new peers"; "understand how research
operates at different levels"; "to gauge my love of work in the lab"; "to
meet with other diverse scholars and discuss research"; "to work in a
collaborative environment"; "to improve my research methods"; and "to
learn how to create a diverse and inclusive environment in research."

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 67
Figure 5.1: Skill acquisition by IE Fellows. IE Fellows and their mentors were asked to complete a
skill acquisition survey prior to starting their summer experience, and within one week of
completing it. Only three IE Fellows and mentors (of five) completed both surveys. Data shown is
derived from a Likert scale analysis (1 - extremely effective and 5 = not effective at all) converted
to percentage. IE Fellows (blue bars) ranked their own skills, while mentors ranked their Fellow's
score in each category, with percent change shown (gray bars).

Each IE Fellow and their mentor then took a validated undergraduate
research assessment survey (Singer & Weiler, 2009). The undergraduate
research assessment instrument listed six groupings of questions
targeted to determine skill levels in communication, creativity, autonomy,
obstacles, inquiry, and disciplinary knowledge. The assessment survey
portion was given both before the program started and after completion
of the four-week program, to both the IE Fellows and their mentors, who
were asked to rank their IE Fellows in each category. The results of the
pre- and post-survey data show that the IE Fellows scored themselves
as having gains in all categories. Generally, mentors' scores for their IE
Fellows were lower in each of the categories (Figure 5.1). Note that lack
of bars in the graph indicates there was no change pre-to-post survey
for that category. Questions from communication skills, inquiry skills,

68
and disciplinary knowledge showed stronger mentor-rated gains than in
creativity or obstacles, although the sample size was too low to show
significance, and some students or mentors did not complete both pre-
and post- surveys.
The pre-survey also asked IE Fellows to comment on their concerns in
the week prior to the program start. Two of the Fellows indicated that
they had no concerns, one was concerned about whether they could get
everything done in just four weeks, another was concerned about what it
meant to be part of a program, and the last was concerned about the fact
that their own project was done in Brazil, and whether they would be able
to connect with their peers.
Focus Group Findings: Dr. Erica Echols at the National Institute for STEM
Evaluation and Research (NISER) conducted a focus group to understand
outcomes of student participation in the IE Fellows program. Five out
of six students participated in the focus group. Preliminary review of
open responses from the focus group found that use of a weekly elevator
pitch practice allowed students to improve their communication skills,
and confidence in their research project. IE Fellows also shared that
even though the four-week period was short, they had increased their
knowledge of laboratory practices, improved their time management, and
learned how to balance their schedule by planning research and meeting
other deadlines.

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 69
    Table 5.3a: Thematic analysis of NISER focus group with IE Fellows: Have you
    gained any disciplinary knowledge you would not have gained in the classroom

                                                        alone?

Theme          Theme Definition

Networking     This theme is characterized by the discussion of different websites, such
and            as ResearchGate and Google Scholar, and the importance of setting up
resources      profiles on these sites to connect with others and access research
               materials.

The value      This theme highlights the differences between classroom and laboratory
of research    experiences and how the latter can provide a deeper understanding of the
lab            scientific process. IE fellows found the research lab experience to be more
experience     informative and practical than classroom learning and appreciated the
               opportunity to apply classroom knowledge in a practical setting.
Transfer of
knowledge      This theme underscores the importance of applying classroom learning to
               real-life situations, as it allows students to see the practical value of what
Fieldwork      they have learned. The research lab experience was particularly valuable in
               this regard, as it helped IE fellows understand why seemingly abstract
               concepts and information are important.

               This theme describes the importance of hands-on experience in
               understanding certain aspects of science, particularly fieldwork. IE fellows
               felt that some things cannot be learned in the classroom and that fieldwork
               experience is necessary to fully appreciate and understand certain aspects
               of scientific research.

Table 5.3b: Thematic analysis of NISER focus group with IE Fellows: Did meeting
      with the other IE fellows improve your program experience? If so, how?

Theme              Theme Definition

Collaborative      The theme of collaborative learning emphasizes the importance of
Learning           learning with and from others in a group setting. Students emphasized
                   how meeting with other IE fellows from different disciplines allowed
                   for broader learning and research opportunities. This collaborative
                   learning environment provided opportunities for practicing and honing
                   research skills, which were enriched through the exchange of ideas
                   and feedback.

Sharing and        The theme of sharing and communication highlights the importance
Communication      of open and effective communication in learning and research. IE
                   fellows emphasized the importance of being able to share research
                   experiences and struggles with others who have similar experiences,
                   as it fosters a sense of community and support.

Interdisciplinary  The theme of interdisciplinary learning highlights the value of learning
Learning           from individuals with diverse backgrounds and interests. IE fellows
                   shared how the interdisciplinary nature of the other students in the
                   program allowed for learning across different scientific fields, which
                   offered fresh perspectives and unique insights.

Personal           The theme of personal growth emphasizes how collaborative learning
Growth             and interdisciplinary learning environments can lead to personal
                   growth and development. IE fellows noted how being part of the
                   program allowed for growth in terms of research skills, confidence,
                   and social skills.

70
Table 5.3c: Thematic analysis of NISER focus group with IE Fellows: How has your
                           mentor impacted your summer experience?

Theme        Theme Definition

Conference   IE fellows received training and preparation for conference presentations.
Preparation  Mentors held presentation rehearsals, and one student was able to attend
             a university-funded research trip.

Learning     IE fellows gained understanding of how research funding is awarded in
about the    academia, as well as insight into the research process from a financial
financial    perspective.
aspect of
academia     IE fellows received mentorship and guidance from experienced
             researchers and were exposed to different resources available in a lab
Mentorship   setting.
and
learning
about lab
resources

Thematic analysis (Strauss & Corbin, 1990) was also conducted on the
focus group responses for three of the focus group questions (Tables
5.3a, 5.3b, and 5.3c). One theme that IE Fellows highlighted was the
importance of practical experience and networking in scientific research,
as well as the value of applying classroom learning to real-life situations.
This theme also underscores the limitations of classroom learning and
the importance of hands-on experience in fully understanding certain
aspects of science. Second, IE Fellows highlighted the value of
collaborative learning and interdisciplinary learning in scientific
research. Their responses also emphasized the importance of open and
effective communication and the role of such communication in fostering
a sense of community and support. These responses reinforce how
learning environments such as the IE Fellows program can lead to
personal growth and development. Third, research mentors impacted the
IE Fellows' research experience through exposure to available researcher
resources and providing opportunities to present their research at a
conference.

Mentor Perspectives: In the pre-survey, mentors were asked to comment
on their expectations for the program, their concerns about the program,
and the length of the program in the pre- and post-surveys. In the pre-
survey, the mentors' expectations for the program included providing
training on presenting research, learning more about the research
process, and having their IE Fellow interact with others from diverse

FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 71
backgrounds. Following the program, mentors commented that the
program was organized, and that the presentations and meetings
seemed beneficial to the IE Fellows. One mentor specifically commented
that the group meetings helped get their student "out of her shell."
Mentors also reported that the students developed confidence and
learned about research possibilities within their field. For concerns about
the program prior to the start, only one mentor indicated that they were
concerned that they would not be able to connect with their student in
such a short period of time. Following the program, the mentor wrote "I
mentored a transgender woman student that has suffered discrimination
and has been unable to participate in research projects in the past due
to their identity and economic limitations. The IE Fellowship program
was the only opportunity available to allow this student access to this
learning opportunity in my research group." The post-survey comments
from mentors indicated concern about the short length of time for the
program, and mentors felt that students needed to have a research
project in place, or they would not be able to have a poster presentation
in that short period of time. A small amount of progress was made on
research projects, but all students had poster presentations with new
data from the summer. All mentors indicated that they would be willing
to host their IE Fellow in the fall, and the three students who were still
enrolled as undergraduates continued with these mentors in the Fall. This
program did not provide direct mentor or laboratory resources.

LESSONS LEARNED

Several lessons learned during this summer research program can be
used by others who may want to try the shorter duration summer
program.

    1. Surveys and focus groups helped to define what worked and
         what could be improved in the program, with the survey results
         generally supporting the result found using the student focus
         groups. Interestingly, the focus group responses indicated
         students wanted more time in group meetings during the summer
         (a single one-hour meeting was held per week), and some planned
         social group outings. Increasing group interactions, especially
         outside of the training, is one way to build relationships with
         the program director and the other fellows, which could increase

72
       group cohesion (Harden et al., 2014).
   2. Shirts bearing the Inclusive Excellence logo (Figure 5.2) were

       provided to each participant at the end of the semester. The use
       of a group name and associated logo is an effective strategy to
       increase group cohesion and distinctiveness (Estabrooks et al.,
       2012). It is recommended that programs, no matter their duration,
       have a unique logo that can be put on shirts or other program
       material. The short timeframe for the IE Fellows program meant
       that students did not receive their shirt during the program. Thus,
       it was not possible to determine if the logo and group name
       indeed fostered group cohesion.

         Figure 5.2: Inclusive Excellence Fellows and shirt logo A. Four of the six members gathered
         in Fall 2022 wearing their IE shirts with program director, Deborah Good (center). Faces
         are partially blocked for the IE Fellows to protect their identity B. A picture of the IE
         Fellows logo

  3. This study provided evidence that shorter, more focused summer
       research programs may benefit diverse students by providing a
       short-term experience that still allows the student to do other
       things (classes, work, travel) during the summer. For faculty
       directing a shorter-term program, there are lower cost in both
       faculty time, and money to run program. Student fellowship can
       be less expensive for shorter duration programs., For example,
       a typical 10-week program pays a fellowship of $5250. A
       comparable four-week program would cost $2100 per student.
       Our program paid slightly more ($2000 scholarship and $1000

FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 73
         summer fellowship) based on the source of our funds.

    4. There were concerns from mentors that four weeks was not
         enough time to have data for a poster presentation, and indeed,
         three of the six students who joined the IE Fellows were already
         doing undergraduate research in the previous semester. Thus
         only two of the five students (40%) were new undergraduate
         researchers. The shorter programs may require that students
         spend the semester prior to the program in a research group
         (perhaps with a scholarship or fellowship in the Spring semester,
         paying for their research time). Alternatively, they could be
         selected in January, and then begin conversations with the mentor
         to define the project prior to the start in the summer. One of the
         students who was not yet doing undergraduate research leveraged
         the program to gain admittance to their research group. This was
         one of the best outcomes from the program as the student then
         continued with the research group in the following Fall.

    5. We suggest the following timeline for faculty who are considering
         implementing a shorter summer program:

             1. Fall applications. This would allow students who did not
                  want to directly approach a faculty mentor to be "matched"
                  with faculty already willing to participate in the program.

             2. A one-credit spring semester course (one to three hour
                  per week) in undergraduate research. This course could
                  include interaction with the mentor and other members
                  of the research team during their lab meetings, as well
                  preparation for the short-term project that could be
                  completed during the summer program. Students might
                  read journal articles and discuss these with their mentors,
                  or even participate in some hands-on training in the Spring
                  semester in advance of the summer.

             3. Short summer program culminating with presentation
                  (poster or oral presentation). For the IE Fellows, the
                  programming was scheduled to culminate on the week
                  where the Office of Undergraduate Research hosted their
                  Summer Research Symposium. All IE Fellows presented
                  their posters at the symposium.

74
             4. One follow-up group meeting in the following semester.
                  This could be a group activity or a lunch and would continue
                  to foster group cohesiveness.

In summary, the short-term summer research program for six students
was a success. All students who did not graduate were still working with
their research groups the following semester. Ideas for improving the
program, such as starting with a spring course, and including at least one
group outing are provided for faculty interested in implementing a short-
term undergraduate research experience in their units.
REFLECTIVE QUESTIONS

Based on our experience, a few reflective questions were designed to
help as you consider building a short-term summer research program
with cross-cultural mentoring and inclusive excellence in mind.

   Developing a 4-week summer research experience:

          · How would students in my department benefit from a 4-week
              summer research experience? Survey students in your courses to
              see if there is interest in summer research and what barriers exist
              that may hinder their participation. Maybe they are taking summer
              courses or need to work during the summer. A one-month summer
              commitment to research may be more conducive to many students'
              schedules and allow exposure and growth.

          · What do I, as a faculty mentor, value more in regard to student
              outcomes: quantity of research data obtained, or the experience
              provided to the student?

          · Where can I leverage money to support a short-term summer
              research program?

          · Who are your target student populations for this program?

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 75
   Cross-cultural mentoring:

          · List the top three things you value most in your professional/
              academic environment.

          · Ask your mentee to also list the top three things they value most in
              their professional/academic environment.

          · Discuss your values with your mentee and share why these values
              are in your top three.

          · Discuss any common or differing values and steps that can be taken
              to improve in these areas.

          · Resources
                       Chan, A. (2010). Inspire, empower, connect: reaching
                         across cultural differences to make a real difference.
                         Lanham, MA, Rowan & Littlefield Education. (Chan, 2010)
                       Mathews, P. (2003). Academic mentoring: enhancing the
                         use of scarce resources. Educational Management &
                         Administration. 31(3), 313-333. (Mathews, 2003)

   Inclusive excellence:

          · What steps have I taken as a research mentor to ensure that diverse
              student populations feel valued and included in the research
              community?

          · How can I help (or continue to help) these students build networks
              and connections that will support their future academic and
              professional success?

          · Resources
                       Karten, T. J. (2015). Inclusion strategies that work!:
                         Research-based methods for the classroom. Corwin Press.
                         (Karten, 2015)

76
REFERENCES

Bruthers, C. B., & Matyas, M. L. (2020). Undergraduates from
   underrepresented groups gain research skills and career aspirations
   through summer research fellowship. Advances in Physiology
   Education, 44(4), 525-539. https://doi.org/10.1152/advan.00014.2020

Chan, A. (2010). Inspire, empower, connect: reaching across cultural
   differences to make a real difference. R&L Education.

Cooper, K. M., Gin, L. E., Akeeh, B., Clark, C. E., Hunter, J. S., Roderick, T.
   B., Elliott, D. B., Gutierrez, L. A., Mello, R. M., Pfeiffer, L. D., Scott, R. A.,
   Arellano, D., Ramirez, D., Valdez, E. M., Vargas, C., Velarde, K., Zheng,
   Y., & Brownell, S. E. (2019). Factors that predict life sciences student
   persistence in undergraduate research experiences. PLoS One, 14(8),
   e0220186. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0220186

Eagan Jr, M. K., Hurtado, S., Chang, M. J., Garcia, G. A., Herrera, F. A., &
   Garibay, J. C. (2013). Making a difference in science education: The
   impact of undergraduate research programs. American Educational
   Research Journal, 50(4), 683-713. https://doi.org/10.3102/
   0002831213482038

Estabrooks, P. A., Harden, S. M., & Burke, S. M. (2012). Group dynamics
   in physical activity promotion: What works? Social and Personality
   Psychology Compass, 6(1), 18-40. https://doi.org/10.1111/
   j.1751-9004.2011.00409.x

Gin, L. E., Pais, D., Cooper, K. M., & Brownell, S. E. (2022). Students
   with disabilities in life science undergraduate research experiences:
   Challenges and opportunities. CBE--Life Sciences Education, 21(2),
   ar32. https://doi.org/10.1187/cbe.21-07-0196

Harden, S. M., Estabrooks, P. A., Mama, S. K., & Lee, R. E. (2014).
   Longitudinal analysis of minority women's perceptions of cohesion:
   The role of cooperation, communication, and competition.
   International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity,
   11(1), 57. https://doi.org/10.1186/1479-5868-11-57

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 77
Hess, G. R. (2013). Giving an effective poster presentation [Video].
   Youtube. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vMSaFUrk-FA

Karten, T. J. (2015). Inclusion strategies that work!: Research-based
   methods for the classroom. Corwin Press.

Going Up! Elevator Pitches for Scientists. LetPub.
   https://www.letpub.com/
   author_education_Going_Up#:~:text=An%20elevator%20pitch%20or
   %20speech,ride%20an%20elevator%20between%20floors.

Levin, A. G. (2021). How to begin building a culture of diversity, equity,
   and inclusion in your research group. AAAS. https://www.science.org/
   content/article/how-begin-building-culture-diversity-equity-and-
   inclusion-your-research-group

Mathews, P. (2003). Academic mentoring: Enhancing the use of scarce
   resources. Educational Management & Administration., 31(3), 313-333.

McLaughlin, J., Patel, M., Johnson, D. K., & de la Rosa, C., L. (2018). The
   impact of a short-term study abroad program that offers a course-
   based undergraduate research experience and conservation activities.
   Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad, 30(3),
   100-118.

Prince, L. Y., Williams, T. B., Allen, A. R., McGehee, R. E., Jr., & Thomas,
   B. R. (2023). Outcomes of the UAMS summer undergraduate research
   program to increase diversity in research and health professions.
   Advances in Physiology Education, 47(1), 20-25. https://doi.org/
   10.1152/advan.00201.2022

Quintana, D. S. (2021). Replication studies for undergraduate theses
   to improve science and education. Nature Human Behaviour, 5(9),
   1117-1118. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-021-01192-8

Redondo-Florez, L., Tornero-Aguilera, J. F., Ramos-Campo, D. J., &
   Clemente-Suarez, V. J. (2020). Gender differences in stress- and
   burnout-related factors of university professors. BioMed Research
   International, 2020, 6687358. https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/6687358

78
Sellami, N., Toven-Lindsey, B., Levis-Fitzgerald, M., Barber, P. H., &
   Hasson, T. (2021). A unique and scalable model for increasing research
   engagement, STEM persistence, and entry into doctoral programs.
   CBE--Life Sciences Education, 20(1), ar11. https://doi.org/10.1187/
   cbe.20-09-0224

Singer, J., & Weiler, D. (2009). A longitudinal student outcomes
   evaluation of the Buffalo State College summer undergraduate
   research program. CUR Focus, 29(3), 20-25.

Toven-Lindsey, B., Levis-Fitzgerald, M., Barber, P. H., & Hasson, T. (2015).

Increasing persistence in undergraduate science majors: A model for

institutional support of underrepresented students. CBE--Life

Sciences  Education, 14(2),  ar12.  https://doi.org/10.1187/

cbe.14-05-0082

Urbina-Blanco, C. A., Jilani, S. Z., & Speight, I. R. (2020, August 17).
   Science is everybody's party: 6 ways to support diversity and inclusion
   in STEM. World Economic Forum. Retrieved April 7, 2023, from
   https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2020/08/science-stem-support-
   inclusion-diversity-equality/

This program is supported in part by a grant to Virginia Tech from the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute through the Inclusive Excellence Grant.

FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 79
80
CHAPTER 6.

CREATING IMPACTFUL MOMENTS

Using Peer Role Models to Build Community and Sense of Belonging in STEM
AMANDA C. RAIMER; KRISTINA STEFANIAK; KAITLYN EDWARDS;
JYNNA HARRELL; TRERESE ROBERTS; AND SANDRA LISS

Kaitlyn Edwards, Jynna Harrell, and Trerese Roberts acted as peer role
model authors who wrote their reflections on the program, seen in
quotes, and assisted with reading the chapter for content.

ABSTRACT
A unique aspect of Radford University's Howard Hughes Medical
Institute Inclusive Excellence (HHMI IE) grant involved training peer
role models (PRMs) to engage early-career college students in biology,
chemistry, and physics majors beyond the classroom. The PRM program
has entered its sixth year and undergone many iterations along the way.
The successes and challenges encountered have resulted in a framework
that other institutions can use in creating their own peer role model
program. In this chapter, we describe the importance of student voice
in the program's success and the various ways we've built community
extending beyond the three original departments to encompass all of
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). Additionally,
we provide a framework for the successful responsibilities of both the
faculty mentors and the students in organizational meetings,
implementation of events, and professional development. Many
successful outcomes have been accomplished through PRMs, and we
hope to see similar models in other institutions.

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 81
INTRODUCTION: REALISE, SENSE OF BELONGING, AND
PEER MENTORING

Radford University's HHMI REALISE (REALising Inclusive Science
Excellence) grant aimed to increase student success and sense of
belonging among biology, chemistry, and physics majors. Radford
University is a mid-sized public university in southwestern Virginia
focused primarily on undergraduates with increasing enrollment of
groups historically excluded from STEM. Over the five years leading up
to the grant (2013-2017), Radford University saw a 21.5% increase in
Pell-eligible students, 22.4% increase in first-generations students, and
53.9% increase in underrepresented minority students (URMs). Within
the three participating departments during the grant period (2018-2022),
38.8% of the students were Pell-eligible students, 35.5% were first-
generation students, and 34% were URMs. Additionally, similar to other
institutions, Radford experiences lower first- to second-year retention
rates in STEM majors. Many factors contribute to lower retention rates
and this grant specifically focused on supporting students' sense of
self, exploring the social constructs of ability uncertainty, self-efficacy,
science identity, and sense of belonging.

Sense of belonging can be conceptualized as including three sub-
categories: academic belonging, social belonging, and campus belonging
(Nunn, 2021). Academic belonging is a student's feeling of belonging
within their classes, study groups, and other academic clubs/
organizations. Social belonging is a student's feeling of connectedness
and inclusion with peers outside of academics. Campus belonging is
the student's connectedness to their institutional community and
environment as a whole. REALISE's assessment of STEM students' sense
of belonging during the COVID-19 pandemic showed that students most
often mentioned impacts to their academic and social belonging,
showing the importance students placed on these aspects of their
college experience (Lau et al., 2023). While multiple aspects of REALISE
focus on increasing academic belonging through faculty and curriculum
development, the REALISE Leadership Team designed a unique aspect
of our grant that involved training peer role models (PRMs), or REALISE
Students, to engage early-career college students in our College of
Science and Technology (see the chapter "Community, Curriculum, and

82
CUREs" in this book; Kennedy et al., 2022). Peer mentoring has been
shown to improve sense of belonging and academic success within
STEM communities, and our PRM program was designed intentionally
to augment both academic and social belonging (Clements et al., 2022;
Zaniewski & Reinholz, 2016).

The leadership team recognized the importance of a peer-mentor
component in order to keep student perspective as a clear voice in
the evolution and direction of REALISE. Additionally, there are stark
differences between our faculty and student demographics, so the PRMs
brought a much-needed diverse set of backgrounds and experiences
to the grant. Beyond the student perspective, the PRMs represented
a spectrum of student voices as first-generation students, transfer
students, student-athletes, commuters, and other identities as well as
a variety of genders and races/ethnicities. Unlike most other PRMs or
mentors who are associated with a specific course or major, our PRMs
performed cross-departmental service that promoted community and
sense of belonging for all of our STEM majors through programming
primarily outside of the classroom. The development and implementation
of each initiative was predominantly student-driven, and each semester's
work was adapted to that specific group's goals for the program. The
PRMs and their faculty mentors truly operated as a team to work through
challenges and achieve their goals.

WHY DOES IT MATTER? GOALS OF THE REALISE PRMS

The PRM component was integral in creating an inclusive environment
within the biology, chemistry, and physics majors. The purpose of our
PRM program was twofold. First, they provided an avenue for the
leadership team to hear about the student experience within the college.
If you are trying to improve the student experience, then the students
are the most important perspective. From these conversations, different
programmatic REALISE initiatives were created. Their second role was
larger; they were on the front line working to (1) build science identity,
(2) increase science community, and (3) amplify student voice within the
college, all done through the lens of diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI).

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 83
The main goal of the REALISE grant was to increase STEM students'
success through cultivating science identity and sense of belonging, both
of which are critical drivers to student success and persistence in STEM
(Estrada et al., 2011; Lane, 2016; Stets et al., 2017). One example of PRM-
developed programming that focused on both of these drivers is the
classroom visits, which we will discuss in detail later. From conversations
between PRMs, mentors, and STEM students, we heard about some
student barriers to success, like having a difficult time navigating the
collegiate system, facing food insecurity, time management struggles
with school plus work, and other similar themes. The classroom visits
and events gave the PRMs time to engage with students; conversations
were tailored around known barriers to our students. Another important
outcome of the PRM program and their events was to make diversity in
science more visible. Below is a statement from a STEM student turned
PRM that highlights how the events hosted by the PRMs helped her build
community in addition to increasing her science identity.

   Student PRM Statement on Community and Science Identity

   "When I graduated with my Bachelor's degree in 2018, I realized that I
   wanted to become a dentist. I decided to enroll into Radford University as
   a Biomedical Sciences major to complete my prerequisites that I needed to
   apply. My first semester was one of my hardest because my workload was
   almost entirely intense science classes. Creating relationships with my peers
   was the last thing on my mind because I was consistently comparing myself
   to others.

   Partway through the semester I was walking down the hall our science
   building and noticed an eye- catching flier about an imposter syndrome
   seminar. I decided to go to the event because I wondered if maybe I
   was going through imposter syndrome myself. The event was hosted and
   managed by the REALISE Students, some of who I recognized from my
   classes. After this event I was able to meet the president of the Pre-Dental
   Club who was also a REALISE Student. She would invite me to other events
   that the program had which allowed me feel more comfortable around a
   variety of STEM majors.

84
   I decided to go to more REALISE events because I enjoyed the topics that
   they covered. One of my favorite events was the diverse panel of scientists
   who came to talk to us about their experience of being a minority in the
   STEM field. I believe that events like that are what truly made me want to
   become even more active in the program. I went to some of their events
   to learn even more about the program and the student mentors in STEM
   just like me. One day I thought to myself that I would like to be a REALISE
   Student Mentor because I wanted to be a part of the mission of helping
   other students like myself who may have been having a hard time going
   through semester with such hard classes. I was persistent when it came to
   inquiring about and joining the program because I knew that I could offer
   even more support of people who look just like me."

   -Trerese Roberts (Biomedical Sciences major)

The multi-faceted impacts of the PRM program are seen in experiences
like Trerese's. The importance of the PRMs was highlighted during the
COVID-19 pandemic when our students saw an abrupt decline in
interactions with peers and faculty which resulted in a lost sense of
community. Our PRMs faced the challenge of a greater need for sense of
belonging and community while trying to completely change the format
of their programming and keep it effective. The PRMs' student
perspective, creativity, and resilience led to completely new or modified
events that remained aligned with their goals. For example, the PRMs
really leaned into using social media and our learning management
system to share resources and connect with first-year students. These
types of initiatives could still be used for PRMs that want impactful
experiences that require less time and funding.

HOW DOES IT WORK? IMPLEMENTING A
CROSS-DEPARTMENTAL , STUDENT-DRIVEN PRM
PROGRAM

The PRM program is now in its sixth year at Radford University and during
that time we've implemented and revised its structure. The following
framework promotes a high level of voice and involvement from the
PRMs which is key to reaching students across the college. It also

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 85
acknowledges the importance of guidance and support from faculty
mentors. The model we found to be most successful is a collaborative
one based on three pillars: (1) weekly communication through meetings;
(2) college wide initiatives to build community and sense of belonging;
and (3) professional development focused on DEI and science identity
for the PRMs. Figure 6.1 outlines the roles of the faculty mentors and the
PRMs in each pillar.

   Figure 6.1: The three main pillars of the PRM program and the
   roles of the faculty mentors and students.

      Meetings

      Faculty: Weekly mentor meetings to set goals for the week
      Students: Weekly meetings with planning, advertising, and assessment sub-
      groups

      Initiatives

      Faculty: Purchasing and organizing off-campus visitors
      Students: Developing event ideas, planning, advertising, running the event, and
      assessment

      Training

      Faculty: Identify areas of training and organize
      Students: Participate and reflect

86
At the start of each semester, the PRMs met and decided on their
goals for the upcoming semester. The mentors started the discussion
by summarizing the overall programmatic goals of the REALISE program
before turning it over to the PRMs. They were given time to consider their
priorities individually, before coming back together to consolidate them
into three to five themes. Below is a sample list of the main objectives of
the PRMs for a semester.

     · Creating Community among STEM students

     · Broadening student participation in events

     · Involving STEM faculty

     · Increasing avenues for advertising events and resources

     · Recruiting a larger, more diverse team of PRMs

WEEKLY MEETINGS

At the end of every semester, we as faculty mentors surveyed the PRMs
and asked about their personal successes and challenges in addition to
the program's successes and challenges. The theme that always showed
up as a challenge was "communication". We all know college students are
busy, especially those who self-selected to be part of our PRM program.
The best way we've found to encourage communication is through a
group chat containing both faculty mentors and PRMs as well as weekly
meetings. The group chat was helpful in keeping the team updated
between meetings on what needs to be done and where to find resources.
There was nothing innovative about the chat other than having students
acknowledge they have read the messages by "liking" them. This helped
accountability and let students feel seen if they asked a question or
shared progress on a project.

The weekly meetings were critical to the success of the PRM program.
Although this was a student-run program, the faculty members played
a pivotal role in managing the logistics of the initiatives and keeping
the overall goal of creating community and belonging within the STEM
majors at the forefront of all initiatives. To accomplish this there was a
separate weekly meeting just for the faculty mentors. During the mentor
meeting, we discussed recent events and whether we believed they met

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 87
the overall goals set by the PRMs for the semester. We also created
an agenda for the upcoming student meeting. This typically included
time for reflections on current and past initiatives, some action items
for upcoming ones, and a short training or professional development
exercise. Along with setting the structure and foundation for the PRM
meetings, this additional meeting among the faculty mentors gave us a
weekly time to troubleshoot, brainstorm, and confirm a plan for the week
for which we were all united.

The PRM meetings themselves opened with the PRMs reflecting on the
effectiveness of previous events and initiatives, specifically discussing
the assessment measures they designed. It was useful to start the
meeting with these reflections because it reminded us of the goals of
the program and set the tone for the planning and training that occurred
later in the meeting. Afterwards, we guided them through a professional
development activity (details below) and then transitioned to working
time for the coming events and initiatives.

We have found that the best way to assign tasks and have them
completed is to break into sub-teams. Each team took ownership of
their specific tasks and assigned a point person to contact. The teams
were composed of three to six students; making sure it was a mix of
experienced and first-time PRMs was ideal. We found that having
advertising, planning, and assessment sub-teams was an effective
structure to divide the workload. We allowed time (fifteen to thirty
minutes) during each weekly meeting during which the sub-teams
collaborated to decide on their to-do list for the week and assign
ownership of each task. Again, the ideas, implementation, and success
of the events were in the students' hands. The mentors were there
for support, purchasing, and logistics. Below is a long-time PRM who
discusses the role of the meetings; you will hear her voice throughout this
Implementation section.

88
   Student PRM Statement on the Role of Meetings

   "I joined REALISE in January 2022, after learning about REALISE from
   my microbiology professor who recommended that I apply for the peer
   role model position, and I am currently in my third semester in REALISE.
   Throughout my REALISE career, I have been a part of the advertising and
   planning teams. During weekly meetings, REALISE students plan academic-
   related and fun stress-buster events to host throughout the semester.
   Weekly meetings consist of planning events, emailing collaborators about
   the events, creating sign-up sheets, preparing supply lists, and discussing
   the overall goals of the events. Throughout the planning process of each
   event, we always reflect back on our semester goals. Is this event meeting
   the semester goals? After the event, during our weekly meeting, we reflect
   on the outcomes of the event. Did the event meet the semester goals? If so,
   how do we expect that outcome in other events? If not, how do we improve
   for the future? These are all important discussions that take place during
   meetings, the behind-the-scenes of REALISE. REALISE is much more than
   events and weekly meetings though, REALISE aims to encourage all STEM
   students to find their sense of belonging in science, doing so by hosting
   events and maintaining a presence in the college. I celebrate being a part
   of REALISE because it is a program that actively incorporates DEI into the
   STEM community at Radford University."

   - Jynna Harrell (Biology major)

COLLEGE-WIDE INITIATIVES

As discussed earlier, the PRM program had three main goals: (1) build
STEM identity, (2) increase STEM community, and (3) amplify student
voice. The avenues to accomplish these varied from one-time large
events to informative flyers posted around the science building.
Throughout the program, we worked to strike a balance between creating
impacts and not overburdening the PRMs. Each semester there were two
to four one-time events and weekly Fresh Fruit Fridays. Fresh Fruit Friday
began early in the program and was able to accomplish all three of the
program's goals. We set up a table offering coffee, fruit, and granola bars
staffed by PRMs and faculty who would actively engage students on their
way to and from class in our science building every Friday morning. Each

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 89
week there was also a question or prompt to help the PRMs engage with
their peers. We used this event to help promote other PRM, college, and
university programming that aligned with the REALISE goals.

The other events and initiatives were more targeted toward one of the
main goals. To encourage growth of students' STEM identity, we held
science identity exploration events, developed a diversity in STEM
panelist/roundtable series, and visited first- and second-year STEM
classes. To create community within the college, we organized STEM
club fairs, stressbuster events, Fresh Fruit Fridays, and created support
and resource fliers for the science building. Last, we collected student
thoughts through surveys and individual event assessments, which we
later compiled to disseminate to faculty within the college. An initiative
that takes place every semester was classroom visits, where the PRM
reached out and offered their services to instructors. Jynna will explain
further.

   Student PRM Statement on Classroom Visits

   "One way REALISE achieves its goal of promoting a sense of belonging in
   STEM students is through classroom visits. REALISE students reach out to
   science professors who teach first and second-year classes, inviting them
   to host the REALISE students in their classrooms. Classroom visits are
   chances for REALISE students to have one-on-one conversations with new
   and transfer students in STEM, as well as an opportunity for students to be
   heard. REALISE students come prepared to discuss academic and personal
   topics about their own experiences being student scientists.

   My most memorable classroom visits were for two back-to-back visits for
   biology major introductory seminar classes. The first classroom visit I
   completed that day was with another REALISE student. As we began the
   conversation with the classroom, I became aware that my fellow REALISE
   student and I had complementing college experiences. I was a local
   commuter student who transferred from community college, she was a
   student-athlete from across the country. I was in STEM to pursue healthcare;
   she was in STEM to pursue pre-veterinary studies. I had no previous
   knowledge of careers in STEM before entering college, she came from a
   background of scientists. Talking about our different experiences in front of

90
   a class of new STEM students was encouraging to me. It was clear to the
   students in the classroom that although we were different, anyone could be
   a scientist. Although our stories may be different from the students' own
   stories, there was an important place for them in STEM.

   After finishing these two classroom visits, I became aware that the
   experience made me develop a strong sense of science identity. I came to
   the classroom visits to help other students build their sense of belonging,
   but I walked away gaining just as much from the experience as I hoped the
   students in the classroom received. I realized that it was up to REALISE
   to help students build their science identity through experiences like these.
   Through this experience, REALISE taught me how to make spaces for
   everyone in STEM."

   - Jynna Harrell (Biology major)

TRAININGS

The ability to navigate conversations about DEI can be challenging. It
would be unfair to task our PRMs with the goal of fostering an inclusive
environment without training on what that means. This looked different
every semester, but the main professional development for the PRMs
included external speakers that led an Inclusive Spaces Workshop as
well as a Mental Health First Aid training, an internal university-run
certification, and short training modules within our meetings led by
the faculty mentors. Some examples of training modules during the
weekly meetings focused on role-playing scenarios to help overcome
student barriers, creating an identity chart, and discussion on student
demographics at Radford University and within the College of Science
and Technology. Additionally, because the PRMs interacted directly with
students in the college, it was important they knew the goals of the
REALISE program and how to communicate this with their peers. To
solidify this, every semester we spent a meeting giving the PRMs time
to develop an elevator pitch describing the PRMs and REALISE program.
Here a PRM described how valuable the trainings were, particularly
regarding DEI:

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 91
   Student PRM Statement on the Value of the Training

   "Prior to being a REALISE Student, I was not as well-versed in DEI. Through
   REALISE, I was able to attend trainings that taught me how to recognize an
   issue and how to respond to that issue. In a meeting, we practiced scenarios
   of what we would do if we encountered certain situations. This not only
   opened my eyes to see that these scenarios can truly happen, but it helped
   me dive deeper into the resources here at Radford University and know the
   faculty that I can trust and reach out to if any of the scenarios happens."
   - Kaitlyn Edwards (Biology major)

WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED? FACULTY AND STUDENT
REFLECTIONS ON PRM SUCCESSES, CHALLENGES, AND
EVOLUTION
Throughout the five years of the REALISE program and the changing
group of PRMs we have learned several lessons.
INITIATIVE SUCCESS
As faculty mentors, we have found that allowing for a significant part of
our weekly meetings to be working meetings contributed to the success
of the event. The students who served as PRMs often had many other
commitments (classwork, athletics, research, etc.) that take up a
significant amount of their time and energy. Using our already-scheduled
meeting times to complete critical tasks ensured that the tasks (1) got
done and (2) included input from other PRMs and the faculty mentors.

92
Planning: Giving the students enough time to plan events was key to
their success. Even small events had many moving pieces.

     · Who: Who is planning the event? Who is advertising the event?
         Who is staffing the event? Who is assessing the effectiveness/
         impact of the event? Who do we need to collaborate with/contact
         to help with the event? Who is our audience for the event?

     · What: What activities will we offer? What supplies/facilities/
         resources do we need?

     · When: When (time/day) will the event be held? Do we have PRMs
         available to staff the event? Are there any other initiatives, events,
         or activities that may conflict with our times, dates, spaces and/or
         target audience?

     · Where: Where will the event take place? How much space do we
         need? What location(s) do we need to reserve? Is it in-person,
         online, or hybrid?

     · Why: What is the overall purpose of the event? What are the
         measurable goals? What tools will we use to assess if these goals
         have been met?

     · How: How will we advertise the event? How will we get our target
         audience to attend and engage with the initiative? How will we
         infuse community-building and sense of belonging into our
         initiative?

Kaitlyn talks more about the challenges and lessons she learned about
event planning and delivery:

   Student PRM Statement on the Challenges and Lessons
   Learned About Event Planning and Delivery

   "During my time in the REALISE student program, I learned that
   communication and teamwork are VERY important in everything you do.
   With all of the students' schedules conflicting, we had to separate the group
   into two meeting times. In order to keep tasks and events organized, we all
   had to communicate and work together. This was done in a variety of ways

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 93
   including Excel sheets for sign-ups and tasks, GroupMe, and meeting notes.
   Keeping information neat and in the right spot is key in order for everyone
   to be informed.

   On another note, I found that hosting events was a larger challenge than
   expected. We all have different schedules and our available times are
   difficult to line up. Also, an event may not always have the end result that
   was hoped for. Just because an event didn't meet our goals doesn't mean
   it holds no value. We use outcomes like this to reflect and see what can
   be improved for the next event. Finding the good in something that didn't
   meet the expectations can be challenging because when time is used to
   plan and advertise an event and no one comes, it can be discouraging. But,
   as a REALISE student, I didn't let it drag me down. I jumped onto the next
   event and used the prior outcomes to better the upcoming event."

   - Kaitlyn Edwards (Biology major)

Advertising: Getting our target audience to the event began with
advertisements. We have found that a consistent, extended advertising
schedule that spans multiple forms of communication helps us maximize
our impact. Typically, this meant having initial advertisements shared
at least three weeks before the event. Several avenues we explored for
reaching students include:

     · Posted flyers in the STEM building
     · Social media posts and stories
     · Half- and quarter-page handouts to be distributed at other events
     · Department and college-wide emails
     · Verbal invitations on the day of the event
     · Extra credit opportunities from faculty

In our experience, these last two were the most effective at contributing
to turnout at our events. The day-of verbal invitations were personalized
and timely, while the opportunity for extra credit provided an additional
incentive for busy students to prioritize attendance.

94
Assessment: The events we planned required time, effort, and resources
from many people. It was important that we knew that the work being
put in was contributing to meeting the goals of the organization. As
discussed above, our primary goal was to increase student success by
(1) building science identity; (2) increasing science community; and (3)
amplifying student voice.

One metric we used to determine the success of our events was to
track attendance statistics. For some events this was simply counting
how many students were engaging with the event. For most, we also
asked how many years the students have been at Radford University, what
their majors are, what REALISE PRM events they have attended in the
past, and if they have any future events they'd like to see. One place
where faculty mentorship of the PRMs was critical was in developing
assessments that clearly aligned with the semester goals. Many of the
PRMs had little to no experience with assessment, so guiding them
through this alignment and referring to the goals regularly was critical.

Another challenge the PRMs had to work through over time was how
the format of the assessments affected the response rate. Several of
our PRMs initially liked the idea of holding informal conversations with
event attendees to determine its success because it would promote
interaction and community-building. However, as the faculty mentors we
found that in practice most PRMs either weren't comfortable enough
approaching that many "random" students or only talked to a few of the
many attendees. Similarly, when we tried digital post-event surveys to
save paper and resources our response rate decreased greatly. We've
found that the most effective way for the PRMs to actively collect data
and get a high response rate is through physical paper surveys and sign-
in sheets.

REALISE STUDENT IMPACTS

One unforeseen but exciting outcome of the PRM program was the
benefits the PRMs saw for themselves. Not only did they recognize
improvement in transferable skills, but most reflected on how being a
PRM increased their own sense of belonging and community in our
college. Trerese, Jynna, and Kaitlyn all mentioned how they feel the PRM
program impacted them:

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 95
   Student PRM Statements on the Program's Impact

   "What I have learned from being a REALISE Student is that I am a part
   of a wonderful program is truly committed to building a community of
   empowered faculty and student learners that is welcoming and inclusive.
   I have truly aligned myself with the vision that REALISE has. I love that
   we deeply aspire to engage students and cultivate a culture of excellence
   so all students believe they can achieve. What I have gained from being
   a REALISE Student is that I am a part of a program that helps change
   mindsets of students to believe that they can."

   -Trerese Roberts (Biomedical Sciences major)

   "REALISE has taught me a lot about myself, allowing me to use my goal-
   oriented mindset to increase the goals of REALISE in our college. As a
   commuter and a transfer student, being involved in college outside of
   academics can present challenges. Typically, I am only on campus on days
   I have classes and some semesters that can only be three days a week.
   REALISE works with my schedule, gives me opportunities to be involved,
   teaches me how to use my voice, teaches me how to lead, and teaches me
   the importance of DEI. I am learning just as much in REALISE as I am in the
   classroom, and being a part of the REALISE program is giving me a more
   balanced college experience as a commuter and transfer student!"

   - Jynna Harrell (Biology major)

   "I am more of a quiet person, but through REALISE, I have been encouraged
   to open up and talk with others and that has helped me tremendously. As a
   REALISE student, I learned to start conversations and follow up with familiar
   faces I see at each event. It is a great way to reach our goal of creating
   community within the STEM community."

   - Kaitlyn Edwards (Biology major)

Sustainability: As the REALISE grant is coming to a close, we are
currently in the process of transforming the PRMs into a college-wide
group of student leaders. As faculty mentors, this has been one of our
biggest challenges as we work with the PRMs and other key stakeholders
(REALISE leadership, college dean, etc.) to decide what form this group
should take.

96
One key lesson that we as faculty mentors have learned is that
incentivizing the PRMs for their work is essential. When we were first
brainstorming ideas for the program's sustainability, we talked with the
PRMs about potential incentives moving forward (wages/stipend, class
credit, book vouchers, etc.). Through informal conversations as well as
anonymous focus groups, the PRMs decided that turning the program
into a student organization would be the best direction. Based on this
feedback, the PRMs worked on developing a club constitution and
officially became a student organization in Spring 2023. We are now
at the end of the Spring 2023 semester and have seen mixed results
in the students' commitment to the PRMs now that they are unpaid. In
previous semesters, the role of our PRMs required more weekly hours of
commitment than most other student clubs and the loss of pay impacted
the students' motivation to maintain the same workload. This caused a
drop in PRM's engagement in meetings and events which both the faculty
mentors and PRMs noticed. In reflection, the PRMs recognized that while
the money wasn't their main reason for becoming a part of the program,
it did help them prioritize this work and commit more time outside of
the weekly meetings. Additionally, we feel that compensating students for
their work whenever possible creates the most equitable access to skill-
building opportunities such as the PRMs.

Another important facet of sustaining and expanding the program is buy-
in and support from our college dean and other leadership. The REALISE
"brand" has been strongly associated with the three main departments by
many in the college, so having the dean and department chairs involved
with rebranding the PRMs as a college-wide group of student leaders
will lower the barrier to attaining buy-in from faculty and potential PRMs
across departments. Additionally, while some of the PRMs' initiatives are
being picked up and funded by our institution's new Quality Enhancement
Plan (QEP), the remainder of the event funding and any monetary student
incentives will need to be supported elsewhere (Mekolichick, 2023).
Buy-in from both the dean's office and department chairs may provide
multiple options for funding streams for PRMs, as well as help with
recruitment of faculty mentors across more departments. Having a clear,
cohesive message and vision for the PRMs college-wide will give this
initiative the best chance for success and longevity.

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 97
REFERENCES

Clements, T.P., Friedman, K.L., Johnson, H.J, Meier, C.J., Watkins, J.,
   Brockman, A.J, Brame, C.J. (2022). "It made me feel like a bigger
   part of the STEM community": Incorporation of learning assistants
   enhances students' sense of belonging in a large introductory biology
   course. CBE - Life Sciences Education, 21(2).https://doi.org/10.1187/
   cbe.21-09-0287

Estrada, M., Woodcock, A., Hernandez, P. R., & Schultz, P. W. (2011).
   Toward a model of social influence that explains minority student
   integration into the scientific community. Journal of Educational
   Psychology, 103(1), 206-222. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0020743

Huston S., Herman R., Liss S., & Taylor B. (2023). Community, curriculum,
   and CUREs: Transformations in the physics department at Radford
   University. In J. Briganti, J. Sible, & A. M. Brown (Eds.), Fostering
   communities of transformation in STEM higher education: A multi-
   institutional collection of DEI initiatives (pp ??-??). Virginia Tech
   Publishing.

Kennedy, S. A., Balija, A. M., Bibeau, C., Fuhrer, T. J., Huston, L. A.,
   Jackson, M. S., Lane, K. T., Lau, J. K., Liss, S., Monceaux, C. J., Stefaniak,
   K. R., & Phelps-Durr, T. (2022). Faculty professional development on
   inclusive pedagogy yields chemistry curriculum transformation, equity
   awareness, and community. Journal of Chemical Education, 99(1),
   291-300.https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jchemed.1c00414

Lane, T.B. (2016). Beyond academic and social integration:
   Understanding the impact of a STEM enrichment program on the
   retention and degree attainment of underrepresented students. CBE
   - Life Sciences Education, 15(3), ar39. https://doi.org/10.1187/
   cbe.16-01-0070

Lau J., Mekolichick J., Raimer A., & Kennedy S. (2023). Assessing changes
   in student engagement using a mixed-methods approach. In
   J.Briganti, J. Sible, & A. M. Brown (Eds.), Fostering communities of
   transformation in STEM higher education: A multi-institutional
   collection of DEI initiatives (pp ??-??). Virginia Tech Publishing.

98
Mekolichick J. (2023). Institutionally advancing inclusive excellence:
   Leading from the middle in times of transition. In J. Briganit, J. Sible, &
   A. M. Brown (Eds.), Fostering communities of transformation in STEM
   higher education: A multi-institutional collection of DEI initiatives (pp
   ??-??). Virginia Tech Publishing.

Nunn, L.M. (2021). College belonging: How first-year and first-generation
   students navigate campus life. Rutgers University Press.

Stets, J.E., Brenner, P.S., Burke, P.J., Serpe, R.T. (2017). The science
   identity and entering a science occupation. Social science research,
   64, 1-14.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssresearch.2016.10.016

Zaniewski, A.M., Reinholz, D. (2016). Increasing STEM success: A near-
   peer mentoring program in the physical sciences. International
   Journal of STEM Education, 3(14), 1-12.https://doi.org/10.1186/
   s40594-016-0043-2

This program is supported in part by a grant to Virginia Tech from the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute through the Inclusive Excellence Grant.

 FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER EDUCATION 99
100
CHAPTER 7.
COMMUNITY, CURRICULUM, AND CURES

Transformations in the Physics Department at Radford University
SHAWN M. HUSTON; SANDRA LISS; BRETT TAYLOR; AND RHETT
HERMAN

ABSTRACT
This book chapter will focus on the efforts made in the Department
of Physics at Radford University to improve diversity, equity and
inclusion (DEI) among physics majors. These efforts include
changes to the curriculum as a whole, changes to individual
classes, faculty training, and attempts to build a welcoming
community for students. Each of these items will be discussed in
some detail. Specifically, an introductory freshman seminar was added;
course-based undergraduate research/problem-based learning was
integrated into classes such as introductory astronomy, atmospheric
physics, geophysics, and thermodynamics & statistical mechanics, as
well as others. In addition, examples will show the ways in which DEI
has been explicitly addressed in the classroom. Historically physics
lacks diversity. While we have much more progress that needs to be
made, we believe our efforts at Radford are one possible step toward
recruiting and graduating a diverse student body.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 101
INTRODUCTION

IDENTIFYING THE CHALLENGE AND EXPLAINING WHO WE
ARE AT RADFORD UNIVERSITY.

Physics as a discipline lacks a diverse representation of faculty and
students (American Physical Society, 2023). For example, approximately
16% of the college-aged population is African American, and yet
only approximately 3% of bachelor's degrees in physics are earned by
African American students. This difference lags behind the percentage
of degrees earned in engineering and math (approximately 4%), and
well behind those earned in chemistry, biology, or computer science
(approximately 8%) (IPEDS, Census, et al., 2023). There are undoubtedly
many reasons behind the paltry numbers for physics. Identifying these
reasons is outside the scope of this chapter, rather we aim to
communicate how we have attempted to increase persistence and
retention among those students who elect to study physics at Radford
University (RU).

Radford is a primarily undergraduate institution (PUI) in rural southwest
Virginia. A large population of our students are first generation (Acosta,
2021), and we are a lower cost public school, routinely landing on U.S.
News and World Report's best colleges rankings in multiple categories
(Brackin, 2021). Radford is not an R1, as such the primary focus of
faculty at RU is teaching (approximately 60%), rather than professional
contributions (approximately 25%) (Radford University, 2022). The
Department of Physics itself is composed of four tenured or tenure-track
faculty members, along with an additional full-time instructor (Radford
University, 2023). Class sizes are small, with upper-level classes for our
physics majors typically being fewer than ten students. Physics majors
have faculty members for multiple classes throughout their academic
career. These factors allow us to build relationships with our students, to
attempt to build a community of learners, and to help students identify
as scientists.

102
LEVERAGING RADFORD'S STRENGTHS

It is undeniable that many first-
year college students are
overwhelmed by the challenges in
their new environment. This
feeling can particularly be the
case for first generation students.
The university experience as a
whole can be daunting, let alone
classes themselves. An isolated
student, faced with new academic Figure 7.1: A small classroom
challenges may be left wondering
whether they truly belong in their major or in college itself. Identifying
this problem, isolation and a lack of a sense of belonging, is an important
step to addressing retention issues in general and in physics specifically.
The best thing we can do for our students is offer them support and
create personal connections for those students, with each other, and with
ourselves. One of the ways in which we have facilitated a network of
support is by having dedicated spaces for our physics majors to
congregate and having a strong physics club presence.

Radford's focus on undergraduate education and small class sizes allows
our physics faculty members to develop years-long relationships with
students. As such, we can talk about issues like imposter syndrome
with some level of credibility. Radford's small class sizes also allow
us as faculty members to step outside some of the traditional class
structure. A "normal" physics class is composed of homework, tests, and
possibly labs. With large class sizes this is about all that a single faculty
member can handle. We have been able to step outside of those bounds
and introduce course-based undergraduate research and problem-based
learning into many of our classes. This kind of pedagogy builds
marketable skills for our students and helps them identify as scientists
because they are, in fact, doing science.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 103
OPERATIONAL STEPS TO ACHIEVING THE
GOAL: INCREASING DIVERSITY IN PHYSICS

FACULTY EDUCATION

It is an unfortunate human truth that most of us will initially react
defensively or in denial when it is brought to our attention that we
have an area that we need to improve on. For this specific problem,
lack of diversity in physics, that might look something like this: "Okay,
I recognize that the numbers for physics don't look good, but what
does that have to do with me? I'm not racist. I'm not doing anything
wrong. What does teaching physics have to do with race anyway? Physics
is just physics." That certainly was the first author's thoughts when
first confronted with the issue. The first barrier in establishing change
in education is achieving faculty buy-in. For physics, buy-in should be
relatively simple, a glance at the statistics and a few moments of thought
is all it really takes to identify that surely something must be done in
order make the physics community more equitable. Once the problem
is identified, diversity training is extremely helpful. For instance, the first
author had never heard of stereotype threat and had little understanding
of microaggressions before taking part in an extended sequence of
diversity training sessions offered through REALising Inclusive Science
Excellence (REALISE), a program here at Radford supported by a Howard
Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI) grant. In fact, the first author's
approach to talking about race in the classroom was to never, ever do it.

Great, faculty buy-in has been achieved. Now what? After acknowledging
that we needed to go beyond just teaching the subject, a number of
steps were and are being taken to provide an equitable and inclusive
experience to recruit and graduate a diverse student body here in RU's
Department of Physics. Our focus is on increasing persistence and
retention in the major for all students, but particularly for traditionally
underrepresented students, which, in physics, includes women (IPEDS &
APS, 2023).

104
ESTABLISHING COMMUNITY AS A DEPARTMENT

One way of increasing student retention is by increasing a student's
sense of belonging as well as student access to support. We were
fortunate to be the beneficiaries of a renovation to our existing science
building just a few years ago. While we had limited control over the
building spaces as a whole, we made it a priority that our physics majors
have a space set aside for their own use. This comes in the form of
a dedicated club space for our local chapter of the Society of Physics
Students. We viewed this space as such a high priority that we cut this
space out of our multi-use faculty research lab. We were also fortunate to
have a large study area (pictured above) that is immediately outside of
our department faculty offices. During most hours of the day our physics
majors can be found congregating in this space, which is a great area
to study, do homework, and talk to one another, and which allows them
ready access to faculty members, many of whom have an open-door
policy and/or stop by that space to chat with students multiple times a
day. It is our hope that this unique environment makes students more
likely to see faculty members as approachable. We certainly emphasize
that we are there for them, and we view our students as whole people, as
we hope they view us.

PROGRAMMATIC CHANGES

Freshman Seminar (PHYS 201)

PHYS 201 was introduced as a required course for all physics majors
starting in Fall 2020. It is a one hour seminar course that is all about
building community and improving students' identity as young physicists.
In this course a great deal of time is spent talking about these topics
and providing external resources for students in an attempt to build
that identity. These external resources are composed of both groups
and individuals with many of these focused on the under-represented
minority students in the group, providing links to external bodies/people
that are not like those who traditionally make up the physics community
(predominantly white and male). An example of one of these external
bodies is the National Society of Black Physicists. The other large faculty
effort in establishing PHYS 201 was assembling an alumni panel to speak
with our freshmen. The panel participants are composed of the most

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 105
diverse group of RU physics alumni that could be assembled. They are
not all male and white and include a member of the LGBTQ+ community,
multiple non-white participants, and about 30% of the participants are
female. This alumni panel is hugely popular with our students. It allows
them to talk with people who were once in their shoes, are diverse, and
are successful in a broad range of post-baccalaureate careers. PHYS 201
also includes an introduction to possible career paths. In the discussion
of careers, we have also tried to provide examples of physicists who
are not white/male. We also have had the REALISE students, a group
of peer mentors at RU, present a peer-level discussion about diversity/
belonging/identity issues (see the chapter "Assessing Changes in
Student Engagement Using a Mixed-Methods Approach" in this book).
Since adding this class that specifically targets community
building and scientific identity, retention numbers for students
moving into their sophomore year as physics majors have
increased. While retention has increased, it must be admitted that
due to the typical cohort sizes of our freshmen majors (approximately
eighteen to twenty enter each year), the sample size is small.

Introducing problem-based learning (PBL) projects into classes

We base so much of our grades and assessments of our students'
work on items that they will NOT encounter when they are employed or
actually doing their graduate school research. By changing the classroom
experience, we can change student engagement and enhance retention.
Jobs and graduate research projects do not have tests, homework, and
labs as we use them - correctly, it might be added - in most of our
instruction. Also, most students, if they just put their traditional
coursework and GPAs on their resumes, would present essentially
identically to potential employers or graduate schools. Our faculty have
received a number of emails from our alumni with a common theme,
saying something along the lines of "While I never did so well on
[physics] tests, I'm now doing really well in [their current career] and am
finally using what I learned in class." That common phrase of "...finally
using what I learned in class...." really stands out. In other words, while
they learned something in class, they did not use that knowledge while
they were undergraduate students with us.

106
There are multiple ways to assess student learning in addition to the
canonical test and homework grades. One of these is through a grade in
problem-based learning (PBL), either embedded within a class or even as
a class by itself. While we will present some ways in which PBL has been
embedded into individual courses, we offer the following observations
first. Students tend to do very well in the PBL aspects of the class. We
have often observed that the students put proportionately more time
and effort into these projects than in the traditional aspects of the class
(homework and tests). They have frequently commented that they are
quite proud of the work because they can see actual results. They say
that it feels more like a real job or graduate school type of project, with a
well-defined goal, or "deliverable" to be completed.

The Department of Physics at Radford offers a special Arctic Geophysics
research class every other year. Over the past decade, the faculty
member who teaches that class, Dr. Rhett Herman, has been slowly
moving away from the traditional test/homework/lab grading scheme
for that course into a more research-oriented format. This class is,
unfortunately, an isolated elective class that affects a small number
of students. In his second year of working with our REALISE/HHMI
program, Rhett encountered the more formal idea of Project-Based
Learning (PBL), and an idea was hatched to include PBL in not just the
Arctic Geophysics class, but in other (required) classes as well, so that
this type of learning would be available to all of our physics majors.
The PBL process was introduced in a two-day workshop facilitated by
members of the Center for Project-Based Learning at the Worcester
Polytechnic Institute (WPI). They detailed how to incorporate real-world
projects into classes, and how those projects could meet one or part of
a learning outcome for a class. This incorporation would mean that the
learning outcome (or part of one) would be delivered to the students,
and assessed by the instructor, through that project. Further, this learning
outcome would not be discussed in the lecture or even included on
the in-class exams. Two examples of learning outcomes that could be
addressed through PBL are (1) Students will apply physics to real-world
problems, and (2) Students will effectively communicate science to a
general audience. Others follow.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 107
These projects are sometimes difficult to create. However, they are
rewarding for both the students and the faculty. One of the main criteria
that is used for these projects - in addition to making sure they address
a learning outcome - is for the project to answer the following question
in the affirmative: "Is this project something that can be listed as a
separate line on students' resumes?" Will this project result in students
learning something, or developing some skill, that they can put on a
separate line on their resume? The PBL process would include skills such
as additional programming, using electronics to build data-acquisition
sensors, developing certain experimental skills, or communicating
scientific results to the public.

The PBL process has been completed in a number of upper-level classes
and has been started in an introductory class. A short list of some of
the upper-level classes and examples of PBLs that have been used in
these courses follows. In all cases PBL is just one aspect of the course,
except the explicit example of the Arctic Geophysics class previously
mentioned. Note that anything related to sensors has employed Arduino
microcontrollers. These all involve basic electronics as well as
programming, in addition to the inevitable data analysis and end-of-
semester public presentations. Most of these involve some small
engineering skill in order to house/hold these sensors.

PHYS 330 - Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics

     · Develop micro-climate sensors that could monitor some thermal
         aspect of a campus building that relates to the official measured
         energy usage of that building.

     · Develop thermal sensors that can monitor the heat absorbed and
         re-emitted from asphalt parking spaces, with some the standard
         black color while others are painted white.

     · Develop irradiance sensors that can monitor the percentage
         of infrared radiation in the solar input and reflected/re-radiated
         output from various ground cover surfaces that could be on
         campus.

108
PHYS 301 - Atmospheric Physics

     · Develop micro-climate sensors that could monitor some aspect of
         the area around a stream bed that is to be re-established along its
         natural route.

PHYS/GEOL 406 - Geophysics

     · Develop a survey plan and carry out a geophysical site survey
         at a nearby undeveloped industrial park using our professional-
         level geophysics equipment. The goal is to determine the fitness
         of these large (approximately 20 acre) parcels for siting a large
         (>100k sq. ft.) industrial building. The final report is delivered to
         the controlling multi-governmental agency to use in marketing
         these sites to potential buyers.

     · This field project has been used in the 4 most recent offerings of
         this every-other-year (spring) class.

     · Alumni have reported that they have been excited to learn how
         their work has helped companies determine whether to site their
         buildings in that area.

The above are all examples of PBL embedded within a course. Each of
these projects counted toward approximately 10% of the overall class
grade, and students have, throughout the years, relayed that they have
put many of these projects in as separate lines on their resumes, along
with the skills that they have used to complete these projects. They
have also shared that the end-of-the-semester presentations required by
these projects - the "deliverables" - have been topics of discussion in
job and graduate school interviews

PHYS 324/325/326 - the Arctic Geophysics Research Experience cycle of courses

The Arctic Geophysics Research Experience that is taught every other
year is an example of extensive use of PBL. This is a one-year sequence
of two classes, the one-credit-hour PHYS 324 - Arctic Geophysics
Preparatory Seminar and the four-hour PHYS 325 - Arctic Geophysics
Field Research. PHYS 324 is offered in the fall of odd-numbered years
and PHYS 325 is in the subsequent Spring semester (even-numbered
years). Each of these is 100% PBL and is entirely student-centered. There

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 109
is also a third class offered in this experience in the subsequent Fall,
the one-hour PHYS 326 - Arctic Geophysics Capstone Seminar. Students
are not required to take this course because a number of those enrolled
in the research experience are seniors who graduate after taking PHYS
325. However, most who have not graduated take the PHYS 326 class.
The Arctic Research Experience is open to any major, although most of
the students in the past have majored in Physics or Geology (typically
with a Physics minor). Chemistry, Biology, Math, and Computer Science
majors have also successfully completed this research experience.

In PHYS 324, students develop their own ideas for research projects that
quantify some aspect of the arctic sea ice or the arctic environment. They
are encouraged to pick this research project with an eye toward their
future career path. They could choose something that directly relates to
their chosen career either as a direct research topic or through having
them learn a particular skill that they can use to enhance their resumes.
However, their project could also be something that's not directly related
to their career, but something that interests them as a research topic.

After students pick their research topic, they write their own research
proposals. These proposals must involve some quantitative aspect of
the artic environment and thus will necessarily involve some type of
sensor. These projects are typically designed using either Arduino
microcontrollers or Raspberry Pi microprocessors due to both their
inexpensive and Do-It-Yourself (DIY) nature. In addition, there are a
great number of inexpensive sensors designed to work with these items
that are the same as the "professional grade," very expensive, black-
box sensor packages that are commercially available. However, we
emphasize to students that they do not need to know anything about
these items beforehand. The faculty member's role as mentor is to show
the students what they need to know in order to bring their project to
fruition. Their job is to identify a sensor that will address their research
question, and then work closely with the faculty member to come up with
a plan to both build the sensor and carry out the research. Thus, they have
to come up with a reasonable budget for their project, again learning
something that they will have to know later for a job, a graduate school
proposal, or a research proposal.

110
After the students turn in their proposals, identifying information is
removed, and the members of the class serve as the "review committee
of the whole" for everyone's proposal (including their own). After
receiving the feedback (anonymously), the students submit their revised
proposal for (reasonable) funding by the Department of Physics. The
necessary equipment is then gathered, and the faculty member works
closely with them as they start to build their sensor packages. These
sensor packages must be made into self-contained units with batteries,
microSD cards for the data, switches, and everything else required of
the more expensive, commercial sensors that they will use later in their
careers. Students usually get a good start on their builds during the Fall
semester, and they start to learn the difficulty in bringing even a small
research project to fruition starting from absolutely nothing.

In the Spring class, PHYS 325, students spend the first half of the
semester finishing their builds and testing them locally. They learn to
troubleshoot and fix issues that their testing reveals. This
troubleshooting is often both frustrating and very rewarding, giving
students an appreciation for a non-textbook-perfect research project.
The students do have to work surprisingly fast under the deadline of
traveling to Alaska at the end of the sixth class week to deploy their
sensors on the ice. They travel to Alaska during one of two weeks (half
the class each week) in late February to early March, when the sea
ice is thickest. They are again learning to troubleshoot under difficult
conditions of extreme cold (although we do stay in warm buildings - we
are not camping in the arctic!), and not having the usual resources of
the Radford Physics laboratories. They had to make sure to take all of
the supplies and tools that they anticipate using when things inevitably
break, or go wrong, during their deployments. They must also learn to rely
on each other because most of the projects require some helping hands
to make them happen.

After the trip, the students present their results to the University
community at a campus-wide research forum in mid-April. One of the
main aspects of PBL is the public communication of their work. They
find that this presentation helps them truly understand what they have
accomplished in this course series.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 111
In the subsequent Fall, most (if not all) of the Alaska students who have
not graduated take the one-credit-hour PHYS 326 - Arctic Geophysics
Capstone Seminar. In this class, students further analyze their data
from the Alaska research trip and prepare a professional presentation.
So far, all of these have been at the Fall Meeting of the American
Geophysical Union, the world's largest gathering of earth and space
scientists (approximately twenty-five thousand attendees from all seven
continents). The most recent cohort saw four of the non-graduating
students take PHYS 326, with one who had just graduated "participating"
in the same professional preparation remotely, just as if she were
enrolled in the class.

The 2023 AGU Fall Meeting saw the largest Radford University
contingent ever, with five students attending, two of whom were female
and one a non-majority male. These five students had a total of 4 poster
presentations, spread out over three separate sessions on different days.
Two of the students were offered direct graduate school positions,
although those graduate offers were not in the career paths that the
students preferred. This offer speaks to one of the main goals of the
entire Arctic Geophysics experience - to get students the full research
experience that they need in order to advance their careers in whatever
direction they choose. This project truly is student-centered and student-
driven.

Students self-identify as scientists by being scientists and undertaking scientific
studies themselves

In the previous section we offered extensive examples of changes made
to courses to incorporate PBL. These examples all fit under the umbrella
of students self-identifying as scientists. Additional efforts have been
made to enhance student self-identity in the Introductory Physics
sequence for majors, PHYS 221 and 222, as well as our pair of skill-
building classes for majors in their sophomore year, Mathematical
Methods in Physics (PHYS 303) and Computational Methods in Physics
(PHYS 370).

112
Students in the introductory sequence often complain about, and we joke
about, no friction, no air resistance, etc. Of course, the reason we start
with these simplifying assumptions is because the mathematics to solve
such situations analytically are typically beyond the students' current
mathematical skills. A large effort has been made in these two courses
to work on building identity as physicists for students and their ability to
solve "non-trivial" problems by using computational physics. The hope is
that students can see themselves more as physicists because they are
not limited to the simplest situations and can include the physics that
they see around them without being limited by their current mathematical
skills. This kind of inclusion is also particularly important in the second
semester class because students have difficulty visualizing topics in
electricity & magnetism, whether that's field, electric potential maps,
motion under electric and/or magnetic forces together, or assorted other
topics. They really have to think three-dimensionally, but if they can build
their own system computationally and see directly what it looks like, then
the hope is they will see themselves as more accomplished than they
might without those skills.

Our sophomore skill-building classes, PHYS 303 and 370, are supposed
to again build a sense of identity and a recognition of students' own
skills and their ability to solve physics problems. Mathematical Methods
in Physics, PHYS 303, has been incredibly helpful in building student
confidence, and students, including a math major who graduated a few
years ago, have told us it was the most useful skills course they took
overall. The computational course again builds students' skills and
requires them to complete a final self-chosen project. The hope is to
build their skills (both in computation and in presentation both written
and oral) and help them see themselves as REAL physicists who can
solve non-trivial problems.

Further examples of helping students self-identify as scientists come
from our sequence of astronomy courses, in which students take on
aspects of astronomy research projects, such as applying for
observational time on remote controlled telescopes, planning
observational runs, and processing data themselves. These activities
are all incorporated into regular classes and while students may opt to
continue their work through independent study or guided undergraduate

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 113
research, their initial "taste" of this research comes as required
coursework. This process has been extremely well received by our
physics and astrophysics majors.

Addressing imposter syndrome and diversity in physics - why are "all" these
historic physicists white men?

If one pops open any textbook on the development of physics and
studies the people behind that development, one finds an unsettling
trend. Nearly all of these historical figures, and certainly all of the
well-known ones, are white men. As mentioned in the introduction, a
lack of diversity in physics is still extremely prevalent. As much as we
have tried to increase diversity in our classrooms in the Department of
Physics at Radford, the same trend exists here. If you look in any of our
classes, you will see that the majority of the students are white men. It
is essential that we increase the retention of non-majority and female
students to reverse this trend. In the sections above, we have outlined
some ways in which we have attempted to increase retention among all
groups of students. These efforts are further enhanced by addressing
imposter syndrome and diversity in physics directly and explicitly in our
classrooms.

Explicit discussions of diversity in physics take place in our Freshman
Seminar, in our Introductory Astronomy courses, and in Modern Physics,
a third semester class for our majors which is heavily focused on
historical development of physics in the early 1900's. The Astronomy
and Modern Physics classes are particularly suited to these discussions
because they not only deal with the problem-solving side of astronomy
and physics but the history behind it as well. This focus allows for organic
discussions of historical examples of privilege; one illustration of this
is the number of Nobel Prize winners whose parent(s) were also Nobel
Prize winning scientists. We offer no condemnation of these scientists or
their work, but we point out the advantages they had. We also address
historical discrimination against women and non-majority persons in the
development of astronomy and physics. In our Introductory Astronomy
class for majors, students give a presentation on a scientist who interests
them. Students are encouraged, but not required, to select non-majority
or female scientists. For those who have chosen non-majority or

114
female scientists, it is often clear during their presentations that the
representation seen is impactful to them.

Discussions about imposter syndrome are also an important component
of helping students understand that they do, in fact, belong in the major.
This discussion requires real vulnerability on the part of faculty members
and alumni, in the case of the alumni panels in the introductory seminar.
By explaining to the students that at some moment in time everyone
in the class is likely to feel like they just aren't smart enough for this
major or that they don't measure up to their peers, we increase the
chance of these students persisting. Faculty members regularly explain
to students that they also felt that way themselves at times and that we
have alumni from Radford who we taught, who we know felt that way, who
have gone on to fantastic careers as scientists. Several times after these
discussions, we have had students approach us and offer deep thanks for
addressing this topic. Imposter syndrome is rampant in physics, and for
those students who are already in the minority in the classroom, it can be
a strong detractor toward completion.

All of these discussions, whether they are about privilege, discrimination,
or imposter syndrome require real authenticity from the faculty member
leading the discussion. This action goes well beyond checking off a DEI
box.

Additional changes that may help some students to overcome boundaries

We offer a few further comments on ways we have helped students
overcome boundaries. Where appropriate we have included lectures on
metacognition and reflective corrections in our classes to help students
understand how to think deeply. Cost is often a barrier for non-majority
students, so we have switched textbooks to open resource or low-cost
alternatives when we can. In one instance, we have even offered testing
to an English as a Second Language (ESL) student in his native language,
though care must be taken if doing this to make sure testing is equitable.
Last, homework and test problems have been chosen to be more gender
neutral. One of the first physics problems a student typically encounters
is "A boy throws a ball..." because these are relatively easy to solve. This
is great, but potentially not very interesting for (a) people who are not
boys or (b) people who don't particularly care for sports.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 115
WHAT WE HAVE LEARNED

First, our department's changes are an on-going, collaborative effort.
Measuring progress is difficult with small numbers, and the effects may
not be immediately seen. We are collecting long-term retention numbers
as a measure of success. Although small sample sizes can be deceiving,
we agree that making a difference to one or a few female or non-majority
physics students equates to success. It may have also been possible
to measure change by taking surveys of students' perceptions pre- and
post- HHMI initiative. This would have required some forethought,
because we would have needed to survey students from approximately
2019 so that we could compare them to today's results. These surveys
would, of course, be clouded by the impacts of the dramatic changes
in emotional well-being caused by recent events, e.g. COVID,
that are evident broadly in today's student body. Although we did not
have the foresight to survey our students pre- and post-HHMI, it may be
possible to develop a pre- and post-course or first year and graduate
surveys to measure change in sense of belonging and science identity
(Potvin & Hazari, 2013). This is a step that may be undertaken in the
future.

Second, integrating PBL is a lot of work, and course-based
undergraduate research experiences (CUREs) are not easy. Projects fail.
Adding CUREs/PBL to traditional classes means that some of the
traditional material must come out. The educational impact is, however,
worth it. Part of this reward can be seen in the pride the students take
from their results and the independence that these projects foster.

Thanks for reading.

116
REFERENCES

Acosta, M. (2021, November 5). Center offers support, advocacy for first-
   generation students. Radford University. https://www.radford.edu/
   content/radfordcore/home/news/releases/2021/november/first-
   generation-students.html

American Physical Society (2023). Minority physics statistics. [Data set].
   American Physical Society. https://www.aps.org/programs/minorities/
   resources/statistics.cfm

Brackin, B. (2021, September 13). Radford University improves and adds
   ranking in U.S. News and World Report's Best Colleges listing. Radford
   University. https://www.radford.edu/content/radfordcore/home/news/
   releases/2021/september/us-news-improves-ranking.html

Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS), & American
   Physical Society (APS). (2023). Physics degrees earned by women.
   [Graph]. American Physical Society. https://www.aps.org/programs/
   education/statistics/womenphysics.cfm

Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS), United States
   Census Bureau (Census), & American Physical Society (APS). (2023).
   Bachelor's degrees earned by African Americans by major. [Graph].
   American Physical Society. https://www.aps.org/programs/education/
   statistics/aamajors.cfm

Lau J., Mekolichick J., Raimer A., & Kennedy S. (2023). Assessing changes
   in student engagement using a mixed-methods approach. In
   J.Briganti, J. Sible, & A. M. Brown (Eds.), Fostering communities of
   transformation in STEM higher education: A multi-institutional
   collection of DEI initiatives (pp 49-63). Virginia Tech Publishing.

Potvin, G., & Hazari, Z. (2013, July 17-18). The development and
   measurement of identity across the physical sciences. Physics
   Education Research Conference 2013, Portland, OR, from
   https://www.compadre.org/Repository/document/
   ServeFile.cfm?ID=13182&DocID=3729

Radford University. (2022, December 2). Radford University teaching
   and research faculty handbook. https://www.radford.edu/content/dam/

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 117
   departments/administrative/faculty-senate/
   Teaching_and_Research_Faculty_Handbook-12-2-2022.pdf
Radford University. (2023). Physics and astronomy. Artis College of
   Science and Technology. https://www.radford.edu/content/csat/home/
   physics.html
This program is supported in part by a grant to Virginia Tech from the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute through the Inclusive Excellence Grant.

118
CHAPTER 8.

WE'RE ALL IN THIS TOGETHER

Fostering a sense of community within a biochemistry department
ANNE M. BROWN AND SASHA C. MARINE

INTRODUCTION

From in-person symposiums to virtual chatrooms, we have strived to
instill a sense of community, belonging, and agency for our students,
faculty, and staff within the Department of Biochemistry at Virginia Tech.
Biochemistry is a challenging major, with many students wanting to
attend a wide variety of professional (e.g., medical, dental, pharmacy,
veterinary, etc.) and graduate programs after graduation. We are well-
known (for better, or worse) for a six-credit laboratory applications course
taken by students in their junior or senior year. This course pushes
students in performing, writing, and presenting their scientific
experiments in numerous lab reports and a practical exam. Until the
late 2010's, we often did not have substantial curriculum interaction
with our in-major students until their junior (third) year, as courses such
as General Chemistry, Biology, and Calculus are taught by other
departments. With curriculum changes underway and by participating in
the Inclusive Excellence program, we sought to transform the learning
and community environments of our students, staff, and faculty.

In the literature, some of the biggest challenges faced by historically
marginalized communities are unrealized and unaddressed in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields, contributing to
lower graduation rates (Xu et al., 2018). However, studies suggest that
both learning communities and communities of practice have significant
impact on improving success, perseverance, and sense of belonging
in populations that are historically underserved or underprepared for
collegiate level coursework. Engaging students both academically and
socially in community/communities has been shown to improve student
outcomes and persistence (Gopalan et al., 2019). Taken together, we

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 119
recognized the need for consistent means of engagement outside the
traditional classroom and the potential impact it could have on students,
especially those from historically marginalized communities.

A group of motivated faculty endeavored to use our initial year in the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI) Inclusive Excellence program
to build knowledge and determine what might be the best fit for activities
and transformation within our department to support all members of
our community - students, staff, post-docs, and faculty. Questions we
asked ourselves as a small group wanting to make big impacts focused
on topics such as: What can we do to increase a sense of belonging
and community for students in our major? What tools and knowledge
should we emphasize for faculty to enhance their knowledge base on
inclusive excellence? We started out with small faculty group meetings,
occurring monthly to discuss these avenues. Each month, the group had
a paper for discussion. Growth mindset - especially the work by Canning
et al. (2019) was a huge motivator in our planning of several avenues to
increase the sense of community and belonging within our department.
Inspiring students and celebrating them became a common thread of
discussion and the need for that in our department was apparent. We
next focused on what elements would be most valuable to all members
of our community - students, faculty, postdocs, and staff - and how we
could establish initiatives that were both sustainable and focused on
supporting the needs of each of these groups.

INITIATIVE #1: A POSTER SYMPOSIUM

When you think of a poster symposium, what comes to mind? Likely you
picture a crowded room with stationary presenters and poster stands
affixed with printed posters. You may think of poster judges, who evaluate
the competing entrants, or you may think of sponsor tables and their
promotional giveaway items. Because people often have a preference for
the familiar (i.e., the familiarity principle; Zajonc, 1968) and established
(i.e., status quo bias; Samuelson & Zeckhauser, 1988), it should come as
no surprise that we initially modeled our departmental poster symposium
after the poster sessions we had attended in the past. We focused on this
initiative because 26% of our in-major students conduct undergraduate
research every semester, either for course credit (15%) or as part of a

120
course (i.e., course-based undergraduate research experience or CURE;
11%). We named the event Engelpalooza, as this amalgamation honors
both our departmental founder (Charlie Engel) and the impressive
contributions of our students (Merriam-Webster Dictionary).

IMPLEMENTATION OF ENGELPALOOZA

Our inaugural symposium was held indoors on a weekday in October in
2019. It had posters displayed along the hallways of the departmental
home building on campus, with a free, boxed lunch set up in an adjoining
auditorium-style classroom. The event was heavily advertised to our
undergraduate community (N=471), and thirty-four undergraduate
researchers presented posters in two sessions at the event. We did
not have any graduate student presenters, although the Biochemistry
Graduate Student Assembly (BcGSA) did participate in the event via
an info booth and by giving out ice cream. The department's Advisory
Board served as poster judges, and attendees could enter a raffle to
win departmental swag. More than a hundred students, faculty, staff, and
alumni attended the inaugural poster symposium.

INAUGURAL POSTER SYMPOSIUM: FEEDBACK

Following the event, presenters were asked to provide feedback in a short
electronic survey. Our response rate for the survey was 32% (11 of 34).
Comments were generally positive, with 70% of respondents indicating
the event was very beneficial, and 60% of respondents indicating they
were very likely to recommend the event to a friend or classmate. The
department's Advisory Board also had a favorable opinion, describing
the event as a strong community-building experience. In terms of areas
for improvement, survey respondents requested more networking
opportunities, better event marketing and communication, and a less
crowded venue. The faculty organizing the event felt it was important to
take additional actions to promote inclusion, namely, to solicit graduate
student presenters and to discontinue the poster competition.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 121
SUBSEQUENT POSTER SYMPOSIA: MODIFICATIONS AND
FEEDBACK

Following the inaugural poster symposium, we have worked to
incorporate the suggestions. Starting in 2020, for example, we have
advertised the event equally to our undergraduate (N=471) and graduate
(N=43) communities. This has resulted in better parity, with
approximately 70% of posters being presented by undergraduate
students and 30% of posters being presented by graduate students.
The distribution somewhat reflects the difference in cohort size though
a greater proportion of graduate students participate in the event than
undergraduate students. We also consistently have between twenty
and forty research poster presenters each year. To facilitate networking,
we have info booths for both the Biochemistry Club (an undergraduate
organization) and the BcGSA (a graduate organization) at the event. We
also invite an accomplished alumnus to give a keynote presentation and
attend the poster sessions. In terms of marketing, we have increased
how often we are advertising on the departmental website, Facebook,
and Twitter accounts in the weeks leading up to the event. We have
also developed a promotional video, paid to have the university mascot
make an appearance at the event, and purchased photo backdrops and
banners.

The poster symposium continues to be held on a weekday in October, but
starting in 2021, we have held the event outside under a tent on a lawn
near the departmental home building. This less crowded venue enabled
inclusion of additional info booths on ASBMB degree certification, study
abroad opportunities, undergraduate research 101, and our department's
peer mentor program. It also gave us space for live demonstrations
on nanopore sequencing, robotic liquid handling, and virtual reality
simulations of molecular dynamics. Another benefit of holding the event
outdoors is increased attendance - we now have more than 170 students,
faculty, staff, and alumni come to the poster symposium. We continue
to provide a free lunch but have expanded the options to better
accommodate dietary restrictions and food allergies. We are proud the
event allows us to authentically, and sustainably, foster a sense of
community within our department.

122
Following the 2021 poster symposium, presenters and attendees were
asked to provide feedback in a short electronic survey. Our response rate
for the survey was 42% (49 of 117). As before, comments were generally
positive, with 94% of respondents indicating the event fostered a sense
of community. We were also pleased to learn that 90% of respondents
were satisfied with the amount of communication leading up to the event,
and 83% of respondents were satisfied with both the outdoor venue and
with the networking opportunities at the event. In terms of areas for
improvement, survey respondents requested more options for displaying
diverse poster types (such as vertical or electronic posters) and more
involvement from departmental personnel.

SPECIAL COMMENTS: HOSTING A VIRTUAL POSTER
SYMPOSIUM DURING A PANDEMIC

In the fall of 2020, COVID-19 guidance and the public health situation
precluded an in-person poster symposium. However, we were aware that
the pandemic was increasing anxiety (Chrikov et al., 2020) and loneliness
(Giovenco et al., 2022) amongst college students, with individuals
identifying as an under-represented minority being more likely to
experience anxiety and depression (Soria et al., 2020). To provide an
opportunity for safe social connection and scientific networking, we
decided to hold our poster symposium online using a Discord server.
Discord is a free, user-friendly platform that enables individuals to set up
topic-specific channels (i.e., servers) for collaboration, communication,
etc. (Lacher & Biehl, 2018). A total of 22 presenters - 10 undergraduate
and 12 graduate - shared electronic posters with an audience of more
than 140 students, faculty, staff and alumni. We also had a panel
discussion with current undergraduate researchers, who answered
audience questions about how to get involved in research, what lab
culture is, and how to list lab skills on a resume. To facilitate community
building, we held a pet photo contest with winners decided by popular
vote. We also had a Discord channel open for non-science discussion for
the duration of the event. Overall, participants had a favorable opinion
of our virtual poster symposium, describing the event as worthwhile and
engaging.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 123
   Considerations when developing a poster symposium for
   community building

   While it may seem obvious, the goal of the event should influence how
   it is designed and implemented. Small, structured events better facilitate
   networking and interpersonal development (Mowreader, 2023), while having
   fewer posters increases attendee circulation and event flexibility (Rowe
   and Ilic, 2015). We choose to keep our event modest in scale because
   we believe an intimate learning environment is valuable to our student
   community. When developing your own poster symposium, be mindful of
   the composition of the organizing committee. Research has also shown
   that increased diversity within the organizing committee is associated with
   improved conference speaker gender parity (Casadevall and Handelsman,
   2014; Sardelis and Drew, 2016). Our inaugural poster symposium was
   designed by a small group of tenure and non-tenure track faculty, with a
   similar ratio of men to women. Subsequent symposia have been organized
   by a larger committee of faculty, staff, and graduate students. Diversifying
   the administrative side of our event resulted in better decision-making and a
   more inclusive poster symposium. To encourage undergraduate attendance
   at your event, you may consider offering opportunities for students to
   practice professional social skills before the event (Flaherty et al., 2018),
   which can reduce anxiety associated with the unfamiliar setting, or having
   student-led sessions (Pedersen et al., 2013), which can foster science
   identity and academic self-concept. In our poster symposium, for example,
   we have had student-led panel discussions and live demonstrations. Faculty
   are often present as attendees, but rarely moderate or interject.

INITIATIVE #2: AN INSTRUCTIONAL TOOLBOX

We developed a sharable "instructional toolbox" to foster a more
inclusive academic environment in our department. The idea came from
conversations at faculty meetings, in which colleagues expressed interest
in learning how to apply diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) practices
into science undergraduate courses, but did not know how to get started
(hence, the toolbox)

124
DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION

The toolbox was designed as an online repository of research articles,
professional development courses, and educational videos, all hosted
within our university's learning management system (LMS). A small group
of tenure and non-tenure track faculty led the effort, but all faculty
in the department were encouraged to contribute to the process. By
providing data-driven resources to instructional faculty and graduate
teaching assistants, we had hoped the toolbox would broaden users'
perspectives and empower them to set goals with specific outcomes to
develop more inclusive classrooms. Developing the toolbox took several
months, and the online resource was officially launched in mid-February
2020.

TOOLBOX ADOPTION

Invitations to the LMS page were sent to all faculty and graduate students
within our department (N = 54), and the toolbox was promoted in a
department-wide email and at a faculty meeting. However, less than
a quarter of those receiving an invitation to the LMS page accessed
it within the first week (8 of 54). To encourage toolbox utilization, a
small financial incentive was offered to users who submitted an inclusive
teaching rubric, participated in a DEI activity or event, and submitted
a reflection post on the discussion board within the Spring semester.
Not a single faculty member or graduate student pursued the financial
incentive, and by mid-March, our university had shifted to fully remote
instruction because of the pandemic. In the subsequent months, we
added resources to the toolbox about teaching online, fostering
community despite social distancing, and preserving equity in turbulent
times, but utilization of the toolbox remained low that spring semester,
with zero page views for 10 of 13 weeks.

Disappointedly, engagement with this sharable resource never improved,
despite our best efforts. Invitations were re-sent in 2022 and 2023
to the original list of prospective participants, as well as to 22 other
members of our department (including staff and postdocs), but 18%
(14 of 76) of invitations remain unaccepted. Of the participants who
accepted the invitation, 35% (22 of 62) have never accessed the page,
and 48% (30 of 62) have spent less than 10 minutes on the page. We

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 125
have continued to offer the financial incentive for toolbox utilization every
semester since 2020 but have never had anyone participate. The toolbox
is periodically mentioned in faculty meetings, but reminding colleagues
about this resource has not translated into meaningful adoption by users.
In contrast to the success of our poster symposium, this route to build
community within our department has largely failed.

   Considerations when developing an instructional toolbox for
   classroom inclusion

   We had not anticipated how challenging it would be to get departmental
   personnel to utilize our instructional toolbox. However, conversations
   amongst the faculty involved in the resource's creation have identified
   several potential barriers to its widespread adoption. To start, the toolbox
   was launched partway through the semester, and shortly before COVID-19
   drastically altered everyone's professional and personal lives. The timing
   of this release, coupled with the increase in student-directed emotional
   labor (which involves actively monitoring and catering to students' emotional
   needs, often at the behest of one's own) (White Berheide et al., 2022)
   and the decrease in work productivity (Esquivel et al., 2023) during the
   pandemic, likely explain the lack of engagement with the toolbox in spring
   2020. To capture interest and encourage timely utilization of your sharable
   resource, we recommend launching it in the weeks prior to the start of a
   semester, when instructional faculty and graduate teaching assistants are
   actively preparing course materials. Begin with a minimal approach, carefully
   curating what research articles, educational videos, etc. you include, to avoid
   choice overload / paralysis amongst participants (Reutskaja et al., 2020).
   One may also find it worthwhile to conduct a survey to identify what people
   want to learn about inclusive academic environments and what resources
   they think would be helpful. We believe we included too many resources in
   the initial iteration of the toolbox, and by not delineating the resources by
   topic of interest, potential users to the LMS page were overwhelmed.

126
Another potential barrier to our toolbox's widespread adoption was lack
of incentivization for DEI within academia. Research has shown that
faculty are less likely to engage undergraduates in research (Eagan et al.,
2011), adopt open educational resources (Todorinova & Wilkinson, 2020),
or engage in pedagogical innovation (Brownell & Tanner, 2012), when
a reward structure is lacking. At our institution, expectations regarding
DEI have only recently been added to the departmental promotion and
tenure process. Faculty participation in DEI activities can be facilitated
via expanded and more flexible measures of impact (O'Meara, 2022)
and via parsing down of other service obligations (Sullivan, 2021), but
few academic institutions do both. Consider how your department can
incentivize instructional faculty and graduate teaching assistants to
meaningfully adopt DEI practices into their classrooms. We believe our
financial incentive of $100 - $250 was too low to entice departmental
personnel with heavy workloads to engage in additional activities. We
may have had better adoption if we had offered individuals the option
to replace a service commitment for a semester with the toolbox (i.e.,
engaging with materials to broaden their perspectives, implementing DEI
practices to foster more inclusive classrooms, and reflecting on whether
they were able to achieve their instructional goals).

REFLECTIONS

We sought to improve the inclusivity in our department with the following
initiatives: a student-focused celebration and research symposium and
a toolbox of easy-to-access learning materials, academic papers and
educational videos for faculty to improve their knowledge base. We
initially thought these events and resources, as standalones, would
improve the community naturally in our department. What we learned
was that authenticity and fully integrating student feedback, and breaking
down barriers for student voices to be heard would be the most
meaningful and true community building aspects of our department. With
a pandemic occurring right after our first inaugural year for a student
research celebration, it took a lot to keep engaging our students and

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 127
faculty in what was a very challenging few years. In reflection, we have
found success in uplifting student opportunities and accomplishments,
and that has gone a long way toward creating true community among
students, staff, and faculty. What has become the most noticeable is
the increased student participation and engagement in all avenues of
the department since implementation of our work. Students have
reinvigorated the long stagnant biochemistry club, students serve as
members on the department DEI committee, and we have had students
become members of our HHMI cohort group. Sometimes all that is
needed to light a fire is a small spark--and in our department--our
community of faculty and students has ignited since our inaugural event.
In this chapter, we have discussed the planning, rationale, and details
of our student research celebration event (poster symposium,
Engelpalooza) and a faculty toolbox of learning materials. We were able
to encourage and accommodate students in belongingness in our
department by reassessing and redesigning the opportunity and
environment. In doing so, we have begun a snowballing effort of success
of student engagement where students are better positioned to be
supported throughout their academic journey and are better equipped
to support one another. We have more efforts and feedback to keep
improving each year and look forward to continually increasing the
community and knowledge of our biochemistry department.

REFERENCES

Brownell, S.E., & Tanner. K.D. (2012). Barriers to faculty pedagogical
   change: Lack of training, time, incentives, and ... tensions with
   professional identity? CBE Life Sciences Education, 11(4), 339-346.

Canning, E.A., Muenks, K., Green, D.J., & Murphy M.C. (2019). STEM faculty
   who believe ability is fixed have larger racial achievement gaps and
   inspire less student motivation in their classes. Science Advances, 5(2):
   eaau4734. https://doi.org/doi:10.1126/sciadv.aau4734

128
Casadevall, A., & Handelsman, J. (2014). The presence of female
   conveners correlates with a higher proportion of female speakers at
   scientific symposia. MBio, 5(1), 1-4.

Chrikov, I., Soria, K., Horgos, B., & Jones-White, D. (2020). Undergraduate
   and graduate students' mental health during the COVID-19 pandemic.
   SERU Consortium, University of California Berkeley and University of
   Minnesota. Retrieved April 2023, from https://conservancy.umn.edu/
   handle/11299/215271

Eagan, M.K., Sharkness, J., Hurtado, S., Mosqueda, C.M., & Chang, M.J.
   (2011). Engaging undergraduates in science research: Not just about
   faculty willingness. Research in Higher Education, 52: 151-177.

Esquivel, A., Marincean, S., & Benore, M. (2023). The effect of the
   COVID-19 pandemic on STEM faculty: Productivity and work-life
   balance. PLoS ONE 18(1): e0280581.

Flaherty, E.A., Urbanek, R.E., Wood, D.M., Day, C.C., D'Acunto, L.E., Quinn,
   V.S., & Zollner, P.A. (2018). A framework for mentoring students
   attending their first professional conference. Natural Sciences
   Education, 47(1): 1-8.

Gopalan, M., & Brady, S.T. (2020). College students' sense of belonging:
   A national perspective. Educational Researcher, 49(2): 134-137.
   https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X19897622

Giovenco, D., Shook-Sa, B.E., Hutson, B.E., Buchanan, L., Fisher, E.B., &
   Pettifor, A. (2022). Social isolation and psychological distress among
   southern U.S. college students in the era of COVID-19. PLoS One,
   17(12): e0279485.

Lacher, L., & Biehl, C. (2018). Using Discord to understand and moderate
   collaboration and teamwork. Proceedings of the 49th ACM technical
   symposium on computer science education (pp. 1107).

Merrian-Webster. (n.d.). Lollapalooza.  In Merriam-Webster.com
   dictionary. Retrieved June 1, 2023,  from https://www.merriam-
   webster.com/dictionary/lollapalooza

FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                EDUCATION 129
Mowreader, A. (2023, March 14). Campus engagement tip: Building
   community and engagement. Inside higher ed. Retrieved in April 2023
   from:https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2023/03/15/six-factors-
   improve-student-connections

O'Meara, K.A. 2022. Enabling possibility: Reform of faculty appointments
   and evaluation. TIAA Institute. Retrieved April 10, 2023, from
   https://www.tiaa.org/content/dam/tiaa/institute/pdf/insights-report/
   2022-03/tiaa-institute-reform-of-faculty-appointments-and-
   evaluation-omeara-ti-march-2022.pdf

Pedersen, C.L., Lymburner, J., Ali, J.I., & Coburn, P.I. (2013). Organizing an
   undergraduate psychology conference: The successes and challenges
   of employing a student-led approach. Psychology Learning and
   Teaching, 12(1), 83-91.

Reutskaja, E., Iyengar, S., Fasolo, B., & Misuraca, R. (2020). Cognitive
   and affective consequences of information and choice overload. In R.
   Viale (Ed.), Routledge handbook of bounded rationality (pp. 625-636).
   Routledge.

Rowe, N., & Ilic., D. (2015). Rethinking poster presentations at large-scale
   scientific meetings - is it time for the format to evolve? The FEBS
   Journal, 282(19), 3661-3668.

Samuelson, W., & Zeckhauser, R. (1988). Status quo bias in decision
   making. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 1, 7-59.

Sardelis, S., & Drew, J.A. (2016). Not "pulling up the ladder": Women
   who organize conference symposia provide greater opportunities for
   women to speak at conservation conferences. PLoS One, 11(7):
   e0160015.

Soria, K., Brayden, R., Horgos, B., & Hallahan, K. (2020). Undergraduate
   experiences during the COVID-19 pandemic: Disparities by race and
   ethnicity. SERU Consortium, University of California Berkeley and
   University of Minnesota. Retrieved April 5, 2023, from
   https://conservancy.umn.edu/handle/11299/218339

130
Sullivan, B. (2021). When you feel overwhelmed, subtraction can lead
   to gains. Psychology Today. Retrieved April 5, 2023, from
   https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/pleased-meet-me/202106/
   when-you-feel-overwhelmed-subtraction-can-lead-gains

Todorinova, L., & Wilkinson, Z.T. (2020). Incentivizing faculty for open
   educational resources (OER) adoption and open textbook authoring.
   The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 46(6), 102220.

Xu, D., Solanki, S., McPartlan, P. & Sato, B. (2018). EASEing students into
   college: The impact of multidimensional support for underprepared
   students. Educational Researcher, 47(7): 435-450. https://doi.org/
   10.3102/0013189X18778559

White Berheide, C., Carpenter, M.A., & Cotter, D.A. (2022). Teaching
   college in the time of COVID-19: Gender and race differences in faculty
   emotional labor. Sex Roles, 86(7-8), 441-455.

Zajonc, R.B. (1968). Attitudinal effects of mere exposure. Journal of
   Personality and Social Psychology, 9(2p2), 1-27.

This program is supported in part by a grant to Virginia Tech from the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute through the Inclusive Excellence Grant.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 131
132
VIGNETTE: REFLECTING ON THE IMPACT OF
ENGELPALOOZA

ERIN DROLET

As a first-year student in biochemistry, I faced challenges connecting
with other students in my major and engaging with biochemistry faculty
members. Many of our introductory courses were attended by students
from various disciplines, making it difficult to establish a strong sense of
community within the biochemistry program during my first two years at
Virginia Tech. However, in my third year, the Department of Biochemistry
took steps to address this issue by organizing an annual event called
Engelpalooza. This event, initially a poster session for undergraduate
researchers to present their work, has evolved over the years to include
guest speakers, research demonstrations, and information on numerous
opportunities for undergraduate students. Personally, I presented my
research at two Engelpalooza events and was involved in planning a third.
Engelpalooza not only boosted my confidence in my research skills as
an undergraduate student but also fostered a sense of belonging within
the biochemistry community. Being part of the planning committee as a
graduate student allowed me to contribute to the growth of Engelpalooza,
particularly for incoming students, and further strengthen our community.
This event played a crucial role in building the sense of camaraderie that
was lacking when I initially joined the biochemistry program.

During the summer of 2019, I worked as an undergraduate researcher for
Dr. Anne Brown and presented my initial findings at a research poster
session in August. Surprisingly, I discovered a deep appreciation for
attending research poster symposia. Creating a poster helped me gain
a better understanding of my own findings, and I thoroughly enjoyed
sharing and discussing my research with others. However, the audience
at this event consisted of undergraduate students from various fields,
leading to difficulties in explaining my research to those unfamiliar
with biochemistry. In October 2019, I had the opportunity to present
my poster at Engelpalooza, which was a vastly different experience.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 133
Because everyone in attendance was knowledgeable about biochemistry,
I could delve into more detail about my research and engage in thought-
provoking discussions. Engelpalooza also provided me with the chance
to interact with faculty members I had not yet met and explore research
conducted in other laboratories within our department. It helped me
transcend the boundaries of my own research space and truly become
part of the larger biochemistry community. Engelpalooza not only served
as a platform for professional development but also allowed new
undergraduate students to see the excitement of research. Students
attending the event could explore innovative scientific posters and
engage with the presenters, igniting their curiosity about research. In
fact, it was common for students to reach out to faculty members after
being inspired by their work at Engelpalooza. This event played a pivotal
role in breaking down barriers and demonstrating the thrilling aspects of
research to prospective students, making it less intimidating for them to
approach faculty members and inquire about joining their labs.

In 2020, community was lacking in many of our lives due to the
pandemic. The Department of Biochemistry decided to hold
Engelpalooza virtually via Discord, an instant messaging and video
calling social platform where users can interact in private chats or as
part of communities called "servers". Several biochemistry students and
faculty members worked together to create a Discord server to host
Engelpalooza. Within the server, there were voice chat rooms where
undergraduate and graduate students presented their research. Students
were able to experience presenting their research when many other
conferences were canceled. I was one of the many students who
presented at this Engelpalooza. I had already given several research
presentations up to that point, so I did not grow as much professionally
from this experience as I had with my first Engelpalooza. However,
Engelpalooza that year tremendously boosted my morale because I was
able to interact with my friends in the department who I had not spoken
to since March 2020. The event helped me feel like I was not alone and
made me more excited for when we could hold Engelpalooza in person
once again.

134
In addition to the research presentation voice chat rooms, there were
other spaces in the Discord server dedicated to sharing various
community resources, including information about graduate school, the
American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, undergraduate
research, and study abroad. There were also chats to network with
students and faculty. Engelpalooza helped our department feel like a
community in a time of isolation. Not only was Engelpalooza important
for the first-year students in our department to learn about the
opportunities that are available to them and meet their peers, but it was
also helpful for our continuing students and faculty members to feel that
our community was still present. One of the other important things that
came out of Engelpalooza was a Discord server for Biochemistry students
to chat with each other, ask for help in classes, and play video games
together. Overall, Engelpalooza 2020 helped to continue building our
community and helped us feel connected in a time of virtual learning.

The next Engelpalooza that I was involved in was in 2022, and it was back
to being in person. I was a graduate student at the time, and my role
was to help coordinate the different information and activity tables. That
year at Engelpalooza, there was information about the undergraduate
Biochemistry Club, Biochemistry Graduate Student Association, the
American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, undergraduate
research, biochemistry peer mentors, and study abroad. At one table,
they held a demonstration for Oxford Nanopore sequencing to get people
excited about an undergraduate research experience pilot program. In
a nearby room, another group was demonstrating virtual reality and
how it could be used for science communication. Other members of
the planning committee expanded the event to include a Virginia Tech
Biochemistry alum to speak before the poster sessions, and inviting
our school mascot, the Hokie Bird, to visit. Several biochemistry classes
were canceled that day to enable students to go to Engelpalooza, and
some professors offered extra credit for talking to some of the students
presenting their research.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 135
Engelpalooza 2022 was a resounding success, with numerous students
presenting their research and many more attending to support their
peers and learn more about our department. It was a delightful
experience to contribute to the event's planning and ensure the best
possible experience for the students. Involvement in the planning
committee also revealed to me that the impact of Engelpalooza extended
beyond the students. Faculty members eagerly participated in
Engelpalooza, displaying enthusiasm for the impressive research
conducted by our students. A few days after the event, the planning
committee convened to discuss ideas for enhancing and expanding
Engelpalooza for the following year. With several new members joining
our department, a multitude of fresh ideas emerged to transform
Engelpalooza into more than just a modest poster session for our
students but a community-wide event that unites everyone.

Engelpalooza has proven to be an invaluable experience for me and many
other students in the Department of Biochemistry. It offers students
their initial exposure to research, which is conducted by their friends
and peers. Many faculty members also attended the event. Engelpalooza
demonstrates to students that research is an exciting endeavor and
diminishes the intimidation of approaching faculty members to join their
labs. Personally, as a presenter, I have experienced the tremendous
confidence boost that comes from sharing your work for the first time.
Additionally, the process of creating a poster and articulating your
findings to others compels you to possess a strong understanding of
your research. It is rewarding to have a tangible representation of your
hard work. As an undergraduate student, Engelpalooza enhanced my
skills as a science communicator and instilled excitement in me about
the work my peers were undertaking. As a graduate student serving
on the planning committee, I have witnessed the significant impact
Engelpalooza has on the faculty within our department. Faculty members
eagerly participate and encourage student involvement in the exciting
opportunities our department offers. They equally relish engaging with
students and learning about their research. Faculty members pose
thought-provoking questions that stimulate students to think critically
about their findings and potentially identify new research directions. At
its core, Engelpalooza is a research poster symposium. However, it has
evolved into a pivotal event for our community, prompting us to expand it

136
each year by incorporating additional events and opportunities to foster
growth and connection among our students.
This program is supported in part by a grant to Virginia Tech from the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute through the Inclusive Excellence Grant.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 137
138
CHAPTER 9.
TEACHING TO MAKE MATH RESONATE

Including Social Justice in a Graduate Course for Teachers
DIANA S. CHENG AND JOHN B. GONZALEZ JR.

ABSTRACT
This chapter describes how the first author ("I") introduced social justice
mathematics lessons (SJMLs) to teachers taking a graduate
mathematics education course on problem solving tailored to the middle
and high school levels. SJML's provide students with experiences where
mathematics can be used to make the world more equal and just, and
learning to teach for social justice is a process by which teachers adapt
their mathematical lessons to social justice contexts. In particular, I
explain how I mentored teachers first to practice solving SJMLs, then
use micro-teaching with their peers to create or extend SJMLs to meet
the needs of their student populations, and then to reflect upon their
implementations to build a sustainable way to continue using SJMLs
in their instructional practices. The results of pre- and post- surveys
indicated favorable shifts in teachers' beliefs about their teaching for the
purposes of empowering students to consider social justice. From the
lens of a facilitator of the professional learning experience, we discuss
the sustainability of this approach to helping mathematics teachers
teach SJMLs.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 139
INTRODUCTION

As a step towards creating a more equitable and just society, educators
have been advocating for teachers to use social justice topics within
school curriculum (Darling-Hammond et al., 2017). Mathematics lessons
within social justice contexts can help students become knowledgeable
about social issues, connect mathematics with students' cultural and
community histories, empower students to confront and solve their real-
word challenges, and help students use mathematics as a tool for social
change (Berry et al., 2020). In tandem, students' desires to conduct more
advanced analyses to explain situations and experiences can motivate
the learning of additional mathematical topics (Gutstein, 2003).

Graduate courses providing professional learning experiences can help
teachers incorporate social justice mathematics lessons (SJMLs) in their
teaching (Bartell, 2013). Teaching mathematics with a social justice lens
is a complex process that spans beyond the short time interval of just
one graduate course.

SOCIAL JUSTICE MATHEMATICS LESSONS AS AN ELEMENT
OF DIVERSITY, EQUITY, AND INCLUSION

Teaching mathematics for social justice includes the idea of not just
preparing students to live in their worlds, but also to help them improve
and revise the social structures they experience (Bartell, 2013).
Mathematics can be used to describe and analyze issues of social
justice, and to support the development of actions to enact
transformative changes in the real world (NCSM & TODOS, 2016). Some
examples of social justice issues for which mathematical analyses can
be informative include but are not limited to diversity, structural and
systemic policies that reproduce inequity, and gaps in outcomes and
opportunities for minoritized groups (Cochran-Smith & Keefe, 2022).

140
The Learning for Justice (2022) organization developed standards to
assist teachers in categorizing social justice issues. The four main
categories involving social justice include: Identity, Diversity, Justice, and
Action. Within the Identity standard, teachers should help their students
express pride and have a positive self-esteem of their own identities
without degrading others. In the Diversity standard, teachers should
guide students to examine social, cultural, political, and historical facets
of diversity and exchange ideas and beliefs in open-minded ways. To
address the Justice standard, teachers should provide tools to students
to recognize when unfairness and biases exist. The Action standard
includes making informed decisions about when and how to take a stand
against biases and prejudices. These standards were written with all
academic subjects in mind, and various types of mathematical ideas can
assist in addressing these standards.

CONTEXT FOR SOCIAL JUSTICE MATHEMATICS LESSONS
WITH TEACHERS

The ten teachers in the Problem Solving for Teachers graduate course
were enrolled in the Masters of Science in mathematics education
degree program at Towson University, a public institution in the
University System of Maryland. The teachers were licensed to teach
mathematics in the state and they all worked for the same public school
district in the county in which the university is located, Baltimore County.
Baltimore County Public Schools paid Towson University the tuition for
the courses they took, based on a direct-billing arrangement that was
negotiated between the district and the university. The teachers were
expected to pay back the district for graduate course tuition if they failed
a course.

The teachers began their master's degree program in Fall 2019, took
three graduate courses per year for four years, and graduated with their
degrees in Spring 2023. The master's degree was designed as a cohort,
in which the teachers took all of their twelve courses with the same group
of classmates. Each of the graduate courses had a different instructor.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 141
The seven courses that the teachers took prior to Spring 2022 ranged
from focusing on mathematics content (algebra, data analysis and
probability) and pedagogy (Common Core State Standards, technological
tools, etc.). The course that the teachers took in the semester
immediately preceding this problem solving course was Makerspace
Technology in the Classroom (described in further detail in the chapter
"Preparing STEM Teachers to Be Change Makers" in this book). The
remaining courses in their graduate course sequence from Spring 2022
through Spring 2023 included topics such as literacy, leadership in
equity, understanding and using mathematics education research, and a
graduate project.

The graduate course described in this chapter is the eighth in a pre-
designed sequence of twelve graduate courses for this group of teachers.
This course was taught in Spring 2022 during a ten-week session in
January through mid-March. The first author was the instructor for this
course. The course was offered entirely online, but the first author met
all of the students in-person while attending an hour of their Fall 2021
semester course which was conducted in a hybrid modality. Five of
the teachers were alumni of Towson University's undergraduate teacher
preparation program, and the first author had existing relationships with
them through prior coursework and other academic events.

Nine of the ten enrolled teachers identified as White, and one identified
as Asian. In contrast, according to demographic information published
by the Maryland State Department of Education (2022), approximately
33% of the enrolled students in the school district where these teachers
teach are White and 7% are Asian. Other races represented in the
student body of the school district include 40% African-American and
14% Hispanic. Four of the teachers (three females and one male) were
full-time mathematics teachers in high schools, and five of the graduate
students (three females and two males) were full-time mathematics
teachers in middle schools.

142
WHY SOCIAL JUSTICE RELATED DISCUSSIONS MIGHT NOT
BE MORE WIDESPREAD

Discussions related to social justice are not always encouraged or
welcome in classrooms, even when faculty members might believe
strongly that engaging in such discussions in academic settings can
better prepare their students for their future careers. For example, in the
state of Florida, there is legislation that restricts the teaching of ideas
about race and gender in higher education; as a result, educators have
changed the content of their courses when faced with the threat of losing
their jobs (ACLU, 2022).

For the purposes of this course, we are fortunate that Baltimore County
Public Schools is extremely supportive of initiating social justice
discussions within classrooms. Dr. John Staley, a Baltimore County Public
Schools mathematics educator and leader, was one of the co-editors
of the course textbook that was used (Berry et al., 2020). Dr. Staley
has initiated many district-wide and national professional learning
experiences to help teachers better "engage students in critical inquiry
about the world and potential injustices surrounding them, pushing
students to imagine and create a world with justice, fairness, and equality
(Berry et al., 2020, p. 25)." In fact, Dr. Staley also taught another course
in the sequence of courses for this degree program in Spring 2023,
focused on creating an equity improvement plan to address an issue
within teachers' schools.

MATHEMATICAL MODELING AND SOCIAL JUSTICE

Mathematical modeling is one way of problem solving that involves a
process of representing real-life situations (Lesh & Doerr, 2003) and
is valued in the Common Core State Standards (CCSSI, 2010).
Understanding the cycle of mathematical modeling is a pre-requisite to
truly applying mathematics to social justice contexts. Modeling is similar
to scientific experimentation in that it begins with a key question that the
student is trying to address using mathematics (Hirsch & Roth McDuffie,

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 143
2016). The question could be an open-ended question for which the
instructor does not know the answer, or one that has a definite solution
that other researchers have already found. But in either case, the student
engaging in the mathematical modeling should not already know the
answer to the question.

The student actions that take place while solving a mathematical
modeling problem related to a social justice context, were described
by Jung & Brand (2021). At the outstart, students need to interpret
the key question and the underlying social justice issue. Sometimes,
in order to understand the problem, it may be illuminating to review
multiple modes of media such as videos, news articles, or tables of data
related to the context. Next, students would propose some approaches
to addressing the social justice problem. This may include researching
additional information that could help solve the problem. Next, students
would need to mathematize the situation, such as writing mathematical
equations or developing other representations of the context. Next,
students would validate the solution against contextual constraints (e.g.,
considering whether the solution makes sense or is acceptable for the
given situation). Finally, student would apply the solution to the social
justice context. This may include justifying mathematical conclusions as
they relate to the context, and reporting the conclusions so that people
can affect informed actions.

Mathematical modeling is designed to be an iterative process (Anhalt &
Cortez, 2015). Once a student undergoes the process once, they may re-
evaluate whether the solution is the best fit for the situation and consider
taking into account additional constraints in the next iteration of the
cycle to arrive at a conclusion that is more realistic or viable.

WHY SOCIAL JUSTICE MATHEMATICS LESSONS MATTER

Berry et al. (2020) provided several reasons as to why mathematics
educators should use social justice contexts in classroom lessons. First
and foremost, SJMLs can help build a society in which students are
informed about their own lives as well as the lives of others. Mathematical
analyses can help students become aware of injustices that are present
and determine that they hold misconceptions about important issues.
Second, SJMLs can connect with students' cultural and community

144
contexts, and thus provide motivation and appreciation for learning
mathematical content. Third, SJMLs can help empower students to
identify issues and propose solutions to real-world challenges that they
face. Fourth, SJMLs help students learn first-hand that mathematics can
be a valuable tool used to inform social change.
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE GRADUATE COURSE
There were two main textbooks for the course, edited by Gutstein &
Peterson (2013) and Berry et al. (2020). Both of these texts were written
by in-service teachers and provide many examples of SJMLs used in
their classrooms. The texts also describe students' discussions on the
issues, students' mathematical work, teachers' analyses of the student
work, and student feedback on the lessons. The texts include authors'
recommendations for future implementations of their lessons. Berry et
al.'s (2020) book includes a link to online resources, such as presentation
and spreadsheet files that teachers can easily use to conduct the lessons
in their classrooms. Berry et al.'s (2020) book also provides a lesson
planner template that teachers can use to plan social justice lessons
on other topics, and recommendations for teachers for conducting
discussions on controversial social justice topics. We found these texts
to be useful for our graduate students, as they conveyed both enthusiasm
and the importance of raising social justice issues with grade school
students and showed how mathematics was used in the lessons.

Figure 9.1: Key features of Problem Solving for Teachers Course

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 145
Figure 9.1 shows a visual diagram with the key features of this course,
intended to be a mentoring cycle for teachers--a modified version of the
mentoring cycle developed by (Kara & Corum, 2023)--to become more
familiar with conducting (SJMLs). The first half of the course included
a guided literature review, where graduate students learned about the
Social Justice Standards (Learning for Justice, 2022) and, culturally
relevant mathematics pedagogy (Aguirre & Del Rosario Zavala, 2013)
because this includes the use of social justice contexts in mathematics
lessons, and solved SJMLs that were designed for middle and high
school students. The majority of the activities in which graduate students
participated during the in-class sessions were adapted from Gutstein
& Peterson (2013), and a few were adapted from Berry et al. (2020).
One lesson on diversity in cultural contexts was adapted from Goffney
& Gutierrez (2018). Appendix A describes how a geometry lesson was
adapted for online instruction.

The first author also used an originally designed SJML, which is further
described in Cheng (2023a). Because the 2022 Winter Olympic Games
took place during the semester in which this course was taught, the
first author used the mathematical tools of power indices to describe
an unjust situation in a current event. In the figure skating team event,
the Chinese team included an American-born female skater Zhu Yi who
renounced her United States citizenship in order to represent China.
Yi earned last place in the first round of the team event, and Chinese
citizens criticized her heavily on social media for the poor performance.
The teachers were asked to employ two measures of power to explain
that Yi's contributions in the first round did actually contribute towards
the Chinese team's advancing to the second round of the team event.

As asynchronous work outside of class time, the teachers were assigned
to read from both course texts and reflect on the use of SJMLs in the
classroom, through discussion board posts and responses to classmates'
comments. The teachers were also asked to analyze the lesson plans
corresponding to the lessons they completed during the synchronous
sessions using the Culturally Relevant Mathematics Teaching tool
(Aguirre & Del Rosario Zavala, 2013). Additionally, the teachers
completed SJMLs created by former graduate students who pre-recorded
their lessons.

146
In the second half of the course, the teachers worked in small groups
to design and implement an SJML. They were allowed to adapt a lesson
from an existing source, but they were also asked to make the lesson
relevant for their students by using their school data and more updated
information than might have been available to the textbook authors. For
example, to adapt a lesson on the Pythagorean theorem as it relates to
wheelchair ramps (Gutstein & Peterson, 2013, pp. 136-137), the teachers
took photographs of the various ramps at their schools and local
businesses so that their students could evaluate whether these ramps
meet accessibility recommendations.

Teachers also provided input to their peers on how they might revise their
lessons through a feedback survey. The presenting teachers were asked
to analyze their classmates' work, their classmates' survey results, and
reflect on their implementation. The complete description of the final
project is in Appendix B.

WHAT WE LEARNED FROM THIS COURSE

The Learning to Teach for Social Justice - Beliefs survey (Enterline, et
al., 2008; Ludlow et al., 2008), abbreviated here as LTSJ-B, was initially
developed to gauge pre-service teachers' beliefs when they entered and
exited their four-year teacher preparation programs, as well as after their
first year of teaching. When Enterline et al. (2008) and Ludlow et al.
(2008) were validating their surveys, they did not use the surveys with the
same group of students in a pre- and post- setting, rather they used three
different groups of students in the different phases of their educational
sequence of courses. In our setting, the graduate students were surveyed
at two points in time: prior to the start of the course in January 2022,
and in the tenth week of the course in mid-March 2022. All ten teachers
enrolled in our course took the pre-survey, but only nine of the teachers
completed the post-survey; thus only these nine teachers' results are
reported in this manuscript.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 147
The LTSJ-B survey consists of twelve Likert-style statements regarding
beliefs about teaching, which participants were asked to rate on a scale
of one to five, with the following categories: "1 = Strongly Disagree, 2
= Disagree, 3 = Uncertain, 4 = Agree, 5 = Strongly Agree." The higher
the score, the more the survey participants agreed with the statements.
The minimum score was twelve points, and the maximum score on the
survey was sixty points. Figure 9.2 shows the pre- and post-average
scores from the participants in this study. The pre-test average score was
45.56 points, indicating that the teachers already adhered to many of the
desired beliefs related to learning to teach for social justice prior to the
start of the course. The post-test average score was 47.11 points, which
shows that there was an overall increase in teachers' beliefs in a relatively
short period of time.

Five of the LTSJ-B statements were positively phrased and Enterline et
al. (2008) found that pre-service teachers in their sample more readily
agreed with these items. An example of one of these statements is
"An important part of learning to be a teacher is examining one's own
attitudes and beliefs about race, class, gender, disabilities, and sexual
orientation (Enterline et al., 2008, pg. 275)." Based on their experimental
data, the authors called this group of items a "non-controversial" set
of items (abbreviated as "NC" in Figures 9.2, 9.3, 9.4, and 9.5), with a
maximum score of twenty-five points. Seven of the items were slightly
more difficult for pre-service teachers to endorse, so the authors
considered these more "controversial" items (abbreviated as "C" in
Figures 9.2, 9.3, 9.4, and 9.5). These "controversial" items were
negatively phrased and Enterline et al. (2008) suggested that they
required reverse scoring. An example of such a statement is
"Economically disadvantaged students have more to gain in schools
because they bring less into the classroom (Enterline et al., 2008, pg.
275)." Participants who strongly disagreed with all of the "Controversial"
subset of statements would have a LTSJ-B maximum score of thirty-five
points.

148
Figure 9.2 shows the pre- and posttest- scores on both the Non-
controversial and the Controversial items from the teachers in this study.
Teachers exhibited a slight increase in the average subscores on Non-
controversial items (2.11 points higher on the post-test subscore), but
showed a slight decrease in the subscores on the Controversial items of
0.56 points.

Figure 9.2: Learning to Teach for Social Justice - Belief Scores of Participants

In order to further illustrate the differences between teachers' pre- and
posttest- scores, we created Figure 9.3 to show each individual student's
scores. The majority of the teachers (listed as #2, #4, #5, #7, #9) had
post-test scores that were higher than the pre-test. One teacher (#3) had
the same score on both the pre- and post-tests, and three teachers (#1,
#6, #8) had lower post-test scores.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 149
Figure 9.3: Individual scores on LTSJ-B Non-controversial subscores, pre- and post-test

RESULTS FROM BINARY SCORING OF LTSJ-B SURVEYS
We also re-scored the teachers' Likert ratings on the LTSJ-B survey in
a binary method, because we wanted a way to detect whether teachers
shifted away from disagreeing with the items between the pre- and post-
test administrations. In the original rating scale, if teachers rated an item
as either 1 = Strongly Disagree, or 2 = Disagree, we assigned a score
of zero to this item. All other ratings (3 = Uncertain, 4 = Agree, 5 =
Strongly Agree) were assigned a score of one. Using this binary scale, the
minimum score was zero if teachers disagreed with all twelve statements,
and the maximum score was twelve if teachers didn't disagree with all
twelve statements.

150
Figure 9.4 shows results of this binary rescoring. We observed an
increase in the overall average scores, from the pre-test average score
of 8.89 points to the post-test average score of 9.56 points. For the
non-controversial (NC) statements, the average subscore on the pre-
test was 3.78 points, and the average subscore on the post-test was 5
points. In other words, all of the teachers agreed with the NC items after
completing this graduate course. The average Controversial subscore
decreased by 0.55 points.

Figure 9.4: Learning to Teach for Social Justice - Beliefs binarized scores of participants

On the Non-controversial items, the majority of the teachers (#1, #2, #4,
#7, #9) had a pre-test score of four or lower, but all teachers had a post-
test score of five points. The alignment of all teachers' Non-controversial
post-test scores is shown clearly in Figure 9.5; this is also reflected in the
standard deviation of zero.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 151
Figure 9.5: Individual binary scores on LTSJ-B Non-controversial subscores, pre- and post-test

STUDENT PERSPECTIVES
DISCUSSION ON LTSJ-B SURVEY RESULTS

The authors of the LTSJ-B survey strongly recommend that teacher
education programs that include social justice agendas also use multiple
ways to measure their students' outcomes, and not solely rely on their
beliefs survey (Cochran-Smith et al., 2010). We also examined university-
distributed course evaluation responses of the graduate students. The
increased overall LTSJ-B survey results are consistent with one teacher's
comment on a course evaluation question asking about what they liked
about the course: "One of the most valuable things about this course was
the chance to talk about our experiences and hopes in melding social
justice into the math content area. It's not an easy thing to make teachers
feel comfortable talking about those concepts, but this course was an

152
excellent experience." In response to a course evaluation question about
whether they would or would not recommend the course to others, one
teacher mentioned, "Every teacher should have training to be able to
speak with their students about social justice issues."

There may be several explanations for the lowered LTSJ-B Controversial
item subscores on the post-test. On the course evaluation, one of the
teachers wrote in response to a question about ways to improve the
course: "One of the only things I could think of would be more `baby
step' lessons. For teachers not used to teaching social justice concepts,
it might be easy to explore less `hot' like race and socioeconomic issues
at first and ease into the idea with things like environmental action." The
teacher directly mentioned that having a hierarchy of topics that range
from easy to discuss to more challenging issues would be helpful, which
is consistent with having scores increase on the Non-controversial items
yet not on the Controversial items.

Another explanation related to the elevated post-test Controversial item
subscores might be reliability of teachers' interpretations of the
statements. We found that the wording of some of the reverse-scored
items was somewhat open to interpretation, so we were not too
concerned about the slight decrease. For example, for the item, "Whether
students succeed in school depends primarily on how hard they work"
(Enterline et al., 2008, p. 275), we could interpret it such that teachers
would want to have their students work hard but also see that the
opportunities (or other factors such as resources, teachers' hard work,
etc.) presented to their students are also a large factor of their success,
and this would be consistent with Enterline et al.'s (2008) rating of a
reverse scored item. However, we could also agree with a similar idea
to what is stated, which is that if students aren't working very hard
in school, then we might not expect for students to have successful
scholastic results independently of other factors - and then this line of
reasoning would support positively scoring this item. The ambiguity of
the interpretation of several statements could lead someone to respond
one way in one setting and an opposite way in a different point in time.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 153
DISSEMINATION OF SJMLS BEYOND SCOPE OF GRADUATE
COURSE

Two of the groups were able to disseminate their final project SJML
beyond the scope of the course. One group of high school teachers
compared the demographics of the students in their schools enrolled
in advanced track courses with demographics of students enrolled in
standard track courses, using the ideas from Berry et al. (2020, p. 81-89).
One of these teachers was asked by the department chair at his school to
present his findings at a faculty department meeting, and this indicates
that there is strong support from the local school district for having
faculty explore these issues and share their results.

Another group of teachers, Mark Heath, W. Brooks Lynch, and Jodie
Wohlfort, used the ideas behind a lesson (Berry et al., 2020, p. 89-98)
quantifying the number of students in a given school who might identify
as lesbian, gay, bisexual, transexual, and queer (LBGTQ+). The lesson was
initially written to include matrix multiplication, but the concept of matrix
multiplication was too advanced for the teachers' middle school students,
so the teachers adapted this lesson using multiplication of percentages
so that they would be able to implement it with their students. Students
were asked to research the student population in each of the grades
at their school. They were then asked to apply national percentages of
students who might have felt bullied or harassed due to their identities,
so that they could generate an estimate of how many students attending
their school might have these experiences. This group presented their
work with others from Towson University at the regional conference of the
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (Ciscell et al., 2022).

As Bartell (2013) mentioned, it is impossible to address all aspects
of social justice in one single graduate course. We are fortunate that
several of the graduate faculty at this university are teaching with the
lens of social justice, and this allows the teachers in our masters degree
program to gain exposure from multiple perspectives on how to use
social justice in their classroom instruction. As teachers continue to take
our courses, we can use previous teachers' work to show the next group
of teachers how SJMLs were used locally by their peers.

154
After teaching this course in Spring 2022, my colleagues and I have
implemented a few other ways to broaden the audience of teachers
who are exposed to SJMLs. In the Fall 2022 semester, we partnered
with other Towson University mathematics education faculty and Towson
University's Center for STEM Excellence to offer a fifteen-hour, five-week
long online professional learning experience. This experience was
approved by the Maryland State Department of Education for participants
to earn one Continuing Professional Development credit toward the
renewal of their Maryland Educator Certificate (statewide teacher
licensure). This professional learning experience allowed teachers across
the state, all of whom were not currently enrolled graduate students, to
hear about how SJMLs can be used in grade school curricula. Several
graduate students from Spring 2022 shared their SJML final projects
during synchronous sessions of this professional learning experience,
which allowed them to see how other in-service teachers interacted with
the SJMLs they developed.

Another venue for expanding the reach of SJMLs is through pre-service
teacher education. I have uploaded teachers' SJMLs from this course
and previous semesters' courses in an online shared repository of
resources for colleagues teaching undergraduate students preparing to
become teachers at our university - some of these activities are also
available through (Cheng, 2023b). These SJMLs have been used as
asynchronous assignments, to further impact the future generation of
teachers.

DISCUSSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH

In order to expand the teaching of mathematics for social justice in
schools, Leonard et al.'s (2010) have suggested that mathematics
teacher educators should provide and find more appropriate examples of
SJMLs. Also, they suggest that mathematics teacher educators provide
teachers with ways to see SJMLs in practice with the mathematical
content they need to teach, and provide teachers with chances to learn
from their practice to increase teachers' self-efficacy for teaching SJMLs.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 155
Whenever possible, having community-based or school-based field
experiences where pre-service and in-service teachers can field-test
their SJMLs can also be illuminating. Teacher interns in Leonard et
al. (2010)'s study found that providing classroom discussions and
reflections after implementing SJMLs helped students realize their own
agency and find their voice in working towards social change.

One semester may be too short of a time span to see significant changes
in teachers' reactions to novel approaches to teaching. For example,
Al Salami et al (2017) designed a fifteen-week professional learning
experience on an interdisciplinary science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) problem unit with middle and high school teachers,
and did not find measurable changes in teachers' attitudes within the
time span of the course (e.g., Al Salami et al., 2017). In the present study,
while we did find measurable changes in teachers' responses to the non-
controversial items on the LTSJ-B survey, teachers did not increase in
their beliefs on the more controversial items within the time span of this
course.

Future research could also involve a more comprehensive evaluation of
teachers' learning to teach for social justice. Guskey (2002) suggested
several general levels of professional development evaluation that can
apply to any kind of intervention aimed to help teachers improve their
teaching. The first level of evaluation includes measuring participants'
reactions to the professional development through questionnaires to
gauge their initial satisfaction. The second level of evaluation involves
measuring knowledge and skills that participants gained through a
content assessment. The third level of evaluation includes examining
organizational policies and practices that may assist or undermine
implementation efforts (in our social justice example, this could include
whether the school principal or district supports this type of instruction).
The fourth level of evaluation investigates whether the participants' new
knowledge or skills have made a difference in their professional practices
- and enough time must pass to allow participants to include this new
knowledge into their teaching. The fifth and final level of evaluation
examines whether student learning outcomes have changed as a result
of teachers' novel instructional approaches. Developing a longer term
and more comprehensive support system for teachers to increase their

156
capacity to teach social justice within mathematics classes is one of our
professional goals.
As of July 1, 2023, the first author is one of the co-Principal Investigators
on a project entitled "Making STEM Matter: Transforming Learning
through Teacher Leadership, Justice-Centered Pedagogy, and
Makerspace Technology," which will be supported by the National
Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program (Award
#2243461). This project aspires to support STEM teacher leaders to
develop equity-focused and social justice-oriented pedagogy. This new
project also aspires to create a repository of maker-enhanced STEM
lessons that can be shared more widely with STEM teachers beyond
the partnering school district. The time frame of this project is five
years, which includes teacher leaders' participation in several different
professional learning experiences from different perspectives - both
as graduate students taking graduate courses, and as instructors of
courses which other teachers are taking for Continuing Professional
Development.

   Acknowledgement

   This project is based upon work supported by the National Science
   Foundation under Grant No. 2243461. Any opinions, findings, and
   conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of
   the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the view of the National Science
   Foundation.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 157
         APPENDIX A

         EXAMPLE OF SOCIAL JUSTICE MATHEMATICS
         LESSON USED IN THE GRADUATE COURSE,
         PROBLEM SOLVING FOR TEACHERS

         The SJML described in this appendix was implemented with the
         Problem Solving for Teachers graduate students in Spring 2022.
         According to the Learning to Teach for Justice (2022) standards,
         students should be able to recognize or describe unfairness in
         many forms (Justice 12 / JU.6-8.12). Mathematics can be a useful
         tool to help students explore whether geographic representations
         that they see are fair or accurate.

         CONTEXT

         Two of my former graduate students, who were sixth grade
         teachers, adapted the lesson "Math, Maps, and Misrepresentation"
         lesson (Gutstein & Peterson, 2013, p. 189-194) for their final
         project in a Spring 2020 section of Problem Solving for Teachers.
         In Fall 2021, two of my undergraduate pre-service teachers used
         those lesson plans, further revised the lesson, and implemented
         it with middle school students. These middle school students
         voluntarily attended a free enrichment activity at our university's
         campus, and the student work from this implementation was
         shown to the graduate students after they participated in problem
         solving of this task. All groups of activity participants compared
         the Mercator map projection of the earth with an internet-based
         map projection and used proportional reasoning to better
         understand relative sizes of countries. I compiled all of the
         versions of this lesson, including middle school student work
         samples, to show to my Spring 2022 Problem Solving for Teachers
         graduate students.

         TASK DESCRIPTION

         Mathematics is inherent in making maps. All maps are misleading
         because they are two-dimensional representations of a three-

158
dimensional Earth. In this activity, students will examine three
map projections: the 1569 Mercator projection, the 1974 Peters
projection, and the True Size (n.d.) projection. Students will
compare the relative sizes of countries in these map projections.
Mathematical content involved in this activity include finding areas
of irregular shapes (HSG.MG.A.1 in the Common Core State
Standards, CCSSI, 2010), using proportional reasoning (7.RP.A.2 in
the Common Core State Standards, CCSSI, 2010), and interpreting
scaled drawings (6.RP.A.3 in the Common Core State Standards,
CCSSI, 2010).
INSTRUCTIONAL GOALS.
STUDENTS WILL...

Construct two-dimensional representations of a sphere to
understand why land masses near the Earth's poles are more
distorted than land masses near the Equator.
Determine areas of land masses taken from various map
projections
Discuss why using misleading maps (e.g., having certain land
masses under-represented or over-represented in area) in schools
is a social justice issue
Student Outcomes. Students were able to distinguish between
Mercator, Peters, and True Size (n.d.) projections. Using counting
strategies, students were able to determine the areas of irregular
figures. Students analyzed differences in area of two land masses
(Greenland and Africa) to provide a mathematical rationale for why
the Mercator and Peters projections are problematic.

               FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                               EDUCATION 159
     Figure 9.6: Photographs of student work on the Math, Maps, and
                              Misrepresentation activities

     Activity 1: Covering a Styrofoam ball      Activity 2: Flattened out paper that
             representing the earth                  covered the Styrofoam ball
                                                        representing the Earth

     Note: Lines of longitude and latitude are      Note: The lines of longitude /
        drawn on the paper that is wrapped      latitude around the equator remain
                                                intact on this unfolding of the paper,
     around the Styrofoam ball, with the goal
     of comparing these lines when the paper      whereas the lines near the North
                                                  and South poles are more spread
                        is flattened.              out when the paper is flattened

        Activity 3: Student Work on Mercator    Activity 4: True Size (n.d.) Projection
     Projection showing that Greenland's area     showing that Greenland's area is
                                                  much smaller than Africa's area
           seems larger than Africa's area

     Student used a coordinate grid             Students' ratio comparing the size
     overlaying a Mercator projection of        of Greenland to the size of Africa:
     Greenland and Africa (Gutstein &
     Peterson, 2013, p. 192). There were        836,330 sq miles to 11,670,000
     options to use dynamic geometry tools      square miles
     or transparencies with coordinate grids
     on them.                                          836,330/11,670,000 ~ 0.072

     Greenland 141 units, Africa 130 square     Interpretation: On the True Size
     units                                      projection, Africa is approximately
                                                14 times larger than Greenland.
                    141/130 ~ 1.08

     Interpretation: On the Mercator
     projection, Greenland appears to be
     slightly larger than Africa.

160
Social Justice Connection

Prior to this class session, most of the graduate students did not
consider the question about why cartographers might have a hard
time creating a two-dimensional representation of the world. Many
of the graduate students remembered having pull-down Mercator
projection maps of the world in their grade schools when they
were younger, but did not remember having discussions with their
teachers about how these maps might be inaccurate. The students
seemed surprised that the misrepresentations on the map were
so egregiously departed from reality (for example, the Mercator
projection's ratio is fifteen times larger than the True Size (n.d.)'s
projection ratio representing the sizes of Greenland and Africa).

The graduate students began examining whether other pairs of
countries would also be distorted in their relative sizes, to see
whether the same effect would hold for other regions of the world.
One of the graduate students completed an undergraduate study
abroad trip to Peru, so she was interested to see how other
countries compared to Peru. She noted, "Peru & Sweden look
about the same on the Mercator projection, but when you drag one
over the other, Sweden is actually much smaller." Other students
noticed that "Canada looks much larger than Africa, but it is
actually smaller."

Students also commented on the perspective of the Mercator
projection, in that the center of the map was in Europe (and they
mentioned that they have also seen other projections of maps
with other countries in the center, based on the country of origin
of the creators of the maps). Perhaps there is nothing inherently
incorrect about centering the map on one's own country of origin,
but being aware of this bias is important to note. Any map can be
recreated to have a different country at its center.

There was also some discussion about how far the countries are
from the Equator or the North or South Poles, and the amount
of distortion that might take place. Based on students' paper-

               FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                               EDUCATION 161
         wrapping activity, they noticed that any country that is closer to the
         poles might easily get stretched to appear much larger than reality
         on a two-dimensional projection. Being aware of this challenge is
         also illuminating.
         This lesson shows how students can use ratios to explain the
         relative sizes of land masses in two-dimensional projections of the
         world. This, in turn, helps quantify how the maps are biased. The
         activity relates to the Justice standard #13, "Students will analyze
         the harmful impact of bias and injustice on the world, historically
         and today." For example, using a distorted map can negatively
         impact resource allocation decisions if people underestimate the
         size of the African continent.

         APPENDIX B
         FINAL PRESENTATION - SOCIAL JUSTICE MATH
         LESSON DESCRIPTION
         Note: The grade on the final presentation (between the
         implementation and reflections written afterwards) comprised
         approximately 20% of the overall course grade.
         You will develop a social justice math lesson to present
         individually or with a small group. You may use a lesson idea from
         a published resource (e.g., a book chapter or an article), and
         adapt it to a local context or a context that is of greater interest
         to your students. If you choose a lesson idea from a published
         resource, please find a context / topic that is different from a
         chapter covered within this class.

162
Please plan to implement this as an in-class synchronous activity
during your assigned class session. Each presentation will span
approximately 75 minutes, including time to have your classmates
complete the activity. You should select 1-2 of the activity
resources that are available from the book chapter to present to
the class. Even distribution of workload among group members
will be considered in the grading of the presentation. Non-
presenters (your classmates who are participating in your activity)
will need to submit their completed version of your handout.

PRODUCT 1. SOCIAL JUSTICE MATH LESSON
PRESENTATION: BOOK CHAPTER AND
INSTRUCTIONAL ACTIVITY

Address the following questions (not necessarily in this order) in
your presentation:

       · What are the recommendations of the authors of the
           chapter, especially related to social justice / equity /
           cultural identity and mathematics learning?

       · Select one activity that the authors described and have
           your classmates participate in the activity (you will need
           to adapt the activity for virtual participation). Classmates
           should solve math problems that the students in the
           chapter were asked to solve, and possibly also solve
           extension problems that you or the authors create to
           further illustrate the ideas behind the chapter.

       · Explain how the authors recommend that teachers
           implement the selected activity with grade school
           students.

       · Find at least one additional resource beyond the book
           chapter that could help you answer the following
           questions within your presentation:

       · How can you introduce the context of the activity to the
           students? Perhaps you can use an engaging video or
           children's book or other resource.

               FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                               EDUCATION 163
                 · How can you scaffold the activity for diverse
                     learners? This can be a combination of your own ideas
                     and the authors' recommendations, as well as via
                     resources that you find.

                 · What are some anticipated student challenges with the
                     problems? [either explicitly stated in the chapter itself, or
                     some that you can anticipate based on your experiences
                     in the classroom]

                 · A summary of Common Core State Standards - Content
                     Standards (CCSSI, 2010) that could be addressed during
                     the solving of the activities presented

                 · Analyze the strengths and weaknesses / room for
                     improvement of the authors' lesson based on the
                     Culturally Relevant Mathematics Teaching Lesson
                     Analysis Tool (Aguirre & Del Rosario Zavala, 2013).

         PRODUCT 2. CLASSMATES' PARTICIPATION
         HANDOUT

         Your handout (or GoogleSlide Deck) should provide space for your
         classmates to take notes during your scheduled presentation (it
         could also list problems to be solved, or be a worksheet taken
         directly from the online resource). The handout should act as a
         reference page for your classmates.

         HANDOUT PART 1: STUDENT HANDOUT TO BE
         ASSIGNED TO CLASSMATES AS PARTICIPATION
         WORK

         An open-ended, cognitively challenging problem or set of
         problems (that could have multiple correct solutions depending
         on choices of constraints) that extends the original modeling
         problem, should be provided to students to complete individually.
         The problem could involve internet research or other research
         beyond the scope of what is being presented in class. You will be

164
collecting your classmates' work on these problems and analyzing
the work for Product 4.

HANDOUT PART 2: ANSWER KEY

The presenting group should submit a set of sample complete
solutions of the problems (at least two mathematically different
approaches / data examined, or two versions of constraints), along
with an analysis of strengths & weaknesses of the model you
developed.

PRODUCT 3: INDIVIDUAL REFLECTION ON
PRESENTATION(15 POINTS)

Following the presentation, each presenter will write an individual
reflection covering the following topics:

       · Informed by your classmates' feedback on your lesson,
           discuss the parts of the lesson that went well and how to
           improve the parts with which you are not satisfied.

       · Describe the part of your lesson that you feel was most
           successful and the part that needs the most improvement.
           You may use the Culturally Relevant Mathematics
           Teaching Lesson Analysis Tool (Aguirre & del Rosario
           Zavala, 2013) to assist you in your analysis.

What would you change for future implementations of this activity?

What would you change if you were to implement this with grade
school students?

What did you learn in the process of preparing and giving the
presentation?

Please rate the distribution of workload among all group members.
You should provide qualitative descriptions of what each group
member contributed, as well as give a percentage estimate of
the workload completed by each group member so that the total
workload completed adds up to 100%.

               FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                               EDUCATION 165
         PRODUCT 4: GROUP REFLECTION (15 POINTS):
         Refer to the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics book
         (Hirsch & Roth McDuffie, 2016). Include an explanation of how
         your activity fits the criteria listed in these chapters:

                 · Chapter 16, about what Modeling Tasks look like
                 · Chapter 8, about features of Modeling tasks that support

                     students engaging with the real world in authentic ways
         PRODUCT 5: CLASSMATES' WORK ANALYSIS (15
         POINTS)
         As a group, examine your classmates' solutions to the activities/
         problems that you wrote. Develop a rubric to score your
         classmates' solutions - the participation work should be scored
         out of 15 points.

                 · For any incorrect solutions, determine what the error(s)
                     were and classify the solutions based on error type.

                 · Classify all of the correct & incorrect solutions by type of
                     solution method used.

                 · Prepare 1-3 slides (add to your existing presentation
                     slides) clearly explaining the different types of correct
                     solutions and incorrect solutions. [These slides could be
                     used in future professional development sessions that you
                     may give related to this activity.]

166
REFERENCES

Al Salami, M. K., Makela, C. J., & De Miranda, M. A. (2017). Assessing
   changes in teachers' attitudes toward interdisciplinary STEM
   teaching. International Journal of Technology and Design
   Education, 27, 63-88.

American Civil Liberties Union. (2022, August 17). Florida educators
   and students file lawsuit challenging "Stop W.O.K.E." censorship law.
   https://www.aclu.org/press-releases/florida-educators-and-students-
   file-lawsuit-challenging-stop-woke-censorship-law

Anhalt, C. O., & Cortez, R. (2015). Mathematical modeling: A structured
   process. The Mathematics Teacher, 108(6), 446-452. https://doi.org/
   10.5951/mathteacher.108.6.0446

Aguirre, J. & Del Rosario Zavala, M. (2013). Making culturally responsive
   mathematics teaching explicit: A lesson analysis tool. Pedagogies:
   An International Journal, 8(2), 163-190. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
   1554480X.2013.768518.

Bartell, T. G. (2013). Learning to teach mathematics for social justice:
   Negotiating social justice and mathematical goals. Journal for
   Research in Mathematics Education, 44(1), 129-163. https://doi.org/
   10.5951/jresematheduc.44.1.0129

Berry III, R., Conway IV, B., Lawler, B. & Staley, J. (2020). High school
   mathematics lessons to explore, understand, and respond to social
   injustice. Corwin Press.

Cheng, D. (2023a). Using the Olympics to teach mathematical modeling
   and social justice. Banneker Banner, 35(1), 3-10.

Cheng, D. (2023b). MATH 325/525: Problem solving for middle school
   teachers. CUREnet: Course-based Undergraduate Research
   Experience. Retrieved May 27, 2023, from: https://serc.carleton.edu/
   dev/curenet/collection/264808.html

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 167
Cochran-Smith, M., & Keefe, E. S. (2022). Strong equity: Repositioning
   teacher education for social change. Teachers College Record, 124(3),
   9-41. https://doi.org/10.1177/01614681221087304

Cochran-Smith, M., Gleeson, A. M., & Mitchell, K. (2010). Teacher
   education for social justice: What's pupil learning got to do with it?
   Berkeley Review of Education, 1. https://doi.org/10.5070/b81110022

Common Core State Standards Initiative (CCSSI). (2010). Common core
   state standards for mathematics. Washington, DC: National Governors
   Association Center for Best Practices and the Council of Chief State
   School Officers. http://www.thecorestandards.org/wp-content/uploads/
   Math_Standards1.pdf

Corum, K. & Nichols, L. (2023). Preparing STEM Teachers to Be Change
   Makers. In J. Briganti, J. Sible, & A. M. Brown (Eds.), Fostering
   communities of transformation in STEM higher education: A multi-
   institutional collection of DEI initiatives (pp.13-25). Virginia Tech
   Publishing.

Darling-Hammond, L., Hyler, M. E., Gardner, M. (2017). Effective teacher
   professional development. Learning policy institute.
   https://learningpolicyinstitute.org/sites/default/files/product-files/
   Effective_Teacher_Professional_Development_REPORT.pdf

Enterline, S., Cochran-Smith, M., Ludlow, L. H., & Mitescu, E. (2008).
   Learning to teach for social justice: Measuring change in the beliefs of
   teacher candidates. The New Educator, 4(4), 267-290. https://doi.org/
   10.1080/15476880802430361

Goffney, I., Gutierrez, R., Boston, M. (Eds.). (2018). Annual Perspectives
   in Mathematics Education: Rehumanizing mathematics for Black,
   Indigenous, and Latinx students. National Council of Teachers of
   Mathematics.

Guskey, T. (2002). Does it make a difference? Evaluating professional
   development. Educational Leadership, 59(6), 45-51.

168
Gutstein, E. (2003). Teaching and learning mathematics for social justice
   in an urban, Latino School. Journal for Research in Mathematics
   Education, 34(1), 37-73. https://doi.org/10.2307/30034699

Gutstein, E. & Peterson, B. (2013). Rethinking Mathematics: Teaching
   Social Justice by the Numbers (2nd ed). Rethinking Schools

Publication.  https://rethinkingschools.org/books/rethinking-

mathematics-second-edition/

Heath, M., Ciscell, J., Corum, K., Lynch, W., & Wohlfort, J. (2022, November
   30). Engaging with social justice mathematics modeling lessons
   [Conference session]. National Council of Teachers of Mathematics
   Regional Conference, Baltimore, MD, United States.
   https://www.nctm.org/uploadedFiles/
   Conferences_and_Professional_Development/
   Regional_Conferences_and_Expositions/Baltimore2022/Schedule/
   Baltimore2022_Program.pdf

Hirsch, C. & Roth McDuffie, A. (Eds.). (2016). Annual Perspectives in
   Mathematics Education: Mathematical modeling and modeling
   mathematics. National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.

Jung, H., & Brand, S. (2021). Student actions for social justice-oriented
   mathematical tasks. Mathematics Teacher: Learning and Teaching
   PK-12, 114(5), 378-385. https://doi.org/10.5951/mtlt.2020.0133

Kara, M., & Corum, K. (2023). Pre-service teachers as researchers: A
   mentorship model. International Journal of Education in Mathematics,
   Science, and Technology (IJEMST), 11(1), 237-251. https://doi.org/
   10.46328/ijemst.2351

Learning for Justice. (2022). Social justice standards: The Learning for
   Justice Anti-Bias Framework, Second Edition. The Southern Poverty
   Law Center. https://www.learningforjustice.org/frameworks/social-
   justice-standards

Lesh, R. & Doerr, H. M. (Eds.). (2003). Beyond constructivism: Models and
   modeling perspectives on mathematics problem solving, learning, and
   teaching. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers.

              FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                              EDUCATION 169
Leonard, J., Brooks, W., Barnes-Johnson, J. & Berry, R. Q. III. (2010).
   The nuances and complexities of teaching mathematics for cultural
   relevance and social justice. Journal of Teacher Education, 61 (3),
   261-270.

Ludlow, L. H., Enterline, S. E., & Cochran-Smith, M. (2008). Learning
   to teach for social justice-beliefs scale: An application of Rasch
   Measurement Principles. Measurement and Evaluation in Counseling
   and Development, 40(4), 194-214. https://doi.org/10.1080/
   07481756.2008.11909815

Maryland State Department of Education. (2022). Welcome to the
   Maryland report card. Maryland State Department of Education.
   https://reportcard.msde.maryland.gov/

National Council of Supervisors of Mathematics (NCSM) and TODOS:
   Mathematics for ALL. (2016). Joint position statement: Mathematics
   education through the lens of social justice. Retrieved March 23, 2023,
   from https://www.todos-math.org/socialjustice

The True Size. (n.d.). The true size of...Retrieved March 23, 2023, from
   http://www.thetruesize.com

This program is supported in part by a grant to Virginia Tech from the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute through the Inclusive Excellence Grant.

170
CHAPTER 10.

STRATEGIES FOR CREATING AND SUSTAINING
INCLUSIVE MAKERSPACES

LYNN NICHOLS AND KIMBERLY CORUM

ABSTRACT

Although the world is amidst a technological renaissance, inequity
prevails throughout the design, implementation, and function of modern
technologies. Though not a panacea, a greater representation of Black,
Indigenous, and People of Color (BIPOC) scientists, engineers,
mathematicians, and computer programmers in the science, engineering,
technology, and mathematics (STEM) workforce will help safeguard
against digital racism. Due to the prolific nature of makerspaces in
schools, one approach to combat this gap is to increase the participation
of BIPOC students in school makerspaces, which provide training on
a variety of STEM tools and technologies and may increase BIPOC
students self-identifying with STEM professions. The purpose of this work
is to explore practices that increase BIPOC student positive perception
and comfort in makerspaces so that students feel empowered to
continue in STEM fields throughout college and in the workforce. This
will be accomplished by reviewing five themes in the literature that
are both internal and external to makerspaces. These include: effective
program leaders, changing the narrative of the space, building safe
spaces, creating support systems, and creating opportunities for
wellness and mental health monitoring. This chapter provides an
overview of these themes, emphasizing the critical role of efficacious
leadership in school-based makerspaces. This work also explores how
a mathematics, making, and social justice graduate course impacts
secondary teacher beliefs about incorporating social justice into the
mathematics classroom.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 171
INTRODUCTION

Although technical advances are ever accelerating, persons who are
Black, Indigenous, and People of Color (BIPOC) continue to be
underrepresented in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) fields (Funk & Parker, 2018). As a result, artificial intelligences,
technological developments, and digital tools espouse racist and white-
centric characteristics (Benjamin, 2020; Noble, 2018; Zou & Schiebinger,
2018). To counter these injustices and close the digital gap, makerspaces
have been proposed as a tool for increasing participation and training
for underrepresented groups in STEM fields (Barton et al., 2017).
Unfortunately, makerspaces have not been the easy panacea anticipated
and the literature suggests that specific strategies must be employed to
increase diverse participation in makerspaces (Barton et al., 2017).

The literature demonstrates that there are several thematic approaches
for promoting BIPOC student comfort, engagement, and belonging in
makerspaces, including: recruiting successful leadership, creating safety,
redefining a space, wellness monitoring, and student support. However,
the literature indicates that the five approaches have never been jointly
considered in addressing BIPOC student comfort in makerspaces. This
chapter argues that these combined approaches are essential to creating
comfort and belonging for students and that institutional makerspaces
must utilize these approaches to form a comprehensive plan for
addressing STEM inclusion. Without institutional change that utilizes
these approaches, the STEM gap will continue to grow for BIPOC
students, creating an ever more unjust digital society.

HISTORY AND CONTEXT

Makerspaces are defined as modern workspaces that bring together a
variety of STEM materials and technologies in schools and communities
to tinker, design, learn, and explore. Some technologies are firmly
stationed in the space, while others may be modular and can be
mobilized and brought to different learning venues. These spaces and

172
technologies are designed for both communal collaboration and
individual projects, exposing communities to contemporary tools, such
as: computers, Arduinos, three-dimensional (3D) printers, robotics
equipment, laser and vinyl cutters, movie-making technologies, and
soldering irons (Barton et al., 2017; Blackley et al., 2017; Sheridan et al.,
2014). These resources allow members of the space, informally known
as "makers," to engage in design thinking, prototyping, and modifying
projects with support from local equipment and technological experts,
who lead and coordinate the makerspaces. The spaces provide access
to technologies, equipment, and expertise that are otherwise costly and
inaccessible to local communities, K-12 schools, and global networks of
creators and problem-solvers (Blackley et al., 2017; Peppler & Bender,
2013; Sheridan et al., 2014).

The zeitgeist for makerspaces began in the 2000's in conjunction with
FabLabs, the rise of Make Magazine, and MakerFaires (Davis, 2015;
Dougherty, 2013; Taheri et al., 2019). In 2003, the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology bolstered the How to Make (Almost) Anything
course by including digital fabrication tools such as 3D printers and
electronics prototyping equipment in their first Fabrication Lab (FabLab)
(Gershenfeld, 2019; Taheri et al., 2019). Although that space had an
emphasis on design technologies, it can still be considered one of
the first modern makerspaces. Shortly thereafter, Make Community, LLC
started a Do-It-Yourself (DIY) community movement through the creation
of Make Magazine in 2005 and the first MakerFaire in 2006 (Burke
& Kroski, 2018; Make, n.d.). These institutions created accessible
instructions for a variety of DIY projects that encompassed the wide
scope of engineering, fashion, technological, and scientific endeavors.

Since that time, the enthusiasm for hands-on, programmable, and
constructible educational manipulatives has driven STEM education in
an effort to prepare students for twenty-first-century learning (Sanders,
2009). STEM activities in makerspaces provide a variety of academic
benefits, including: practice with design, prototyping, communication,
collaboration, teamwork, critical thinking, and academic enrichment
(Kiley-Rendon, 2019; Taheri et al., 2019). Although Gilbert (2017)
suggests makerspaces may become redundant as robotic manufacturing
replaces manual labor, she also acknowledges the enormous potential

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 173
for makerspaces to increase equal access to technologies and STEM
knowledge if levied appropriately. As such, makerspaces should be
considered a powerful tool for preparing students for 21st-century STEM
careers.

In spite of the prolific nature of makerspaces in schools, BIPOC students
are not regular participants in these labs (Kafai & Burke, 2014; Sang
& Simpson, 2019) and given the well-documented relationship between
behavior and identity (Simons, 2021), makerspaces must be carefully
established to foster the belonging that traditionally underrepresented
students do not regularly feel in engineering programs (Cirell et al.,
2020). This trend continues into the STEM workforce (Jones et al., 2018;
Kwasa, 2021; Pourret et al., 2021) and as a consequence, white-centric,
racially-insensitive, and inequitable standards become deeply embedded
in new technologies, including discriminatory search engine algorithms
and white supremacist artificial intelligences (Noble, 2018; Zou &
Schiebinger, 2018). An abhorrent example is the 2015 Google facial
recognition "glitch" that automatically tagged Black, African American,
and People of Color as "gorillas," "apes," and "animals" (Noble, 2018).
Furthermore, facial recognition software incorrectly identifies Black,
African American, and People of Color ten to a hundred times more
often than white faces and has greater difficulty recognizing women in
comparison to men (Singer & Metz, 2019). A greater representation of
BIPOC computer programmers changes this narrative.

Systems of institutional, medical, societal, and environmental racial
oppression have been well-documented in the United States (L. T. Brown,
2021; Kendi & Reynolds, 2020; Washington, 2006, 2020; Wilkerson,
2020), the effects of which have extended into computer science,
contemporary technology, and digital invention (Benjamin, 2020). The
shortage of Black computer programmers, engineers, mathematicians,
and scientists echoes these divisions (Benjamin, 2020; Jones et al.,
2018; Pourret et al., 2021). In 2014, just 6% of the STEM workforce
was comprised of Black, Latine, and Indigenous employees (Barton et
al., 2017), reiterating that makerspaces and STEM fields are dominated
by the white, male narrative (Kafai & Burke, 2014; Vossoughi et al.,
2016). The majority of women in STEM fields report discrimination and
in computer science, female representation has decreased to just 25%

174
since 1900 (Funk & Parker, 2018). Without measures to address this
representation gap by creating a sense of belonging and STEM comfort
during formative years, we will continue to see an ever-widening digital
divide that leaves our BIPOC populations out of critical STEM industries.

THEMES

The literature suggests a multitude of strategies for combatting a lack of
diverse participants in school makerspaces, and these can be grouped
into five main categories: effective program leaders, building safe
spaces, changing the narrative of makerspaces, monitoring student
health, and implementing support systems. These thematic approaches
to increasing BIPOC student comfort in makerspaces can be grouped
into two camps: internal and external makerspaces factors. Internal
factors are outlined as characteristics that impact student participation
within the makerspace, specifically the conditions of the space and
relationships between students and faculty. External factors exist outside
of the makerspace and include obstacles to participation, such as stress
and mental health, and academic barriers, including GPA and advanced
or honors classes. The interplay of internal and external factors provides
a comprehensive approach to boosting student comfort and belonging in
makerspaces.

INTERNAL FACTOR: EFFECTIVE PROGRAM LEADERS

Program leaders with high levels of efficacy play a crucial role in
successful STEM institutions that have high levels of diverse student
representation and low levels of BIPOC student attrition rates.
Makerspaces are frequented and frequently managed by white, adult
men, whose interests may not align with BIPOC student interests and
community needs (Barton et al., 2017). This can cause disinterest and
disassociation on the part of BIPOC students (Douglas et al., 2008). It is
crucial to employ effective leaders to ensure that makerspaces focus on
community priorities, promote strong relationships between mentors and

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 175
students, and offer expertise in the use of technical tools. These leaders
drive the direction of the space, norms, and culture.

Leaders who commit to long-term mentoring relationships and bring
technical expertise to the community are a critical component of
makerspace success (Barton et al., 2017; Jett & Davis, 2020; Kwasa,
2021; Masters et al., 2018). In the "Making 4 Change" program, Barton,
Tan, and Greenberg (2017) explored the characteristics of successful
mentors. Program participants included thirty-six Black and Latine K-12
students and the founders sought leadership from the community who
were knowledgeable about STEM, tools, and procedures. Mentors were
invited to participate in a long-term experience mentoring students in
the program. Although it was challenging to find leaders who reflected
the diverse participants (women, people of color, etc.), the relationships
of the mentors with the students played a key role in student retention
and success (Barton et al., 2017). Furthermore, Jett and Davis (2020)
demonstrated the need for effective leadership in their literature review
on factors that most significantly contribute to the success of Black male
students in STEM coursework. The results implied that long-term and
dependable relationships with faculty and mentors played a major role
in engagement with STEM and continued success. These relationships
extended outside of the classroom to extra-curricular STEM experiences.
The most significant relationships were those between BIPOC students
and Black, male STEM faculty (Jett & Davis, 2020).

Moreover, makerspace leaders must represent and center on the needs
of the community (Barton et al., 2017; Masters et al., 2018; Riley et
al., 2017). Masters et al. (2018) determined that makerspaces should
be driven by leaders who prioritize the needs of local participants as
opposed to institutional priorities. Masters et al. (2018) reviewed six
makerspaces that were managed by mentors who aimed to recruit
specific demographic groups, such as women, People of Color, and other
marginalized STEM populations, and acquired technologies or crafted
activities that supported their members. For instance, the group
Liberating Ourselves Locally in Oakland, California, was initiated and run
by people of color and focuses on endeavors for community sustenance,
such as cuisine, textiles, accommodations, art, technologies, and culture
(Masters et al., 2018). These programs engaged community members,

176
especially people of color, and supported participants in their endeavors
within the makerspace.

INTERNAL FACTOR: SAFE SPACES

A second factor impacting BIPOC student participation is perceived
physical and emotional safety in a makerspace. Students who do not feel
physical and emotional safety in a makerspace are less likely to engage
in STEM activities in the space (Bradshaw et al., 2014). Feelings of
safety are evidenced by student comfort in testing, tinkering, and sharing
their beliefs, questions, and personality with the making community, and
engaging in collaborative projects while having the confidence to make
creative mistakes. The cultivated culture of the space is non-punitive, and
students feel comfortable and capable of working within the constraints
of the space (Bradshaw et al., 2014).

One method for promoting feelings of emotional and physical safety in
a makerspace is to create spaces that are representative of the shared
identities of participants (Barton et al., 2017; Holbert, 2016; Masters et
al., 2018; Vossoughi et al., 2016; Young et al., 2013). Makerspaces and
STEM activities that target marginalized populations have been shown to
yield positive results for recruitment and retention of BIPOC participants.
Masters et al. (2018) reviewed several makerspaces that focused on a
particular demographic group and their goals; thus creating a feeling
of belonging for participants. Two examples that focus on demographic
groups include the Liberating Ourselves Locally Makerspace in Oakland
and the MergeSort Makerspace in New York. The Liberating Ourselves
Locally makerspace is managed and run by people of color and focuses
on community enhancement, whereas the MergeSort Makerspace
promotes women and non-binary makers in the STEM arena (Masters et
al., 2018). Both spaces created an environment where participants feel as
though they are part of a community that prioritizes their identity.

An additional approach for making a space safe is to increase comfort
with technologies through tinkering, play, and normalized risk taking
(Holbert, 2016; Papert, 1991; Vossoughi et al., 2016). Seymour Papert's
constructionist approach (1980, 1991) suggested that students are best
able to construct knowledge, especially in computer science, by playing
with technologies. Holbert's (2016) case study utilizes Papert's approach

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 177
by creating playful learning opportunities for BIPOC fourth grade
children. This "Bots for Tots" program allows students to use makerspace
technologies and build toys for younger students. A secondary goal
of the program was to bring students' own culture and traditions into
the toys. Holbert analyzed data collected in pre- and post-interviews
of the nine participants and identified that students enjoyed exploring
3D printing, laser cutting, and fabrication technologies to meet the toy
requests of the Pre-K students. The ability to tinker and play with the
technologies helped students feel confident in their ability to use the
equipment to manufacture the toys (Holbert, 2016). Vossoughi (2016)
also recommended that makerspaces normalize risk taking in their
practices in order to promote BIPOC student comfort in the space.

INTERNAL FACTOR: CHANGING THE NARRATIVE OF THE
MAKERSPACE

Another internal factor in increasing BIPOC student comfort in
makerspaces is changing the student perception of a space (Barton et
al., 2017; Kafai & Burke, 2014; Sang & Simpson, 2019; Vossoughi et al.,
2016). This can be accomplished by adjusting the perception of projects,
incorporating civic engagement, and normalizing regular participation in
the space. These approaches reframe the space in a way that entices
students to learn and tinker without fear of social ostracization.

It is critical for students to perceive that spaces are trendy, cutting
edge, and intended for their interests (Sang & Simpson, 2019; Vossoughi
et al., 2016). In addition to combatting student perceptions about the
developmental appropriateness of a space, makerspaces must also have
some degree of a "cool" factor that entices participation (Sang &
Simpson, 2019). Youth identities must be reflected in the space in order
to allow BIPOC students to feel ownership of the technologies and
the room (Barton et al., 2017). Furthermore, BIPOC students may feel
alienated by projects that reflect white privilege (Vossoughi et al., 2016)
or are inaccessible due to academic requirements (Sang & Simpson,
2019). To maintain interest, comfort, and belonging, special care must be
taken when curating technologies and activities for makerspaces.

178
Moreover, makerspaces should make use of tools for civic engagement,
social justice, and sharing cultural identities whenever possible. Culturally
responsive design tools, such as ethnocomputing, combine student
culture and computer programming (Kafai & Burke, 2014). This kind
of project-based learning activity promotes civic engagement and
awareness of culture and cultural heritage. Kafai and Burke (2014) used
ethnocomputing with Arduino Lilypads to teach indigenous secondary
students about programming through e-textile manufacturing of quilts
that reflected student interests and cultures. Similarly, Barton, Tan, and
Greenberg (2017) reviewed the "Making 4 Change" program where
students created jackets that were both warm and well-lit to help prevent
violence against women at night. Both projects allowed students to share
their identity and provide responses for certain issues. In each case,
prolonged participation in the space was a key component of the
project's success (Barton et al., 2017; Kafai & Burke, 2014). Each case
required a mindset shift, both on the part of the students and from faculty
who need to reframe what can be done to engage students.

EXTERNAL FACTOR: WELLNESS AND MENTAL HEALTH
MONITORING

Outside of the makerspace, BIPOC students who are involved in STEM
programs should have additional wellness and mental health monitoring
to assess student stress of STEM participation. These wellness checks
should be a regular component of participation and provide students with
opportunities to articulate their experiences and reflect on the balance
of their stress with STEM activities. Furthermore, therapists who are
Black, African American, and People of Color and are paired with clients
who identify similarly reported increased feelings of connection and
concern for patient well-being (Goode-Cross & Grim, 2016), suggesting
the benefits of comparable partnerships for BIPOC STEM students. The
impact of race-related trauma and anxiety on Black students' health and
wellness has been documented in multiple studies (Adam et al., 2015;
Washington, 2020; Wilkerson, 2020). Cortisol levels have been used to
measure stress and results indicate that racially charged incidents spike
cortisol levels. While cortisol itself does not negatively influence health,
it is associated with higher levels of stress, which has been associated

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 179
with numerous negative implications for wellbeing (Adam et al., 2015;
Richman & Jonassaint, 2008; Washington, 2006).

Richman and Jonassaint (2008) found that Black college women who
watched clips of civil-rights speeches had cortisol levels that were
significantly higher compared with the control group who watched clips
of school athletic events. A longitudinal study by Adam, Heissel, and
Zeiders (2015) also demonstrated hypercortisolism level changes for
Black children in comparison with their white peers that had resulted
from long-term, traumatic childhood experiences or stress relating to
race (Adam et al., 2015). Both studies demonstrate that while cortisol
may not cause health complications, lower levels of cortisol are
associated with better health outcomes surrounding stress, cardiac
health, and sleep hygiene. The results of both studies are concerning,
because prolonged adrenocortical activation is correlated with negative
health outcomes, such as increased risk of infectious disease,
depression, fibromyalgia, fatigue, and post-traumatic stress disorder
(PSTD) (Adam et al., 2015; Richman & Jonassaint, 2008). Although less
racially charged than the previous studies, as previously mentioned,
STEM experiences can heighten BIPOC student awareness of
underrepresentation in a space, which can cause stress (Hall & Newman,
2020).

EXTERNAL FACTOR: SUPPORT SYSTEMS FOR PARTICIPANTS

Another external factor for increasing comfort for BIPOC students in
makerspaces is creating support systems for students. These supports
are defined as systems that eliminate barriers to makerspace activities,
form connections between participants, and supplement student
knowledge. Without support systems, students can feel less engaged in
programs and leave the program when they are faced with obstacles
(Kwasa, 2021).

The most immediate obstacle to student participation in STEM activities
is financial barriers limiting materials, program enrollment, and
transportation (Kwasa, 2021; Masters et al., 2018). Riley, McNair, and
Masters (2017) identified that a resolution to this barrier is the removal
of financial hardship via sliding scale memberships, free experiences,
or shared memberships. Some of the organizations leased spaces that

180
were easily accessible via public transit or offered exhibits for makers to
share and sell their works. Kwasa (2021) found that providing academic
assistance for first-generation college scholars and removing financial
burdens associated with academia were important supports for BIPOC
students in STEM majors. Black families are more likely to have
additional financial burdens associated with medical bills (Washington,
2006, 2020), so allowing students an additional opportunity to earn
money via campus jobs that pay more than minimum wage helped
alleviate student financial stress (Kwasa, 2021).

Additionally, peer and adult support groups yielded positive results in
increasing student comfort (Barton et al., 2017; J. Brown et al., 2018;
Jett & Davis, 2020). Jett and Davis (2020) found that peer support
groups create learning teams and study groups help Black male students
achieve and excel in STEM coursework. Extra-curricular or specialized
experiences that reinforce STEM content have also been shown to
support student success, especially if started at an early age. Smith
(2020) also supports the formation of affinity groups to allow individuals
to feel a sense of belonging. Hurley Boykin, and Allen (2005) also support
the idea of communal learning to connect knowledge in and out of school
and removing scheduling conflicts is also important (Sang & Simpson,
2019).

IMPLEMENTING TRAINING TO FOSTER INCLUSIVE MAKING
LEADERSHIP

Although all facets of inclusive makerspaces are significant, the most
influential catalyst of change is arguably an effective makerspace leader
who can formulate a combined approach to create inclusive
makerspaces. While institutional pressures and standards provide some
scaffolding for these factors, an effective leader ultimately ensures the
establishment and consistent implementation of all justice-centered
support systems, safety, and engaging spaces. This individual solidifies
the standards, expectations, and agenda for the makerspace and
subsequent projects and programming. However, honing these

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 181
leadership skills requires specific training in makerspace technologies,
pedagogy, content knowledge, and justice-centered, inclusive learning.
Although many teacher preparation programs also focus on building
justice-centered learning into STEM classes (Cochran-Smith, 2010),
there is limited research on the role of race, ethnicity, culture, and
social justice training in mentoring relationships between white mentors
and youths of color (Anderson & Sánchez, 2022), especially in STEM
settings. However, the research that exists suggests the importance of
adult training centering on these issues (Anderson & Sánchez, 2022).
Given the volatile and sensitive nature of discussing these topics in the
classroom, it is more important than ever that teachers and mentors
for STEM learning receive adequate training in order to foster inclusive
makerspace leaders.

Studies show that mentoring relationships with adequate foundational
training on justice-centered and cultural issues yield greater success
between white mentors and students of color (Anderson & Sánchez,
2022; Henneberger et al., 2013; McGill, 2012). In comparison with a
control group, Anderson and Sánchez (2022) demonstrated that training
mentors in racial, ethnic, cultural, and social justice topics impacts their
relationship satisfaction and quality of interventions by improving mentor
self-efficacy in providing culturally-sensitive support for their mentees.
The mentors who received training were better able to support and
validate youths after becoming more confident in their own ability to
identify systemic privilege and oppression. Similarly, the Young Women
Leaders Program (YWLP) at the University of Virginia also provides
training for their predominantly white mentors in supporting mentees
of color to grow their skills in connection and autonomy (Henneberger
et al., 2013). Students participating in YWLP were shown to maintain
global self-esteem over time in the program in comparison with the
declines of self-esteem for the control group. These studies demonstrate
the importance of providing adequate training in inclusion-and-justice-
centered topics to promote sustained and effective leadership in
inclusive makerspaces.

182
OUR RESEARCH STUDY

Although the difficulties of changing teacher beliefs surrounding social
justice topics are well-documented, teacher preparation programs that
implement specific justice-centered learning training can encourage
teachers to examine their beliefs, discuss and challenge inequity, and
incorporate teaching practices that celebrate diversity (Enterline et al.,
2008). However, the literature suggests that additional research
demonstrating the efficacy of justice-centered training in STEM teacher
training programs is needed (Anderson & Sánchez, 2022). Our work
focuses on the students in a mathematics, making, and social justice
graduate course who experienced a change in beliefs about the role of
social justice in mathematics classes following targeted social justice
and mathematical-making training. These students are secondary
teachers who are enrolled in a Mathematics Education M.S. degree
program. Seven of the enrolled teachers elected to participate in a post-
course survey reflecting on how their beliefs changed throughout the
course. For more information about the course, participants, and survey,
please see the chapter "Preparing STEM Teachers to be Change Makers"
in this book. Teachers who participated in the post-class survey self-
reported little previous experience with integrating social justice into
their STEM lessons but shared enthusiasm for future incorporation of
social justice via STEM activities after the interventions.

Each social justice training intervention followed the following formula:

     · Demonstrate the need for social justice topics including
         accessibility, water loss, lack of access to nutritious food, the need
         for a celebration of diverse heroes, and climate change.

     · Model the implementation of the social justice content
         complementing the technology, makerspace pedagogy, and STEM
         content.

     · Reflect on the experience and challenges of implementing social
         justice and making.

     · Engage in opportunities to practice creating social justice STEM
         lessons and projects for their students.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 183
The framework for the activity design followed an expansion of Mishra
and Koehler's (2008) Technology, Pedagogical, and Content Knowledge
(TPACK) framework that also incorporated making and inclusion as
proposed in the Inclusive MakerPACK framework (Corum et al., 2020;
Nichols & Corum, 2023).

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Although not all teachers participated in the survey, several included
enthusiastic comments that indicated their change in beliefs about the
importance of social justice. The survey collected short responses to
questions about changing social justice beliefs and results were analyzed
using an inductive and deductive coding approach (Saldaña, 2021).

One teacher walked away from the training experiences feeling an
increased sense of obligation to take civic action or implement social
justice in their STEM classes as indicated in the response below.

               "...It made me realize that we need to take our earth seriously. The
               second lesson made me realize how fortunate and blessed I am
               with having many options for shopping. It also made me curious
               about how many communities do not have [nutritious grocery store
               food] and how to help change that."

The training and activities brought awareness to the social justice issues
embedded in climate change and the lingering detrimental impact of
historic redlining in urban environments. Anderson and Sánchez (2022)
argue that this awareness and empathy have positive impacts on mentor-
mentee relationships who have different racial and cultural backgrounds.
Another teacher acknowledged the synergy between STEM, maker
technologies, and social justice and enthusiasm for solving equity-based
problems following the training:

               "I found the social justice-centered lessons inspire to help bring
               awareness to problems in our world. We need solutions. We need
               engaged problem solvers using all they can. Using tech help brings

184
               a different perspective and offers an additional layer of seeing and
               solving problems."

Other teachers reiterated their excitement for bringing social justice into
a mathematics classroom. One teacher noted the importance of being
aware of social justice considerations when presenting a mathematics
lesson:

               "Bringing social issues to light in a teaching environment sparked
               new ideas for presenting math lessons in an engaging and socially
               aware manner."

This demonstrated increased awareness of social and cultural
considerations. Anderson and Sánchez (2022) reiterate the importance
of this cognizance, as well-meaning mentors who lack cultural awareness
may offend mentees and lead to the early termination of relationships.
Similarly, another teacher emphasized the importance of including social
justice activities in mathematics class on a regular basis:

               "I believe that social justice can and should be brought into math
               lessons daily/weekly because students already have such a difficult
               time realizing the importance of math in real life."

This indicates the realization that social justice is an important
component of learning in STEM environments and that STEM teachers
have ownership over this implementation. As a result of the training
that combines STEM, makerspace technologies, and social justice, these
teachers are empowered to incorporate justice-centered making in their
mathematics classrooms.

CONCLUSION

This work demonstrates the impact of social justice STEM training on
creating confidence and self-efficacy for effective leaders in creating
sustainable relationships with BIPOC youths in makerspaces. While
much literature exists on the importance of social justice in STEM
curricula, this research suggests that specific justice-centered maker

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 185
training opportunities yield leaders who have the awareness and skills to
create makerspace programming that is effective and inclusive. Although
the sample size is small, the data yields positive initial results and a
variety of opportunities for future research into STEM, social justice, and
makerspace leadership. This work has future implications for subsequent
study of the teachers' involvement in technology leadership, use of
makerspace technologies in the classroom, and experiences engaging
BIPOC students in STEM work. An additional area of study can explore
whether recruiting successful leadership, creating safety, redefining a
space, wellness monitoring, and student support impact BIPOC student
participation in Makerspaces. In an increasingly complex world, it is
crucial that teachers act as leaders and change agents in engaging
BIPOC students in STEM.

REFERENCES

Adam, E. K., Heissel, J. A., Zeiders, K. H., Richeson, J. A., Ross, E. C.,
   Ehrlich, K. B., Levy, D. J., Kemeny, M., Brodish, A. B., Malanchuk, O.,
   Peck, S. C., Fuller-Rowell, T. E., & Eccles, J. S. (2015). Developmental
   histories of perceived racial discrimination and diurnal cortisol profiles
   in adulthood: A 20-year prospective study. Psychoneuroendocrinology,
   62, 279-291. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psyneuen.2015.08.018

Anderson, A. J., & Sánchez, B. (2022). A pilot evaluation of a social justice
   and race equity training for volunteer mentors. American Journal of
   Community Psychology, 69(1-2), 3-17. https://doi.org/10.1002/
   ajcp.12541

Barton, A. C., Tan, E., & Greenberg, D. (2017). The makerspace movement:
   Sites of possibilities for equitable opportunities to engage
   underrepresented youth in STEM. Teachers College Record: The Voice
   of Scholarship in Education, 119(6), 1-44. https://doi.org/10.1177/
   016146811711900608

186
Benjamin, R. (2020). Race after technology: Abolitionist tools for the new
   Jim Code. Social Forces, 98(4), 1-3. https://doi.org/10.1093/sf/soz162

Blackley, S., Sheffield, R., Maynard, N., Koul, R., Walker, R. (2017).
   Makerspace and reflective practice: Advancing pre-service teachers
   in STEM education. Australian Journal of Teacher Education, 42(3),
   22-37. https://doi.org/10.14221/ajte.2017v42n3.2

Bradshaw, C. P., Waasdorp, T. E., Debnam, K. J., & Johnson, S. L. (2014).
   Measuring school climate in high schools: A focus on safety,
   engagement, and the environment. Journal of School Health, 84(9),
   593-604. https://doi.org/10.1111/josh.12186

Brown, J., Schreiber, C., & Barbarin, O. (2018). Culturally competent
   mathematics instruction for African American children. In M. Caspe,
   T. A. Woods, & J. L. Kennedy (Eds.), Promising practices for engaging
   families in STEM learning: A volume in family school community
   partnership issues (pp. 49-61). Information Age Publishing, Inc.

Brown, L. T. (2021). The black butterfly: The harmful politics of race and
   space in America. Johns Hopkins University Press.

Burke, J., & Kroski, E. (2018). Makerspaces: A practical guide for librarians
   (2nd ed.). Rowman & Littlefield.

Cirell, A. M., Kellam, N., Boklage, A., & Coley, B. (2020). Reimagining
   the thirdspace through makerspace. In M. Melo & J. T. Nichols (Eds.),
   Re-making the library makerspace: Critical theories, reflections, and
   practices (pp. 47-82). Library Juice Press.

Cochran-Smith, M. (2010). Toward a theory of teacher education for
   social justice. In A. Hargreaves, A. Lieberman, M. Fullan, & D. Hopkins
   (Eds.), Second International Handbook of Educational Change (pp.
   445-467). Springer Netherlands. https://doi.org/10.1007/
   978-90-481-2660-6_27

Corum, K., Nichols, L., Spitzer, S., & Begen, K. (2020). Supporting
   teachers' ability to leverage makerspaces in the teaching and learning
   of mathematics. In D. Schmidt-Crawford (Ed.), Proceedings of Society
   for Information Technology & Teacher Education International

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 187
   Conference (pp. 1334-1339). Online: Association for the Advancement
   of Computing in Education (AACE). https://www.learntechlib.org/
   primary/p/216043/

Davis, M. (2015, December 10). A brief history of makerspaces. Curiosity
   Commons. https://curiositycommons.wordpress.com/a-brief-history-
   of-makerspaces/

Dougherty, D. (2013). The maker movement. In M. Honey & D. Kanter
   (Eds.), Design, make, play: Growing the next generation of STEM
   innovators (pp. 7-11). Routledge.

Douglas, B., Lewis, C. W., Douglas, A., Scott, M. E., & Garrison-Wade, D.
   (2008). The impact of White teachers on the academic achievement
   of Black students: An exploratory qualitative analysis. Educational
   Foundations, 22, 47-62.

Enterline, S., Cochran-Smith, M., Ludlow, L. H., & Mitescu, E. (2008).
   Learning to teach for social justice: Measuring change in the beliefs of
   teacher candidates. The New Educator, 4(4), 267-290. https://doi.org/
   10.1080/15476880802430361

Funk, C., & Parker, K. (2018). Women and men in STEM often at odds over
   workplace equity. Pew Research Center. https://www.pewresearch.org/
   social-trends/2018/01/09/diversity-in-the-stem-workforce-varies-
   widely-across-jobs/

Gershenfeld, N. (2019). Making (almost) anything: Neil Gershenfeld
   outlines the impact of fab labs. MIT Spectrum.
   https://spectrum.mit.edu/fall-2019/making-almost-anything/

Gilbert, J. (2017). Educational makerspaces: Disruptive, educative or
   neither? New Zealand Journal of Teachers' Work, 14(2), 80-98.

Goode-Cross, D. T., & Grim, K. A. (2016). "An unspoken level of comfort":
   Black therapists' experiences working with Black clients. Journal of
   Black Psychology, 42(1), 29-53. https://doi.org/10.1177/
   0095798414552103

188
Hall, K., & Newman, C. B. (2020). Ease on down the road: Navigating the
   Yellow Brick Road to graduation at a Primarily White Institution (PWI).
   In C. S. Platt, A. A. Hilton, C. B. Newman, & B. Hinnant-Crawford (Eds.),
   Multiculturalism in higher education: Increasing access and improving
   equity in the 21st century (pp. 109-128). Information Age Publishing,
   Inc.

Henneberger, A. K., Deutsch, N. L., Lawrence, E. C., & Sovik-Johnston,
   A. (2013). The Young Women Leaders Program: A mentoring program
   targeted toward adolescent girls. School Mental Health, 5(3), 132-143.
   https://doi.org/10.1007/s12310-012-9093-x

Holbert, N. (2016). Leveraging cultural values and "ways of knowing" to
   increase diversity in maker activities. International Journal of Child-
   Computer Interaction, 9-10, 33-39. https://doi.org/10.1016/
   j.ijcci.2016.10.002

Jett, C. C., & Davis, J. (2020). Black males' STEM experiences: Factors
   that contribute to their success. In E. O. McGee & W. H. Robinson
   (Eds.), Diversifying STEM: Multidisciplinary perspectives on race and
   gender (pp. 192-208). Rutgers University Press.

Jones, J., Williams, A., Whitaker, S., Yingling, S., Inkelas, K., & Gates, J.
   (2018). Call to action: Data, diversity, and STEM education. Change,
   50(2), 40-47. https://doi.org/10.1080/00091383.2018.1483176

Kafai, Y. B., & Burke, Q. (2014). Connected gaming: Towards integrating
   instructionist and constructionist approaches in K-12 gaming. In J. L.
   Polman, E. A. Kyza, K. O'Neill, I. Tabak, W. R. Penuel, A. Susan. Jurow,
   K. O'Connor, & L. D'Amico (Eds.), Learning and Becoming in Practice:
   The International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS) (Vol. 1,
   pp. 86-93). International Society of the Learning Sciences.

Kendi, I. X., & Reynolds, J. (2020). Stamped: Racism, antiracism, and you
   (1st ed.). Little, Brown and Company.

Kiley-Rendon, P. A. (2019). The academic benefits of makerspaces for
   middle-childhood students. ProQuest LLC. https://www.proquest.com/
   docview/2268372929

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 189
Kwasa, J. A. C. (2021). Paying attention to what matters: Individual
   differences in neural correlates of spatial selective attention in
   heterogeneous populations and increasing diversity, inclusion, equity,
   and justice in STEM [Ph.D., Carnegie Mellon University]. In ProQuest
   Dissertations and Theses. http://www.proquest.com/docview/
   2543455076/abstract/5D2287B96FED4D39PQ/1

Make: Community. (n.d.). Make: Community. Retrieved October 9, 2021,
   from https://make.co

Masters, A. S., McNair, L. D., & Riley, D. M. (2018). MAKER: Identifying
   practices of inclusion in maker and hacker spaces with diverse
   participation. Proceedings of the ASEE Annual Conference &
   Exposition, 1-8.

McGill, J. M. (2012). The Young Women Leaders' Program: Exploring
   factors and outcomes associated with emerging adult female mentors'
   experience [Auburn University]. https://etd.auburn.edu/xmlui/
   bitstream/handle/10415/3398/
   McGill%20Thesis%20Final.pdf?sequence=2&isAllowed=y

Mishra, P., & Koehler, M. J. (2008). Introducing technological
   pedagogical content knowledge. 1-16.

Nichols, L., & Corum, K. C. (2023). Increasing teacher commitment to
   justice-centered mathematics through maker-enhanced social justice
   activities. In E. Langran, P. Christensen, & J. Sanson (Eds.), Society
   for Information Technology & Teacher Education International
   Conference (pp. 411-416). Association for the Advancement of
   Computing in Education (AACE).

Noble, S. U. (2018). Algorithms of oppression: How search engines
   reinforce racism. NYU Press. https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctt1pwt9w5

Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas.
   Basic Books.

Papert, S. (1991). Situating constructionism. In S. Papert & I. Harel (Eds.),
   Constructionism (pp. 1-11). Ablex.

190
Peppler, K., & Bender, S. (2013). Maker movement spreads innovation
   one project at a time. Phi Delta Kappan, 95(3), 22-27. https://doi.org/
   10.1177/003172171309500306

Pourret, O., Anand, P., Arndt, S., Bots, P., Dosseto, A., Li, Z., Marin
   Carbonne, J., Middleton, J., Ngwenya, B., & Riches, A. J. V. (2021).
   Diversity, equity, and inclusion: Tackling under-representation and
   recognition of talents in geochemistry and cosmochemistry.
   Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 310, 363-371. https://doi.org/
   10.1016/j.gca.2021.05.054

Richman, L. S., & Jonassaint, C. (2008). The effects of face-related
   stress on cortisol reactivity in the laboratory: Implications of the Duke
   lacrosse scandal. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 35(1), 105-110.
   https://doi.org/10.1007/s12160-007-9013-8

Riley, D. M., McNair, L. D., & Masters, S. (2017). An ethnography of maker
   and hacker spaces achieving diverse participation. Proceedings of the
   ASEE Annual Conference & Exposition, 5952-5956.

Saldaña, J. (2021). The coding manual for qualitative researchers (4th
   ed). SAGE Publishing.

Sanders, M. (2009). STEM, STEM education, STEMmania. The Technology
   Teacher, 68(4), 20-26.

Sang, W., & Simpson, A. (2019). The maker movement: A global
   movement for educational change. International Journal of Science
   and Mathematics Education, 17(S1), 65-83. https://doi.org/10.1007/
   s10763-019-09960-9

Sheridan, K., Halverson, E. R., Litts, B., Brahms, L., Jacobs-Priebe, L., &
   Owens, T. (2014). Learning in the making: A comparative case study
   of three makerspaces. Harvard Educational Review, 84(4), 505-531.
   https://doi.org/10.17763/haer.84.4.brr34733723j648u

Simons, J. D. (2021). From identity to enaction: Identity behavior theory.
   Frontiers in Psychology, 12, 679490. https://doi.org/10.3389/
   fpsyg.2021.679490

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 191
Singer, N., & Metz, C. (2019, December 19). Many facial-recognition
   systems are biased, says U.S. study. The New York Times.
   https://www.nytimes.com/2019/12/19/technology/facial-recognition-
   bias.html

Smith, D. A. J. (2020). Theoretical framework of inclusiveness at
   workplace. 7(1), 11.

Taheri, P., Robbins, P., & Maalej, S. (2019). Makerspaces in first-year
   engineering education. Education Sciences, 10(1), 8. https://doi.org/
   10.3390/educsci10010008

Vossoughi, S., Hooper, P., & Escudé, M. (2016). Making through the lens
   of culture and power: Toward transformative visions for educational
   equity. Harvard Educational Review, 86, 206-232. https://doi.org/
   10.17763/0017-8055.86.2.206

Washington, H. A. (2006). Medical apartheid: The dark history of medical
   experimentation on Black Americans from colonial times to the
   present. Harlem Moon.

Washington, H. A. (2020). A terrible thing to waste: Environmental racism
   and its assault on the American mind.

Wilkerson, I. (2020). Caste: The origins of our discontents. Random
   House.

Young, J., Young, J., & Hamilton, C. (2013). Culturally relevant project-
   based learning for STEM education. In M. M. Capraro, R. M. Capraro, &
   C. W. Lewis (Eds.), Improving urban schools: Equity and access in K-12
   STEM education for all students. IAP, Information Age Publishing, Inc.

Zou, J., & Schiebinger, L. (2018). AI can be sexist and racist--It's time
   to make it fair. Nature, 559(7714), 324-326. https://doi.org/10.1038/
   d41586-018-05707-8

This program is supported in part by a grant to Virginia Tech from the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute through the Inclusive Excellence Grant.

192
CHAPTER 11.

CREATING A SPACE IN THE CURRICULUM FOR
EFFECTIVE MENTORING TO FOSTER STUDENT
CONNECTIONS AND AGENCY

CYNTHIA A. DEBOY; PATRICE E. MOSS; AND KAITLIN R. WELLENS

Vignettes by Mia Ray and Anette Casiano-Negroni

Figure by Adriana Pino-Delgado

ABSTRACT

Mentorship in an undergraduate institution has a significant impact on
student success. Inclusion and community are created when students
are able to share their cultural, social, and academic experiences with
peers and faculty. An initial survey of students in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines at Trinity Washington
University demonstrated a need for increased engagement, motivation,
and community among our students. To that end, we designed and
implemented a sequence of four required one-credit courses embedded
within the STEM curriculum. These Mentor Moments support social and
emotional wellness, with an emphasis on curriculum and career
preparation. Effective embedded mentoring requires a safe space for
students to form connections with peers, faculty, and the STEM
community members, creating multi-tiered mentoring opportunities.
Based on assessments and interactions with our students, we highlight
here some essential components of effective mentoring and provide
examples of how these elements may be incorporated in dedicated
courses and other settings. The implementation of Mentor Moments
and companion activities correlate with increased persistence of STEM
majors and the desire to pursue STEM careers. More importantly, we
experience a spirit within our academic community that lends itself to

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 193
freedom, belonging, and power in position and voice for women of color
in STEM. Through this network, we are removing barriers and increasing
opportunities, rooted in authentic relationships.

INTRODUCTION

Excitement and nerves echo through the halls of Trinity Washington
University (Trinity) as a new academic year commences. Fresh notebooks
opening and soft taps on keyboards signal that our students are ready
to take on the workload of a new semester. While sitting quietly awaiting
the start of class, thoughts of fear, anxiety, excitement, confusion,
anticipation and pride circle in the minds of our students. "What if I fail
my classes? What if I am the only person in the class who doesn't get
what's going on? What if I don't belong here? How will I make friends?
No one in my family has gone to college, how will I know what to do?"

Many students experience these thoughts and emotions as they
contemplate the monumental occasion of starting their first day as an
undergraduate student. More specifically, these feelings are heightened
in students majoring in STEM disciplines, especially marginalized
populations, such as women and students of color (Rodriguez et al, 2021;
Ong et al., 2018).

   Box 1: Trinity Statistics

   Trinity's College of Arts & Sciences is the full-time undergraduate historic
   women's college which is home to science programs including biology,
   biochemistry, chemistry and forensic science. Greater than 90% of students
   in Trinity's College of Arts and Sciences are African American and Latina
   and 80% are first generation college students. Recent funding opportunities
   from TheDream.US has increased the percentage of students with varying
   immigration challenges. Trinity is the only institution in D.C., and one of few
   in the country, to be classified as both a Predominantly Black Institution
   and a Hispanic Serving Institution by the U.S. Department of Education.
   Approximately 70% of students receive Pell Grants and have a median
   family income of $25,000.

Trinity students are 100% female and fabulous, from multiple walks of

194
life. (See Box 1). They are excited, enthusiastic, and eager to morph into
the best versions of themselves while in pursuit of their undergraduate
STEM degree. One of the key factors impacting student success and
belonging in STEM is intentional support through mentorship (Kendricks
et al., 2013). Inclusion and community are created when students are
able to share their cultural, social, and academic experiences with peers
and faculty (Estrada et al., 2018). To build an effective mentorship
structure at Trinity, we determined we needed to build this into the
curriculum so all our students would benefit from mentorship without
sacrificing time for outside responsibilities. To that end, we designed four
required one-credit courses embedded within the STEM curriculum to
support social and emotional wellness, with an emphasis on curriculum
and career preparation. (See Figure 11.1). All four mentoring courses run
concurrently with students from all science majors taking the courses
together. This was strategically designed for us to meet periodically
throughout the semester as one large multi-generational community of
women in STEM. We also take this time to break into Mentor Streams--
one STEM faculty member mentoring a group of students from various
stages in the STEM program.
Embedding effective mentoring into the curriculum requires creating a
safe space, which is necessary for students to form connections with
peers, faculty and members of the STEM community. This creates
opportunities for multi-tiered mentoring.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 195
Figure 11.1: Topics and structure for Mentor Moment courses. Figure created by Adriana
Pino-Delgado.

MENTORING REQUIRES VALUING STUDENTS' UNIQUENESS
AND CELEBRATING DIFFERENCES.

Creating a safe space means developing a community in which all
students' uniqueness is valued and differences are celebrated, therefore
creating an inclusive environment. Throughout the Mentor Moment
courses, students and professors participate in activities in which they
learn about and appreciate the uniqueness and value that each brings
to our community. In the Mentor Moment 1 course, our first-year science
students create vision boards on which they depict their goals and
aspirations. They then share their vision boards with students from all
mentor classes and STEM faculty during a large group class session.
Here, students share and listen to one another's stories and recognize
both the unity and diversity of their interests, personalities, and goals. As
one student explained, "I didn't see any pictures that looked like me, so
I made one. I added a lab coat with a Trinity ID and a microscope." As
this student so clearly noted, the vision board activity invites students to
bring their authentic selves into our community space. As a community,
we begin to create a safe space by validating student goals, celebrating

196
who students are as individuals, and fostering a sense of belonging and
an awareness that students are not alone.

Students continue to explore career interests and share their goals
throughout their second year Mentor Moment course. They develop plans
to support their aspirations which they present to peers. Presentations
include resources and strategies such as links and deadlines for
internship applications. Students develop confidence and leadership as
they acquire and share practical information. By inspiring one another
and learning together, connections within the community form. As the
professor also learns about each student's individual goals, it provides
opportunities for future discussions and follow up with specific resources
and opportunities. One student noted at the end of the course that she
received "mentorship this semester by being reassured" that her chosen
major aligns with her career goals.

Mentor Moment courses provide a structure for professors to get to
know their students, but more importantly, it provides an opportunity
for instructors to communicate to students that they care about their
well-being as well as their academic and career goals. In the beginning
of their second Mentor Moment course, most Trinity STEM students
surveyed (62%) indicated some hesitation about communicating with
professors. Student responses to a survey indicated that they hesitate to
communicate with professors because they feel intimidated, are afraid of
being judged, or worried about bothering their professors. Some students
expressed concern that they would not be able to put their question
into words clearly. One student explained, "I hesitate to communicate
with my professors most of the time because I get nervous about the
reaction they might have to what I'm communicating as well as the
kind of response they might have." The concerns students share help
us recognize that, as professors, our reactions to students are critical to
encouraging them to open up and seek assistance, but they also have the
potential to shut down their efforts. The responsibility therefore falls on
us as instructors to create a safe environment for communication, which
means that our responses to students need to be affirming and non-
judgmental. At the end of the second Mentor Moment course, a student
reflected that, "I think what makes [seeking help] comfortable is how
open my professors are to help me. They don't seem bothered by my

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 197
questions so I feel like I can go to them whenever I have questions".
When our responses to students communicate acceptance of where
they are, as well as the high expectations we have for their continued
academic growth, we begin to break down barriers perpetuating student
hesitation and create an opening for trust and connections that lead to
mentorship. (See Student Vignettes 1 & 2.) Through active and responsive
listening, we empower students to use their voice for self-efficacy and for
learning.

The invitation for students to interact with us as faculty begins with our
own understanding of our positionality and recognition of the hesitation
students may have communicating with us because of that lens. It has
therefore been helpful to provide opportunities for instructors to be more
relatable to students by providing examples of overcoming challenges
or sharing snippets of our own lives to be more relatable (See Faculty
Vignette 1).

Our faculty team participated in a series of training opportunities to
learn about topics ranging from implicit bias to culturally affirming
assignments to effective mentoring. (For examples of workshops, see
Table 11.1.) Each of us incorporated aspects of our approaches to
students both formally in our course policies and activities, but also
through our awareness and intentionality for every interaction we have
with students, recognizing that it all matters. The impact of faculty
interactions with students has been both magnified and buffered by
the effect of a team approach. This means that students on the whole
receive consistent messaging about the value they bring to STEM. Each
faculty member communicates this in their own unique interaction with
students. These interactions occur not only in the classrooms, but also
in the hallways, during office hours (which many of us have renamed
student hours), club activities, and science laboratories. Throughout our
interactions, and in our own way, we affirm to students their belonging in
STEM. We offer our encouragement, motivation, reassurance, and career
advice, but this positive interaction only occurs if students feel safe
and welcome to open up to our willingness to mentor them. Students
have reflected on the value of these interactions. One student indicated,
"I have the support of my professors and the people around me[.] I
would say that has a huge impact on how I am performing during this

198
semester. They give me advice, help me with any matters and they are
also understand[ing]." Another student added, "Even if it's just small tips/
advice, I believe it has contributed to my life. There is a professor that
has motivated me to keep pushing through in my classes, and I believe
that it has aided me a lot mentally and academically." The value of
mentorship is clear, but the effort and intentionality that faculty must take
to welcome students into a space to be vulnerable and trusting enough
to be open to mentorship cannot be underestimated.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 199
     Table 11.1: Examples of workshops supporting mentorship in the curriculum

     Topic         Facilitator            Key takeaways               Outcomes

     Cultural       Carl        Inclusive learning environments    Revised course
competency and     Moore        and practices; value all students   requirements
universal design
                                    Inclusive syllabi, fostering       including
     Motivating     Christine       growth mindset, culturally     mentor classes
     students to   Harrington
      learn and                       relevant assignments,                and
                                       meaningful feedback         interdisciplinary
      culturally
     responsive                       Recognizing privilege            approach
      teaching                                                        Addition of
                                  Empowering students in the        program goals
    Equity and       Bryan                learning process             including
   community       Dewsbury                                         academic and
                                 Combatting microaggression
     building        Floyd          and communication skills             social
                    Cheung          Increasing student use of      integration and
     Students                            support services;
     become          Tasha                                               career
  pedagogical      D'Souza                                            exploration
  partners with                                                       Developing
      faculty                                                        awareness of
   Confronting                                                     positionality in
microaggression                                                       mentoring/
  and building
     inclusion                                                         teaching

                                                                   Embedded tutor
                                                                        program

                                                                    Strategies for
                                                                   communication
                                                                   incorporated in
                                                                   Mentor classes

      Mentoring     Brett         supporting students to use         Activities in
     students for  Woods          active learning strategies to    mentor classes
                                                                   added to foster
       success                                  study;
                                                                       students'
                                peer and faculty mentorship for    effective use of
                                              students;
                                                                       supports.

                                fostering growth mindset

    Inclusive       Lindsey        Welcoming and engaging                Online
teaching online:   Masland      students online with check ins     strategies used

    removing         Janet          and collaborative group           to engage
 barriers in our   Branshaw                   activities               students

    teaching                     Entering Mentoring resource          Designing
                                library: http://Cimerproject.org/  mentor courses
 Optimizing &                                                      and developing
     creating
    inclusive                                                        mentorship
                                                                   skills; preparing
undergraduate
    research                                                         students for
                                                                       research
experiences for
   students &                                                        experiences
     mentors

200
Topic             Facilitator            Key takeaways                Outcomes

     Cultural     Courtney       Incorporating various voices,         Specific
   responsive       Plotts      historical considerations and      activities within
teaching: policy               perspectives with knowledge of
and small group                 ethnicity and intersectionality.        courses
 management
                                   Maximizing ALL students'
                               opportunities to think, socialize,

                                             and learn.

NORMALIZING STRUGGLE BUILDS TRUST AND INCREASES
ACCESSIBILITY TO CREATE A SAFE SPACE FOR
MENTORSHIP

According to Merriam-Webster, The definition of struggle is "to proceed
with difficulty or with great effort" however, in our STEM program, we
aim to emphasize the process of achieving goals despite difficulty and
through struggle. Our students are diverse in many ways and the ability
to create an environment where they know they are worth the struggle, for
a lack of better terms, is paramount to their mindset and success.

As we meet in our Mentor Streams throughout the semester, we place
an intentional emphasis on normalizing struggle. Students and faculty
alike share experiences with each other related to issues in STEM and
beyond. Students gain the opportunity to learn from each other, citing
similarities and differences in their experiences and therefore are able to
offer real time and relatable advice, suggestions, and solutions. A student
in the sophomore class stated, "I have had help from other people who
also go through the same struggles and can lean on them to know
what to do in times of struggle." These Mentor Streams are also used
to humanize faculty through moments of transparency and vulnerability.
(See Faculty Vignette 1.) Collectively, this environment removes barriers
between students as well as between students and faculty, building trust,
increasing accessibility, and creating a safe space.

Our STEM faculty community has most definitely accepted the charge of
creating an inclusive environment for the success of our students, but it
is important to note that this environment has also been beneficial for
the faculty. In the archaic times of our program, before the curriculum
redesign, our faculty's interaction with students was minimal. There were
some instances where faculty would not meet students until that
student's junior or senior year. By this time, the window to form mutual

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 201
and genuine relationships was significantly smaller. Currently, students
have the opportunity to interact with all of our faculty as early as the
first semester of their first year. Additionally, the STEM professors that
teach our Mentor Moment courses are not necessarily the professors
that are instructing the students in their current core STEM courses that
semester. Additionally, the Mentor Streams provide exposure to faculty
outside of the curriculum year and specific discipline (Biology, Chemistry,
Environmental Science, etc.) This structure allows students and faculty to
see each other outside of the "science" and get to know each other on a
humanistic level, thereby leading to authentic connections and rapport.

The mentoring structure as part of the curriculum has been an effective
way to empower and engage students and faculty. However, the efforts to
normalize struggle do not end there. It has been shown that introductory
STEM courses, including math, can be barriers to student success,
especially students from marginalized populations (Chang et al., 2008).
Research also indicates that peer to peer tutoring is a great source
of support for both the tutor and the tutee (Cutright & Evans, 2016;
Rockinson-Szapkiw et al., 2021). Therefore, we decided to create an
embedded tutor program for some of the first and second year courses
in the curriculum. In short, students who have successfully completed
an introductory STEM course serve as tutors, who are incorporated into
the classroom space (one tutor per class). These are not tutors who
meet after hours or in an isolated space outside of class. They are
available for the students enrolled in the course in real time and assist
the professor in communicating and demystifying key concepts of the
course material. With this program, struggle is being normalized as the
advanced students use their voice to empower the learning of their peers;
students are leading the charge in learning and mentoring. We have
seen some significant gains from the program and have expanded this
concept throughout multiple programs at the institution.

202
FUN ALLOWS STUDENTS TO CONNECT WITH EACH OTHER
AND PROVIDE GREATER PEER SUPPORT

Let's get that dopamine flowing! Research shows that dopamine release
can lead to memory stimulation (Jay, 2003), meaning that students
that have more fun may also be learning more (Bonde et. al., 2014).
As part of our mentorship classes, we have specifically allotted time
within the curriculum for students to have fun, relax, and get to know
each other. We promote conversations that get students to truly know
who they and their peers are, and what their motivations, interests,
and struggles are. These types of conversations and focused time for
connection has led to more open peer relationships and true friendships
that last through their undergraduate careers. Student reflection data
demonstrate how these mentorship opportunities lead to friendships and
meaningful relationships: "I feel I had mentorship this semester because
I [got] to bond and get advice from a lot of upper-class students". Some
examples of fun activities that have helped create a space for student
connection and friendships include collaborative games where students
work in groups to build the tallest spaghetti tower possible within a given
time. Typically, the classroom starts out serious, as students get down to
business to determine their best architectural and engineering designs.
However, the difficult building materials of spaghetti and tape eventually
lead to bursts of laughter and cheering each other on. While the goal of
this activity is to realize the power and learning opportunities in one's
willingness to try and not succeed, building the spaghetti towers also
helps students meet one of the core objectives for the course: to work in
teams in a fun and low stakes manner.

As previously discussed, students build vision boards to help them
envision their goals and futures in STEM and increase their sense of
belonging. During the making of the vision boards, the classroom turns
into a lively arts and crafts hub, with music playing and, students running
around grabbing magazine clippings, chatting with one another about
their designs and their futures. You can hear students have "ah-ha"
moments as they recognize their own goals in their peer's dreams and
relax into the comfortable space of togetherness.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 203
Building fun and time to play into our mentor courses has set the
foundation for peer interactions in their STEM courses. Similarly, the
increase in connection and normalizing struggle that occurs between
the faculty and students in the mentor moment courses has created
a comfortable and relaxed environment that allows for more fun while
learning. Furthermore, faculty have incorporated fun into their STEM
courses via games or challenges for students. These activities engage
students in a hands-on way that also gets them moving, connecting,
and having fun while learning. For example, a biochemistry course uses
rap battles as a creative way to have students work through concepts.
Students work in groups to understand the biochemistry and create the
winning rap. The process itself is unique and fun for students to take
part in, and the actual battle has students dancing, rapping, cheering,
and ultimately connecting through laughter. Overall, by intentionally
incorporating fun into the classroom, we are helping our students relax,
form a community of support, and be more open to learning.

CELEBRATION FOSTERS TOGETHERNESS AND PRIDE

Celebration is contagious and it is a bug we are happy to spread! We
believe that when our students celebrate each other's accomplishments
they will use this energy to fuel their own achievements. Furthermore,
our STEM students work hard and we want them to feel pride in that
work. Therefore, we have built a variety of celebrations, from small, in-
class celebrations, to larger university wide celebrations. Growth mindset
has been an important core focus of our inclusive pedagogy, so we are
mindful to celebrate the road traveled and the growth along the way, not
just the end point.

Our Mentor Streams provide the perfect platform for celebrating
students. Because we meet in these large groups throughout the
semester, we are able to incorporate celebrations of students'
achievements and successes with the entire STEM faculty and student
body. In the beginning of each Fall semester, we start by celebrating
students' achievements from the summer and previous Spring semester
by highlighting student scholarship winners and summer fellowships. This
not only creates an uplifting energy for the start of the semester and

204
demonstrates to the students that we value their efforts, but it also helps
all STEM students become aware of these opportunities.

Toward the end of each semester, we have two main activities in our
Mentor Streams centered around celebration. Our first are alumnae
panels. Here, we bring alumnae back to campus to speak to students
about their experiences while at Trinity and what they are currently doing.
We have done similar panels with external scientists, and while they
are inspiring, nothing seems to compare to when it is Trinity alumnae.
Alumnae are often met with a flurry of student questions, ranging from
how they managed their coursework to how they chose and pursued
their current careers. Students have mentioned that the alumnae panels
resonate with them because they can see themselves in the panel
members. By bringing alumnae back to campus, we are also celebrating
them and creating a community that extends beyond current Trinity STEM
students.

Our second celebratory activity is to throw an end of the year celebration.
In recent years, we have tasked the seniors in Mentor Moment 4 with
organizing the event for the first through third year students. The energy
that the seniors bring to this assignment helps to end the semester on a
high note. Students get to hear and learn from their senior peer mentors
all while feeling recognized and celebrated by them. It is very clear
from student reflections that one of the largest benefits of the Mentor
Streams is their interactions with peers in upper-level courses, whether it
is helping them build community, normalizing struggle, or celebrating.

   Box 2: Measurable outcomes after implementing curricular
   changes

   Since implementing the mentor structure and corresponding curriculum
   revisions, some measures we have noted include:

          · Based on Likert survey responses, students maintain a high sense
              of belonging throughout their first Mentor Moment course, even as
              the excitement of beginning college fades and the reality of struggle
              sets in.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 205
          · We found an increase in in average Likert survey responses for
              how likely students see themselves with a future in science when
              comparing students in their first to third Mentor Moment classes.

          · A student indicates that she has "More confidence in myself, more
              sure of the career path I want to follow"

          · We observed increased pass rates for our introductory biology
              course.

          · We have found increased retention from first semester science
              courses to second year courses.

          · 100% of our science graduates participate in an experiential
              learning opportunity.

          · We have increased the number of science graduates.

We have expanded our celebration of student work to include an annual
campus wide event, Spring Research Day. Undergraduate research and
experiential learning experiences are high impact practices that increase
persistence of women of color in STEM disciplines. However, the process
by which to obtain and be successful in these experiences is not always
clear and accessible. Through our mentoring structure, students are
supported through the process of acquiring internships during Mentor
Moment 3. Additionally, students learn from each other and faculty as
they share about their undergraduate research and experiential learning
opportunities. (See Faculty Vignette 2.) During Spring Research Day,
students present their work in an undergraduate research symposium
where they are able to see the work of their peers both in STEM and
other disciplines. Spring Research Day is highly attended by faculty
and administration, creating a sense of pride for the presenters as
we celebrate the research collaborators they have become. As part of
this event, students receive certificates for their participation. For non-
presenting students, Spring Research Day acts as an inspiration for
future opportunities and a place to support their peers.

206
By celebrating our students in a variety of ways, we help to create a
community that supports and uplifts one another. The celebrations bring
energy to our classrooms and help students feel external pride for their
Trinity community as well as an internal pride for their accomplishments.

CONCLUSION

While for some students, the academic undergraduate journey may begin
with fear, apprehension, or low self-confidence, we have found that by
creating a mentor structure within the curriculum we foster
belongingness and support students' perseverance. Tiered mentorship
(faculty and peer mentorship) built into the fabric (structure) of our
program, supports students through struggles, and fosters supportive
relationships that often lead to professional opportunities. We have also
embedded fun and celebration throughout the student's academic and
mentored experiences. Through our faculty team approach, structured
mentorship courses expand into meaningful mentorship relationships
and students develop increased confidence and identity within the
science field. (See Box 2 for outcomes and Student Vignettes 1 & 2.)

   Lessons Learned

          · Creating a safe space open for mentorship, necessitates activities,
              communication and an environment that welcome students to bring
              themselves to the community space.

          · Intentional and consistent affirming and non-judgmental responses
              to students break down barriers impeding trust and connections
              necessary for mentorship.

          · Normalizing struggle builds trust and increases accessibility to
              create a safe space for mentorship.

          · Celebration and fun help foster togetherness.
          · A faculty team approach is an integral component of the

              effectiveness of the mentor structure embedded within the
              curriculum.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 207
VIGNETTES

   Faculty Vignette 1: Mia Ray

   "Mentor Moment I (MM1) is one of my favorite Fall classes to teach. This
   course gives me an opportunity to drop the façade of a professor and
   humanize myself to students that I have yet to teach, but hope to encounter
   during their Junior or Senior year at Trinity. I do this throughout the
   semester in several different ways. During the first class we do an ice breaker
   entitled, "What's in a name?". During this activity I introduce myself as Dr.
   Ray and share a personal story of how I acquired the name. I also have
   them introduce themselves to the class and a personal aspect of one of their
   names. This begins to break down the professor/student wall that separates
   many students from connecting to their instructors and to one another.
   Another way in which I help to eliminate student/professor barriers is to help
   students normalize struggle by sharing struggles that I encountered first as
   a freshman undergraduate student withdrawing from her first Biology Course
   and later as a first-year medical school student turned Ph.D. Graduate. This
   level of transparency allows me to connect to students in ways that I wasn't
   able to prior to MM1. Another way in which I connect with students during
   MM1 is when I work with them to complete their vision boards. Students
   begin this section of the course by creating SMART goals (Lawlor and
   Hornyak, 2012) based on their career aspirations. During this class I share
   with them a chart of my own SMART goals to show them that goals can
   continuously be achieved and evolve. As they create their vision boards
   based on their career goals, I am creating a vision board of my own, which
   I share with them. These interactions with my students where I allow myself
   to be vulnerable, allow them to see me as more than just my degree and
   position, but as someone that they can feel comfortable reaching out to for
   advice or support."

   Mia Ray raym@trinitydc.edu

208
Faculty Vignette 2: Anette Casiano Negroni

"As a Professor of Chemistry at Trinity Washington University, there is no
greater joy than mentoring and seeing our Trinity students succeed in their
endeavors. I have learned that my own experiences as an undergraduate
student and graduate student in an environment where I had to learn the
language simultaneously as I learned the technical skills is one of the
reasons why I am even more invested in motivating and encouraging them
to push themselves to greater heights. Teaching the Mentor Moment 3 class
has given me the opportunity to be part of students' journey as they prepare
to apply for experiential learning experiences. I am particularly proud to
watch their progress as they participate in internship programs and present
their research projects at conferences. As a firm believer in the statement
"You can't become what you can't see", I am thrilled when my students get
exposed to bigger and challenging STEM environments and come out with a
desire to want to learn more and become what they assume at some point
in their thought process was impossible. I certainly do not miss a moment
to celebrate their accomplishments."
Anette Casiano Negroni casianonegronia@trinitydc.edu

Student Vignette 1: from senior responses to open response
questions

"When I first started at Trinity, I did not see myself as a scientist at all.
When working with the other [students] in lab groups, I felt insecure that I
did not know much as they did ... My junior year in the spring semester, a
professor pulled me to the side, and she stated she saw potential in me and
all i needed to do was be confident in my work and myself [and] I'll go far.
... Now that I understand basic concepts, I am willing to discover more in
science and pursue other things that relate to science."

                       FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                       EDUCATION 209
   Student Vignette 2: from senior responses to open response
   questions

   "I most definitely see myself more as a scientist from when [I] started
   freshman year. I really struggled with relating to the term when I was in my
   sophomore year. During that time, My classes were becoming overwhelming
   and I didn't see myself as a scientist anymore. However, once I started
   taking more labs and completing more research presentations, I started to
   enjoy STEM more. The feeling of completing each presentation and showing
   my classmates our hard work felt great! I also liked a lot of the labs we
   completed because it peaked my interest in wanting to work in a laboratory."

REFERENCES

Bonde, M. T., Makransky, G., Wandall, J., Larsen, M. V., Morsing, M.,
   Jarmer, H., & Sommer, M. O. (2014). Improving biotech education
   through gamified laboratory simulations. Nature Biotechnology, 32(7),
   694-697. https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.2955

Chang, M. J., Cerna, O., Han, J., & Sáenz, V. (2008). The contradictory
   roles of institutional status in retaining underrepresented minorities
   in biomedical and behavioral science majors. The Review of Higher
   Education, 31(4), 433-464.

Cutright, T. J., & Evans, E. (2016). Year-long peer mentoring activity
   to enhance the retention of freshmen STEM students in a NSF
   scholarship program. Mentoring & Tutoring: Partnership in Learning,
   24(3), 201-212. https://doi.org/10.1080/13611267.2016.1222811

Estrada, M., Eroy-Reveles, A. and Matsui, J. (2018). The influence of
   affirming kindness and community on broadening participation in
   STEM career pathways. Social Issues and Policy Review,
   12(1), 258-297. https://doi.org/10.1111/sipr.12046

Jay, T. M. (2003). Dopamine: a potential substrate for synaptic plasticity

210
   and memory mechanisms. Progress in Neurobiology, 69(6), 375-390.
   https://doi.org/10.1016/s0301-0082(03)00085-6

Kendricks, K., Nedunuri, K. V., & Arment, A. R. (2013). Minority student
   perceptions of the impact of mentoring to enhance academic
   performance in STEM disciplines. Journal of STEM Education:
   Innovations and Research, 14(2), 38-46

Lawlor, K.B., Hornyak, M.J. (2012). SMART GOALS: How the application
   of smart goals can contribute to achievement of student learning
   outcomes. Developments in Business Simulation and Experiential
   Learning, 39, 259-267.

Ong, M., Smith, J.M. and Ko, L.T. (2018). Counterspaces for women of
   color in STEM higher education: Marginal and central spaces for
   persistence and success. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,
   55(2), 206-245.

Rockinson-Szapkiw, A., Wendt, J.L. & Stephen, J.S. The efficacy of a
   blended peer mentoring experience for racial and ethnic minority
   women in STEM pilot study: Academic, professional, and psychosocial
   outcomes for mentors and mentees. Journal for STEM Education
   Research, 4, 173-193 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/
   s41979-020-00048-6

Rodriguez, S. L., & Blaney, J. M. (2021). "We're the unicorns in STEM":
   Understanding how academic and social experiences influence sense
   of belonging for Latina undergraduate students. Journal of Diversity
   in Higher Education, 14(3), 441-455. https://doi.org/10.1037/
   dhe0000176

Merriam-Webster. (n.d.). Struggle. In Merriam-Webster.com dictionary.
   Retrieved June 1, 2023, from https://www.merriam-webster.com/
   dictionary/struggle

This program is supported in part by a grant to Virginia Tech from the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute through the Inclusive Excellence Grant.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 211
212
CHAPTER 12.

GUNPOWDER CODE CLUB

Bringing elementary school students' interests and passions into the classroom through
coding
WENDY GIBSON AND KIMBERLY CORUM

ABSTRACT

Inspired by my fifth-grade students' passion and excitement when
designing mathematics games using Scratch (a visual block-based
coding language), I established the Gunpowder Code Club (GCC), an
after-school coding club that meets weekly. Our goal for GCC is to give
all students access to coding education. There are approximately forty
upper elementary students from diverse backgrounds who regularly
attend the weekly GCC meetings. During our meetings, students have
time for free play to explore Scratch and other coding platforms (e.g.,
CodeMonkey.org, Code.org) to learn basic coding commands. They are
also challenged to complete various coding tasks and projects. In
addition to learning how to code, students are exposed to computational
and algorithmic thinking, while further developing their mathematical
thinking skills, problem-solving skills, and ability to work collaboratively.
Students work together on projects, ask questions, and tutor each other
while solving problems and debugging their code.

Studies show that girls begin to associate boys with science and math
as early as second grade, and middle school is often when stereotypes
and harmful associations cause many girls to avoid STEM subjects.
The American Association of University Women (AAUW) reports girls
and women are systematically tracked away from science and math
throughout their education, limiting their access, preparation, and
opportunities to pursue these fields as adults. In fact, women make
up only 28% of the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) workforce and men vastly outnumber women majoring in most
STEM fields in college. The gender gap is particularly high in some of

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 213
the fastest-growing and highest-paid jobs of the future, like computer
science and engineering (Corbett & Hill, 2015). Racial discrimination
is also prevalent in the STEM fields. As explained by Girls Who Code
(n.d.), "Historical and institutional barriers--particularly racial bias and
discrimination--play a role in the widening gender gap in computer
science and who has access to opportunities in these fields."
Underrepresentation in STEM fields can have long-term consequences
for women and Black, Indigenous, and people of color (Pew Research
Center, 2021).

INTRODUCTION

ESTABLISHING THE GUNPOWDER CODE CLUB

One of the most important goals of teaching computer science to young
children is to foster the development of computational thinking skills that
are applicable to many educational disciplines and areas of life (Barr
& Stephenson, 2011; Chen et al., 2017; Cuny et al., 2010; Wing, 2006).
All children, regardless of race, gender, or socioeconomic status, should
have equitable opportunities to learn coding and develop computational
thinking skills. The consequences of not providing equitable
opportunities are dire. Researchers found that "...it is increasingly
apparent that performance gaps by social class take root in the earliest
years of children's lives and fail to narrow in the years that follow. That
is, children who start behind stay behind--they are rarely able to make up
the lost ground," (Garcia & Weiss, 2017).

An element of diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) excellence includes
providing increasing access to coding education. During the Spring 2022
semester, I challenged my fifth-grade students to design a mathematics
game appropriate for kindergarten students using Scratch (a block-
based coding language) as a class assignment. We spent four days
creating a mathematics game and then shared the game with a
kindergarten class at our school. Fifth-grade students taught addition
and subtraction operations to kindergarten students using the games
they created. Student interest, motivation, and engagement with this
project was so high that I went on to establish the Gunpowder Code
Club (GCC) the following year. GCC is an after-school coding club that

214
meets weekly. Our goal for GCC is to give all students access to coding
education, thus leveling the playing field and providing opportunities for
those traditionally marginalized in STEM education.

INCREASING STUDENTS' OPPORTUNITIES TO CODE

Evidence of our school's commitment to utilizing technology to support
our students' education includes providing all our students a school-
issued device, issuing students Scratch accounts, and providing initial
instruction to coding with Scratch. Our school serves a diverse
population of students. More than 40% of our students identify as Black,
Hispanic/Latino, Asian, or multiracial. Nearly 28% of our students receive
free/reduced price meals and nearly 20% of our students are classified
as economically disadvantaged. GCC provides underrepresented
minority students, low-income students, and those with little exposure
or access to computer science and coding with new and exciting
opportunities. Approximately 40 upper elementary students representing
a range of diversity and ability levels regularly participate in the weekly
after-school meetings. We have an equal distribution of girls and boys
in our club and our school demographic draws from African-American,
Caucasian, and South-East Asian populations. During these meetings,
students explore Scratch basics, work together with peers to problem
solve and experiment, and have fun playing and exploring. Students learn
how to code in Scratch through free play and teacher-led instruction as
they work to complete various tasks and projects, such as using Scratch
to support game-based mathematics learning.

In addition to learning how to code in Scratch, GCC provides students
with opportunities to develop computational and algorithmic thinking
skills, while attending to mathematical practices such as engaging in rich
problem solving and collaboration. Students work together on projects,
ask questions, and tutor each other while solving problems and
debugging their code. During each meeting, students are provided time
to share their current projects or games on our large projection screen.
Students come to the front of the classroom, plug their device into the
teacher station, and discuss their Scratch project. Students have the
chance to show their code, as well as what they have learned and how
they have refined their projects. Students learn important skills from their
peers related to problem solving, perseverance, and productive struggle.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 215
The act of coding facilitates strong habits of mind for students in GCC.
Giving students agency to demonstrate their learning through coding
has highlighted students' depth of mathematical understanding while
also generating excitement for learning and engaging in mathematics
concepts and skills.

FOLLOWING STUDENTS' LEADS

There are many options for coding with a wide range of programming
languages available to students. As the school year progressed, students
were introduced to two additional code platforms to explore and expand
their understanding and knowledge of coding. The next platform they
explored was CodeMonkey.org. While CodeMonkey.org is a beginning
programming language, this platform was more challenging and rigorous
than most of our club members were ready to pursue, particularly for
our fourth-grade members. The learning curve from Scratch to
CodeMonkey.org was steep for some and required more teacher support.
Two of our more advanced fifth-grade students did enjoy the challenge
and spent time over winter break learning the basics of the programming
language and successfully created simple games. However, given the
choice of which coding platform to work with when students returned
from their holiday break, all students returned to using Scratch.

I introduced the third platform, Code.org, halfway through the school
year. Code.org has been a great fit for GCC and all students were very
receptive to this platform. With just a few simple introductory activities
and utilizing their prior knowledge from Scratch, students were able to
complete various Code.org challenges at their own pace and create their
own games. The most popular difference between Code.org and Scratch
is the ability to send code projects to phones through a link or QR code.
This allowed students to quickly and easily share their games with others.
Introducing Code.org with its additional features and tools came at the
right time for students, allowing them to build on their code knowledge
from the beginning of the school year. Emily, one of our fourth-grade
girls, reported that Code.org was more enjoyable because, "You can
do more things." Sara, one of our fifth-grade girls, shared, "I like how
creative we can get with it. It's not too complicated...I like how you can
explore and learn and how you can code a lot more than on Scratch."

216
BUILDING COMMUNITY THROUGH CODING

GCC provides students with the opportunity to work in community to
learn how to code. Students are often heard saying, "This doesn't work!"
"Why is this not working!" and "I don't know how to fix this." As these
frustrations are shared freely, other students eagerly respond with "Have
you tried...," "I'll be right there," "Give me a minute and I'll take a look,"
or "I know how to fix that!" The collaboration of applied computational
thinking and problem solving is on display as students share their works-
in-progress, receive peer feedback, and add new features to projects as
they learn more about the various capabilities in Scratch.

This sense of community can also be seen in the following vignette.
During one meeting, Collin, a fourth-grade student, was excited to share
his Scratch game with his fellow club members. In the midst of the
demonstration, Collin realized his game character was not moving in the
direction he intended and commented, "I see a problem I need to fix."
During the demonstration, Donny (one of our fifth-grade club members)
rose from his seat, approached the projector, and said, "I can help you.
I think I see your problem." Donny proceeded to coach Collin through
the debugging process by identifying an error in the directional code and
explaining how it could be fixed. Collin was able to revise his code on the
spot, tested his revised code, and saw that the game now worked as he
intended. Collin was overjoyed that his code was working and returned
to his presentation as if nothing had previously stopped him. This is just
one example of the type of collaboration, computational thinking, and
problem-solving that occurs each week in GCC.

STUDENTS' PERSPECTIVES

Based on responses to the Elementary Student Coding Attitudes Survey,
students overwhelmingly report that "solving code problems seems fun,"
"coders are good at math," and "coders are good at language arts"
(Mason & Rich, 2020). When asked to share if coding has helped them in
school, students reported the following:

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 217
   When asked to share if coding has helped them in school,
   students reported the following:

               "Yes, I think it's because in Scratch you are a problem solver."

               "Yes a little in math because there is a lot of thinking."

               "Coding definitely helps me in school. My brain overtime improves
               how it functions which helps with math and other technology
               subjects."

   When asked to describe how coding has helped them grow in
   other ways, students shared:

               "It helped me grow my knowledge."

               "Yes, because I am growing smarted in more than one way."

               "It made me have new interests and I work at ideas and ideas
               make me grow."

Research on how children learn reveals that learning outside the
classroom, if given the opportunity, often transfers to student
engagement inside the classroom. As students pursue their interests,
motivation increases, and often academic achievement is enhanced.
Researchers have noted, "Students that engage in learning experiences
outside of the classroom report having higher levels of motivation, recall
the course material more vividly, and have improved academic
performance in the class," (Claiborne et al., 2020). Fourth- and fifth-
grade teachers in our school have reported students in GCC are showing
greater interest in math class and are excited to share coding projects
with other students. Students who participate in GCC have asked
teachers' permission to work on code projects in class and have reported
spending additional time after school and on weekends improving their
code projects.

218
LESSONS LEARNED

Learning to code promotes problem solving and persistence. As students
grow, progress, and mature through their mathematics education, they
begin to discover the predictability and unpredictability of mathematics.
Learning to code is a beautiful example of how to support students'
conceptual understanding as their knowledge of coding continues to
grow over the school year. Our goal with GCC is to give all students
access to coding and opportunities to participate in rich mathematical
thinking and problem solving, thus increasing student motivation and
engagement in and out of the classroom. Learning to problem solve
and persevere through productive struggle while coding develops strong
habits of mind for students in GCC. Giving students agency to
demonstrate their learning through coding has highlighted students'
depth of mathematical understanding while also generating excitement
for learning mathematics. In GCC, we integrate an inquiry-based
curriculum with explicit instruction as needed resulting in transferable
computer science and mathematics knowledge. Whether novice coders
or experienced coders, the structure of GCC provides all students with
the opportunity to create and share their knowledge of coding with a
variety of student-driven projects. As a result, students have autonomy
over their learning and are self-motivated to deepen their coding
knowledge.

While there is a need for further research, our initial exploration revealed
that the authentic learning experiences demonstrated by students in
GCC provided insight into what motivates students. My students ignited
around learning to code and their enthusiasm has been contagious.
Students demonstrated perseverance and productive struggle
accomplishments in ways I could only hope for in the classroom.
Students were highly engaged as they were allowed multiple means of
expression and choice. Mathematical interest and habits of mind
increased during the various coding projects, as well as students' social
and emotional well-being as they worked together and eagerly shared
their learning with others.

There is a call to action to decrease barriers for marginalized students
to participate in STEM fields. An advocate for STEM education, former
First Lady Michelle Obama argues, "We need all hands on deck. And that

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 219
means clearing hurdles for women and girls as they navigate careers
in science, technology, engineering, and math" (STEM Like a Girl, n.d.).
The Gunpowder Code Club is a proof-of-concept that providing students
with opportunities to learn coding in a student-centered, inquiry-based
environment results in transferrable skills that supports students'
computational thinking, mathematical learning, and social-emotional
well-being.

   Acknowledgement

   This project is based upon work supported by the National Science
   Foundation under grant No. 2243461. Any opinions, findings, and
   conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of
   the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the view of the National Science
   Foundation.

REFERENCES

Barr, V., & Stephenson, C. (2011). Bringing computational thinking to
   K-12: What is involved and what is the role of the computer science
   education community? ACM Inroads, 2(1), 48-54. https://doi.org/
   10.1145/1929887.1929905

Chen, G., Shen, J., Barth-Cohen, L., Jiang, S., Huang, X., & Eltoukhy,

M. (2017). Assessing elementary students' computational thinking in

everyday reasoning and robotics programming. Computers &

Education,  109,       162-175.  https://doi.org/10.1016/

j.compedu.2017.03.001

Claiborne, L., Morrell, J., Bandy, J., Bruff, D., Smith, G., & Fedesco, H.
   (2020). Teaching outside the classroom. Vanderbilt University Center
   for Teaching. Retrieved June 7, 2023 from https://cft.vanderbilt.edu/
   guides-sub-pages/teaching-outside-the-classroom

220
Corbett, C., & Hill, C. (2015). Solving the equation: The variables for
   women's success in engineering and computing. American Association
   of University Women. https://www.aauw.org/app/uploads/2020/03/
   Solving-the-Equation-report-nsa.pdf

Cuny, J., Snyder, L., & Wing, J. M. (2010). Demystifying computational
   thinking for non-computer scientists. Unpublished manuscript in
   progress, referenced in http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~CompThink/
   resources/TheLinkWing.pdf

Garcia, W., & Weiss, E. (2017, September). Education inequalities at the
   school starting gate: Gaps, trends, and strategies to address them.
   Economic Policy Institute. https://files.epi.org/pdf/132500.pdf

Girls Who Code (n.d.). Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Statement.
   https://girlswhocode.com/diversity-equity-and-inclusion

Pew Research Center (2021, April 1). STEM jobs see uneven progress
   in increasing gender, racial and ethnic diversity.
   https://www.pewresearch.org/science/wp-content/uploads/sites/16/
   2021/03/PS_2021.04.01_diversity-in-STEM_REPORT.pdf

Mason, S. L., & Rich, P. J. (2020). Developmental analysis of the
   Elementary Student Coding Attitudes Survey. Computers & Education,
   153. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2020.103898

STEM Like a Girl. (n.d.). https://stemlikeagirl.org/
Wing, J. M. (2006). Computational thinking. Communications of the ACM,

   49(3), 33-35. https://doi.org/10.1145/1118178.1118215

This program is supported in part by a grant to Virginia Tech from the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute through the Inclusive Excellence Grant.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 221
222
CHAPTER 13.
USING DEPARTMENTAL BOOK CLUBS TO BRIDGE THE
FACULTY-STAFF-STUDENT GAP

DEBORAH J. GOOD AND DEBBIE POLLIO

INTRODUCTION
Book clubs are one method for increasing discussion of topics in a safe
place. In academia, they have been embedded in classes or used by
faculty groups to discuss topics such as student learning. We describe a
unique book club that is not course-based and includes faculty, staff, and
students (graduate and undergraduate) from a department. All books had
a diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) theme. We present an overview of
the format of the book club, and data from a survey supporting its use to
both increase a feeling of department inclusion among participants and
increase understanding of DEI topics. Lessons learned for setting up a
departmental book club are included.

BACKGROUND
According to one source, one of the earliest recorded book clubs was
a women's religious reading club organized on a ship bound for the
Massachusetts Bay Colony in 1634 (Overstreet, 2020). Fast-forward to
1996 and the start of Oprah's Book Club, which is thought by many to
have caused a resurgence in book clubs among friends and neighbors.
The "best-seller" type book club trend continues today, and now includes
book clubs on Amazon.com and another (Reese's Book Club) led by
Reese Witherspoon.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 223
In academia, student reading is usually assigned, with either an in-
class discussion or out-of-class writing assignment to follow. However,
more course-based book clubs have been described in the literature,
especially in psychology and sociology departments where using fictional
accounts in popular books can help students engage with discipline-
based topics (Khokhlova & Bhatia, 2023; Segrist & Meinz, 2018; Wyant
& Bowen, 2018). In addition, faculty book clubs are becoming more
popular as a way for faculty to engage outside of formal meetings or
training in education topics (Rouech et al., 2022) or in diversity, equity,
and inclusion-based books. Examples include a book club run by Radford
University STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math) professors
as part of their Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI) grant work (S.
Kennedy, personal communication), or those run by diversity, equity, and
inclusion (DEI) offices, such as the Inclusive VT (Virginia Tech) Book
Circles, of which this author (D.J.G.) is a participant.

It was following a meeting where the Radford University faculty book
club was discussed and a subsequent discussion with a colleague who
was doing a book club as part of her course that I (D.J.G.) decided
to start up a departmental book club. I wanted the format to include
faculty, staff, undergraduate and graduate students and even alumni, with
a broad focus on DEI. A search of the literature did not reveal other
clubs like it, in terms of the inclusion of all members of a department,
and although some faculty-student book clubs do exist (i.e. (Khokhlova &
Bhatia, 2023; Ney et al., 2023; Segrist & Meinz, 2018; Wyant & Bowen,
2018)), these exist as credit-bearing, not voluntary experiences, with only
one exception found (Segrist & Meinz, 2018).

This chapter will describe this book club's format and provide data to
support its use to increase a feeling of inclusion among members and
increased understanding of DEI topics.

224
   After reading this chapter, individuals will:

          · Have the tools to start up their own departmental DEI book club.
          · Understand results and findings from a continuing 2-year DEI book

              club in a STEM department.

I M P L E M E N TAT I O N

Departmental list-servs and undergraduate student advising lists were
used to announce the first meeting of the book club in Fall 2021. D.J.G.
picked the first book, Educated, a Memoir by Tara Westover. This book
has themes of religion/religious freedom, child abuse, and gender bias.
The book was pre-selected by the organizer to ensure it was ordered in
time for people to obtain it prior to the first meeting, and because the
organizer had already read it and was prepared to lead the discussion.
Ten books were ordered (approximately $150) with priority going to
undergraduate and graduate students for the free book copies. Faculty
and staff were encouraged to attend but were asked to obtain their
own copy of the book. Meetings were set up using a poll for those who
initially indicated they were interested in attending. Fourteen students
(one graduate student), three faculty, and one staff member signed up
for the first book club. Several individuals indicated that they had read
the book and would not need a copy, and several people dropped out
after the initial poll, so that ten books were sufficient for everyone who
wanted a copy. This first book was long (352 pages, (Westover, 2018)),
so meetings were set up every two weeks by web-conferencing (ZoomTM)
and in person to reduce the number of chapters for each meeting. As
we were still in the COVID-19 pandemic, some members chose to join
by Zoom, but most attended in person, wearing masks and socially-
distancing. Of the seventeen originally signed up for the first book club,
seven attended at least one of the meetings during Fall 2021. The list of
book-club selections and number of members per semester is shown in
Table 13.1.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 225
     Table 13.1: Book club selections and number of members by semester

     Book

     Semester Club   Book

     Members

     Fall 2021 7     Educated, a Memoir by Tara Westover

     Spring 2022 9   The Bluest Eye by Toni Morrison

     Fall 2022 12    Being Heumann by Judith Heumann
                     Disability Visibility by Alice Wong*

     Spring 2023 12  Invisible Women by Caroline Criado-Perez**

                     From Farmworker to Astronaut: My path to the stars
                     by Jose Hernandez

     1This book was added to the Fall 2022 list mid-semester and finished
     during the first meeting of the Spring 2023 semester because the members
     of the book club wanted more information on disability topics.

     2This book was dropped at the first meeting of Spring 2023 because it was
     too data heavy. It was replaced by the Hernandez book mid-semester.

To increase participation, book club meetings lasting one to one and a
half hours were usually held in the late afternoon/early evening, based on
a poll of meeting times. The meetings included one meeting with food
or at a restaurant to celebrate the end of the semester and pick the
book for the following semester. While there was one book club that was
held entirely on Zoom, it was decided that book-club meetings that were
mixed (with some on Zoom and some in the room) were not effective, and
these were discontinued the second year of the book club.

226
Figure 13.1: Advertising the Book Club. Survey respondents were asked how they found out about
the book club. The results are shown in A. Most respondents found out about the book club through
email, but several mentioned advertisements in class and the flyer. B. Two examples of flyers used
to advertise the book club are shown. C. Bookmarks were created and handed out with each new
book.

In 2023, a survey was sent out to all past members of the book club,
as well as to all members of the Department of Human Nutrition, Foods,
and Exercise at Virginia Tech. The survey was approved as "not research"
by the Human Research Protection Program (protocol # 19-602). The
purpose of the survey was to first, and second, to ask members about
their experience in the book club, specifically asking about departmental
inclusion, and the focus of the book club on topics of DEI.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Thirty-two people responded to the survey, with 25% (8) of these being
individuals who had joined the book club. Most individuals indicated that
they had heard of the book club through email (75%), while 9.4% of
respondents indicated that they had heard about the club through word
of mouth. The remaining individuals had either heard about it through a
flyer, or during a class when it was presented as an announcement. Email

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 227
was the best way to reach all individuals in the department but including
flyers with dates/times and the book for the semester seemed to reach
some of the students (Figure 13.1A). All respondents indicated they were
aware of the book club. Flyers were generated for each semester using
online templates (Figure 13.1B). When the books were distributed, they
came with paper bookmarks that had the dates listed and chapters due
for the book-club meeting (Figure 13.1C). The bookmarks were made
using a template in Microsoft PowerPoint, and printing on cardstock.

As previously shown (Table 13.1), membership in the book club reached
twelve individuals. This is somewhat low for a department with nearly one
thousand students but is a group size that is generally recommended
for book-club meetings (Overstreet, 2020). Most of the individuals
responding to the survey (75% of 32 individuals) indicated that they were
not members of the book club at any time in the past four semesters.
Answers to why people did not join the book club (open-ended question
on survey), included a lack of time or scheduling conflict (fourteen), and
not interested in the books (three) as reasons.

The eight individuals who indicated they were members of the book
club identified the semesters during which they participated, with the
breakdown being shown in Figure 13.2. An open-ended question asked
the respondents to comment on why they joined the book club and why
they stayed in the book club. Respondents (N=9) gave answers with two
major themes: (1) to meet more people, and (2) because of an interest in
reading in general and the topics specifically. These reasons for joining
our book club are consistent with book-club membership in general
(Overstreet, 2020). Survey respondents were also asked why they stayed
in the book club, and responses included "It is a good opportunity for
networking within the major and I like having a distraction from school
that still keeps me involved" and "I love the intimate atmosphere and
the opportunities it has given me to get to know the faculty outside of
the classroom. I've also connected with several of my peers and built
relationships that go beyond the book club."

228
Figure 13.2: Survey respondents who are members of the book club. Survey respondents (8) who
indicated they were members of the book club were asked which semester they were active in the
club and were able to select more than one answer for this question

The book club was originally formed to provide a place to read and
discuss books related to DEI topics, with a goal to increase awareness of
DEI issues. A secondary goal was to break down barriers between faculty,
staff, and students, providing a non-classroom environment to engage
people with similar interests. As shown in Figure 13.3, most respondents
overwhelmingly agreed that the club had met both goals, increasing
their awareness of DEI topics, and increasing feelings of departmental
inclusion. Interestingly, 9 individuals responded to this question, even
though only 8 individuals had indicated they were members. The "n/a"
responses may be from that 9th person. An open-ended set of comment
questions followed, focusing on connection within the department. In
terms of participants sense of connection, comments included "I feel
that my participation in the book club allowed me to feel more connected
to the HNFE [sic] (Human Nutrition, Foods & Exercise) students and
faculty who also participated in book club discussions because we have
very open conversations and we learn a lot about each other and from
each other" and "I have been able to connect with student and faculty I
wouldn't have otherwise met" and "It shows students the other side of
professors, connected by the joy of reading."

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 229
                    Figure 13.3: Book club themes. Survey respondents (9) who
                    indicated they were members of the book club were asked (A.) if
                    being part of the book club has increased your awareness of DEI
                    issues and (B.) if being part of the book club has made you feel
                    more like part of the department.

230
Table 13.2: Comments from the open-ended question, "which book impacted you
   most and why" (N = 7). The survey was conducted at the start of the fourth
      semester, so only the first three books were included in the responses.

Book                Comment

Educated by Tara    · "Educated was the most impactful for me because I
Westover                resonated with the author's experience without being
                        familiar with her culture."

                    · "I really respect how inclusion is an important and
                        conscious decision for a happy community"

The Bluest Eyes by  · "I read both "Educated" and "The Bluest Eye". I was
Toni Morrison           incredibly impacted by both as I not experienced what the
                        authors of both of those books experienced. These books
                        changed my perspective in various but I believe what I
                        received most was the conversations within the Book Club.
                        To not only to my own perspective of the book but to also
                        hear the perspective of others was so moving. I learned so
                        much about not only life but also myself."

Being Heumann by    · "I really enjoyed Judith Heumann's book because the
Judith Heumann          disabled community is not usually the first to come to mind
                        when thinking about disadvantaged groups. As such, my
                        knowledge of the day-to-day for disabled people was
                        limited but grew exponentially after reading Heumann's
                        perspective"

                    · "It impacted me by raising my awareness of the challenges
                        (past, present, and future) that individuals with disabilities
                        face every day as part of their lives. It also allowed me to
                        better understand the process of lawmaking and policy work
                        in the context of disability (and diversity, equity, and
                        inclusion)."

                    · "Being Heumann impacted me the most. I was aware of
                        many of the issues discussed in the book, but reading and
                        discussing the book made me understand disabilities and
                        the history of legislation involving rights for those with
                        disabilities on a deeper level."

                    · "Being Heuman impacted me the most because disability
                        issues aren't something I always think about as an abled
                        person, and she has an incredible story."

We asked which book impacted them most, with participants' comments
are shown in Table 13.2. The focus on DEI topics has clearly impacted
group members' understanding and interest in diversity, equity, and
inclusion. One person commented "I firmly believe that these types
of discussions can help us to become more introspective, purposeful,
compassionate, and analytical, which in turn promotes DEI."

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 231
Overall, the outcomes of the book club were achieved, and the book
club will continue in our department for the foreseeable future. Currently
the club is funded using money from a grant from the Howard Hughes
Inclusive Excellence fund, but our department is supportive of this
project, and the costs are low (approximately $150 per semester). It is
hoped that the transition from grant to departmental funding will be
seamless. The current members regularly indicate that they are looking
forward to continuing to use popular books to broach topics of gender,
race, religion, sexuality, and inequity, among others in future semesters
during book-club meetings.

   Lessons Learned

   Several lessons have been learned since starting the book club, and these
   are listed below, in hopes of helping others who want to form a
   departmental book club.

          · It is important to have a lead for the club, and helpful to have
              another person to help. In this case, both authors have been
              consistent participants in the club from its inception. They help
              to organize and facilitate discussions, send out reminder emails,
              and generate flyers to announce the upcoming club topic. People
              interested in starting their own club might consider whether the
              lead for the club changes each semester, or continues with one
              person, and if so, how they are selected. The lead should be a faculty
              or staff member with access to departmental email list-servs.

          · While we picked a different time each semester, it might be useful
              to have a consistent day/time for the book club each semester
              so that people can schedule it into their calendars. Student and
              faculty class schedules change each semester, but those who are
              interested in the book club (especially students) could plan around
              the timing of the club if they knew in advance. Faculty and staff
              may be more likely to come to the book club if it is not scheduled
              too late into the evening hours, conflicting with family obligations,
              dinner etc. We found that a 5 PM time, mid-week worked well for
              the members. We also initially had a meeting every two weeks
              (for the 352-page book that was picked in the first semester) but
              found that once-per-month meetings were sufficient for subsequent

232
    semesters.
· When choosing books, consider upcoming author visits to campus

    as this can also help to engage members. Judith Heumann's book
    was picked because the author was giving a zoom-talk the same
    semester.
· In choosing books, the survey respondents indicated that they liked
    the "democratic" approach, which makes sense in group dynamics.
    Respondents also liked receiving a copy of the book to read.
    However, in one case, a book was picked that no one had read
    (based on online reviews only), and it was a flop, with members
    choosing a different book mid-semester and not finishing that book.
    This increased costs for the semester and led to a discussion where
    members said they wanted at least one person who read the book
    before selection to avoid it again.
· The book club became a casual way to learn more about each
    other, and our interests. We also heard about other good books to
    read, since most people in the group were avid readers with several
    books on their side table. One of the comments from the survey
    stated "Personally, I did not have time to read an additional book.
    I would have loved to join a discussion based on short, current
    readings (like a journal club) because that would have been more
    convenient." In the future, we will make sure to emphasize that
    reading the books is never mandatory--in fact, many times the
    organizer (D.J.G.) had not yet finished all the chapters assigned. The
    topics discussed were based on the book, but many times diverged
    into personal stories or thoughts that everyone could participate in.
    It is important that there is no pressure to read the book and that
    everyone is welcome to attend the book club.

              FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                              EDUCATION 233
   Reflective Questions

          · If you were to start a book club in your department, would it be part
              of a course structure, or a separate non-graded club? What do you
              think the advantages/disadvantages are of these two distinct types
              of clubs?

          · What theme or topic would be the focus of your departmental book
              club? Are these themes structured for faculty-led discussions or
              inclusive of all levels of the department?

          · Who will fund the purchase of the books?

REFERENCES

Khokhlova, O., & Bhatia, A. (2023). Bringing books back: Enhancing the
   understanding of psychotherapy in psychology students through book
   club participation. Teaching of Psychology, 50(1), 32-40.

Ney, D. B., Ankam, N., Wilson, A., & Spandorfer, J. (2023). The
   implementation of a required book club for medical students and
   faculty. Medical Education Online, 28(1), 2173045. https://doi.org/
   10.1080/10872981.2023.2173045

Overstreet, M. (2020, October 16). I've got to talk to someone about this!
   A history of book clubs. Book Riot. https://bookriot.com/a-history-of-
   book-clubs/

Rouech, K. E., VanDeusen, B. A., Angera, J. J., Arnekrans, A. K., Majorana,
   J. C., & Brown, J. L. (2022). Read all about it: Faculty book clubs in
   action to support student engagement. The Clearing House: A Journal
   of Educational Strategies, Issues and Ideas, 95(6), 242-249.

Segrist, D. J., & Meinz, E. J. (2018). Looking for a good read? Running a
   psychology book club. Psychology Learning & Teaching, 17(2), 219-228.

234
Westover, T. (2018). Educated: A memoir. Random House.
Wyant, A., & Bowen, S. (2018). Incorporating online and in-person book

   clubs into sociology courses. Teaching Sociology, 46(3), 262-273.
To whom correspondence should be addressed: Department of Human
Nutrition, Foods, and Exercise, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24060;
540-231-0430; goodd@vt.edu
This program is supported in part by a grant to Virginia Tech from the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute through the Inclusive Excellence Grant.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 235
236
CHAPTER 14.

INSTITUTIONALLY ADVANCING INCLUSIVE
EXCELLENCE

Leading from the middle in times of transition  AND  SHARON  BLACKWELL
JEANNE MEKOLICHICK; JAMIE K. LAU;
JONES

ABSTRACT

Like so many institutions of higher education, Radford
University experienced significant leadership transitions over the past
number of years. During the award period, leadership turnover in key
institutional stakeholder positions occurred yearly, including--and
importantly--at the provost and president levels. These repeated
transitions, while challenging, created the opportunity for us to
focus and hone our approach and strategies for advancing
institutional change. Centering the whole student, and with attention
to the contexts within which our students live, learn and thrive,
foundational texts including Tinto's (1975) model of engagement and
persistence, symbolic interactionism and identity theory (Mead 1934;
Stryker; 2003), and intersectionality theory (Collins 1993; 2013) were
at the core of our thinking. These theories suggest that proximate
and intermediate campus environments that cultivate a sense of
belonging and science identity can be critically important drivers of
success for all students. More, we leveraged theories of organizational
change to guide our strategies toward institutional shifts at multiple
institutional levels as well as across units and divisions (Boyce 2003;
Denofrio 2007; Golem 2018; Kotter 2018; Kuh et al. 2005, 2007;
McNair, Albertine., Cooper, McDonald & Major 2016; McNair,
Bensimon & Malcom-Piqueux 2020). We have been intentional,
strategic and opportunistic in our efforts to alter the environments
within which our students live and learn, attending to culture,
structure and the political landscape. This chapter shares strategies
employed, challenges encountered, successes enjoyed, and lessons
learned in institutionally

                                        FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM
                                                                                                HIGHER EDUCATION 237
advancing our Inclusive Excellence (IE) initiative from the middle in
times of transition.

INTRODUCTION

OUR APPROACH: CENTERING THE WHOLE STUDENT FOR
ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE

Like all the other IE projects, the goal of our program, REALising
Inclusive Science Excellence (REALISE), was to effect positive cultural
and structural change in our participating science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) departments and spark change to
advance inclusive excellence across the college and the entire institution.
With a focus on faculty professional development, curricular change,
student programming, and institutional change, we aspired to build a
community of empowered faculty and student learners and a university
community that is student-ready, welcoming, and inclusive.

CHANGE FRAMEWORK

Our approach to achieving program goals was to center the whole
student--attending to the contexts within which our students live, learn
and thrive. We drew heavily on Tinto's (1975) model of engagement and
persistence, symbolic interactionism and identity theory (Mead, 1934;
Stryker, 2003), and intersectionality theory (Collins 1993, 2013). These
theories suggest that proximate (classrooms and student groups) and
intermediate (departments and colleges) campus environments that
cultivate a sense of belonging and science identity can be critically
important drivers of success for all students. We placed energy in
cultivating our student groups, shifting student and faculty mindsets,
and implementing inclusive pedagogical practices. As an overlay, we
leveraged theories of organizational change to guide our strategies and
approaches toward cultural and institutional shifts at multiple
institutional levels, as well as across units and divisions (Boyce, 2003;
Denofrio, 2007; Golem, 2018; Kotter, 2018; Kuh et al., 2005, 2007;

238
McNair, Albertine, et al., 2016; McNair, Bensimon, et al., 2020). We
focused on capacity-building by mobilizing a critical mass of committed
faculty, staff, administrators and students who were focused on advancing
diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) at Radford University and leveraging
a variety of available tools. At an organizational level, our approach to
change was intentional, strategic and opportunistic.

With these goals and framework, we set out with a keen focus on
implementation and seeding change. As a leadership team, our positions
included Associate Provost, Dean/Interim Dean/Interim Associate Dean,
several junior and senior faculty, and post-doctoral fellows. This diverse
group allowed us access to different institutional levers, resources, and
spheres of influence to keep advancing the work.

SELECT STRATEGIES FOR INSTITUTIONAL CHANGE

In this section, we share some strategies employed, offer examples of
implementation and share how transitions influenced our direction or
focus. We focus on areas that showcase how we leveraged the strategic
plan, leveraged other institutional change, leveraged existing institutional
structures and leveraged connections that built alliances.

LEVERAGING THE STRATEGIC PLAN

A foundational strategy initially articulated in the grant proposal was
to invoke the strategic plan as a touchstone for advancing the work.
The alignment between REALISE project goals and the University's new
strategic plan has been a key factor in gaining the support of our
institutional leadership and expanding REALISE beyond the founding
three departments. Many of the goals and strategies put forth in the
strategic plan aimed to remove barriers and promote student success.
We identified three goals and specific strategies in our Strategic Plan:
Embracing the Tradition and Envisioning the Future 2018-2023 in the
proposal and continued to forefront those strategies through the life
of the grant up to the end of the Hemphill Presidency (under which

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 239
the strategic plan was created). These included three goals focusing on
creating opportunities for engaging students in experiential education,
incentives to infuse undergraduate research in the curriculum, and faculty
professional development. The work of the REALISE program advanced
the work in each of these three areas. Once the presidency shifted, and
as we began to move toward the expiration of the strategic plan, we
focused less on these touchstones as motivating factors to advance the
work because they became less powerful drivers for change.

LEVERAGING OTHER INSTITUTIONAL CHANGE

When the REALISE program was launching, we were also restructuring
and revisioning our tutoring support and faculty professional
development units. We were able to hire directors for both units and
charge those units to advance the inclusive practices goals of the grant,
as well as advance other DEI work as part of their work. This change
was made possible because these two units reported to one of our grant
co-authors. Further, in our audit of the tutoring program's practices and
documents, we removed deficit language and intentionally hired student
tutors that reflected our student population. Our faculty development
and teaching and learning center infused best-practices in inclusive
pedagogy into their approach and workshops. During this time both of
these units were charged with developing a program or learning outcome
focused on DEI (as did all of the other units that reporting to the
Associate Provost). Over time, the tutoring unit was moved to another
reporting line, although the focus on DEI remains. Faculty Development
remains in the Associate Provost portfolio and continues alignment with
project goals.

LEVERAGING EXISTING INSTITUTIONAL STRUCTURES

Thinking with the end in mind, we set out to infuse the REALISE work into
existing institutional structures including in our tri-annual teaching and
learning conference, Our Turn, hosted by Faculty Development/Center
for Innovative Teaching and Learning, and in our annual Institutional
Effectiveness Day (IE Day) hosted by our Institutional Effectiveness and
Quality Improvement Office. With new Faculty Development leadership
and a charge to advance DEI programming, our tri-annual teaching and
learning conference began to include a DEI track. The number of DEI

240
sessions as well as the number of participants in these sessions soared.
In a second example, the provost at the time was investing in making
Institutional Effectiveness a campus-wide signature event. During the
two-year tenure of this Provost, DEI was infused in the breakout sessions
and workshops of IE Day, and in the second year, we brought in Dr. Tia
McNair, Vice President in the Office of Diversity, Equity, and Student
Success and Executive Director for the Truth, Racial Healing, and
Transformation (TRHT) Campus Centers at the American Association of
Colleges and Universities (AAC&U), author of Becoming a Student-Ready
College, and alumna of Radford University. During Dr. McNair's visit she
delivered an interactive keynote and led a workshop. When this provost
left, the annual IE Day event, having run for six years, ceased.

On the more opportunistic side of leveraging institutional structures,
COVID brought significant numbers of faculty to our teaching and
learning center. As the team infused inclusive pedagogies across their
programming, the faculty coming for assistance to navigate teaching
through COVID were exposed to inclusive pedagogies and the tools to
implement them. In a second example, as we were nearing the end
of the grant cycle, institutionally we were gearing up for our ten-year
accreditation visit from the Southern Association of Colleges and
Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC) along with the associated
Quality Enhancement Plan (QEP). A QEP is required for accreditation
and is a comprehensive, five-year action plan that "reflects and affirms
a commitment to enhance overall institutional quality and effectiveness
by focusing on an issue that the institution considers important to
improving student learning outcomes and/or student success." Several
QEP proposals were reviewed as possibilities for the 2023-2028 cycle,
and our team put forth a proposal using the data and concept of
REALISE. Indeed, the timing of accreditation and request for QEP
proposals afforded us a prime opportunity to expand our vision for
inclusive excellence across the university. Our proposal was selected,
SACSCOC approved, and the implementation of our vision is underway,
indicating that inclusive excellence is important to and supported by
both our regional accrediting board and Radford.In some cases,
leveraging institutional structures were resistant to leadership change
(e.g., QEP), others (e.g., IE Day) were not.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 241
LEVERAGING CONNECTIONS AND BUILDING ALLIANCES

A key feature of any change initiative is capacity-building. We invested
in relationships to expand the circle of committed faculty in the STEM
College as well as building collaborations horizontally and vertically
across Academic Affairs and institutional divisions. We were also
awarded allied grants during this time which created the opportunity to
amplify and expand our reach of the HHMI IE grant beyond the STEM
college.

Each of the Core team members spent time promoting the program
in the three departments and recruiting faculty to participate in the
REALISE Faculty Learning Community. We focused on making in-roads
with strategic institutional partners, including leadership in Human
Resources and the Center for Diversity and Inclusion. We also promoted
and hosted reading groups (sponsored by an HHMI Faculty Forums
on Race Grant) inviting anyone who was interested to sign up, get a
free book, join in discussions and develop action plans for change.
These groups were led by our Diversity Educator and drew participants
from across institutional divisions and campus sites including athletics,
alumni relations, human resources, student affairs, and enrollment
management.

Working across institutional divisions, an informal group of mid-level
administrators and faculty with a shared goal of advancing diversity
and inclusion, along with our Diversity Educator, started meeting to
collaborate and collectively advance our work. We met monthly for over
a year, traveled to the AAC&U DESS conference together, and had a
paper accepted to present the following year, You Are Here: Leveraging
Resources, Building Alliances & Capacity for Change, before being
interrupted by the pandemic. We continued to meet and advance our
DEI work, but the group dissolved with most of the participants leaving
the institution. We also were fortunate to have representation from two
REALISE leadership team members on our institutional Diversity Equity
Action Committee (DEAC). During the award period, DEAC led a two-year
effort to develop a strategic plan to advance DEI at Radford University.
With REALISE members on this team, we were able to share our work
and, at times, align efforts.

242
Unfortunately, the full yield from these investments was limited due to
several institutional departures. While we had a core cross-divisional
cohort of committed folks progressing through the reading groups
together, when our Diversity Educator left, the cohort dissolved.

During the HHMI IE grant award period, we were awarded an HHMI
Faculty Forums on Race Grant and a Jessie Ball duPont Fund grant that
allowed us to augment the work of the HHMI IE grant beyond the STEM
college to other departments, colleges, and institutional divisions.

Threaded through all four of these approaches, we incentivized people
and activities, aligning with partner priorities and supporting their
initiatives for our mutual gain. As personnel and associated priorities
shifted, we redirected our efforts, energy and resources to other viable
pathways to continue advancing the work.

CHALLENGES

Like all other institutions, leading change during the COVID years was
marked by significant challenges--as well as extra stressors of advancing
DEI initiatives amid global racial unrest. Radford University was no
exception. As an added layer to the typical challenges navigated when
implementing organizational change, the volume and pace of leadership
transitions across the institution created an amplifying effect.

While not unusual to higher education institutions at this time, Radford
University experienced successive leadership transitions that would
persist across the award period. The number and pace of the leadership
turnover in key institutional stakeholder positions was extensive and
brisk. During the six-year period, we had three presidents, six provosts,
three science deans, several Center for Diversity and Inclusion Directors
and AVPs for Human Resources, and three IE program leads, experienced
the departure of our sole DEI Educator, as well as lost two of the three
grant authors and nine faculty (26% of those invested in REALISE)
who participated in the professional development. These repeated

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 243
transitions, while challenging, created the opportunity for us to focus and
hone our approach and strategies for advancing institutional change.

Fatigue, particularly change fatigue, was felt across our institution and
especially among folks who were working to advance DEI. As is typical,
with every new leader comes a new vision and approach. Faculty, staff,
administrators, and students advancing the work experienced frustration
from investing in relationships and building trust that was continually
erased and repeated as key stakeholder positions were vacated and new
leaders arrived. An exemplar area was the AVP of Human Resources. The
position changed multiple times over the past six years. The constant
shifts in HR leadership, as well as personnel changes across the unit,
significantly hindered our efforts to advance DEI initiatives in this critical
partner area and ultimately led to investments of time and energy
elsewhere in the organization where there was greater stability.

An adjacent thread was the shifting viability of strategic approaches that
were no longer as beneficial or impactful after a transition. Connecting
to the strategic plan and leveraging Institutional Effectiveness Day are
two examples discussed above. In a more project-specific disruptive
example, we had crafted training for the REALISE students, peer
academic coaches/tutors, and students participating in our civic
engagement program to include a social justice certificate training
offered by our Center for Diversity and Inclusion. When the director left,
we lacked the institutional expertise to continue the work, and had to find
alternative experiences for students to replace this program. The new
leader was not continuing the program.

The continual transitions forced us to focus and revisit our foundational
documents regularly as we were continually tasked to introduce and
garner support for the program from institutional leadership. These
repeated transitions also forced us to think differently and creatively
to continue the advancement of our efforts; we were simply unable to
become complacent, being consistently pushed to critically review our
strategies, tactics and approaches.

244
SUCCESSES

Amid the challenges, we are fortunate to have experienced a number
of successes in implementing the REALISE program and seeding
institutional change. Sometimes these successes were in spite of
transitions, where we pushed through or pivoted. At other times, these
successes were because of transitions, where we were forced to think
deeply and critically about the work we were doing. No matter which path
brought us here, we have advanced the inclusive excellence effort across
the institution.

The faculty professional development we offer has shifted. And
consequently, faculty have altered their courses, how they teach, and the
mindsets they bring to student interactions. This shift is evidenced in
data from our student surveys and focus groups, as well as in course
syllabi and faculty artifacts.

As mentioned above, we were able to leverage the HHMI IE initiative
to secure two additional DEI grants that have allowed us to expand the
reach and depth of allied programming to advance institutional DEI work
supporting faculty development and student success.

We have tangible evidence of change in institutional documents. Our
Teaching and Research faculty hiring guide was revised from an inclusive
lens and our faculty annual reporting system now specifically includes
opportunities for faculty to share their DEI work. Further, a number
of academic support areas (undergraduate research, Honors College,
community and civic engagement, tutoring, global, and faculty
development) include a DEI programmatic or learning outcome in their
units.

We are seeing culture change with the creation of the Fresh Fruit Fridays
(an initiative to engage faculty and students - see the chapter, Creating
Impactful Moments of this book for details). This kind of event has been
adopted across the institution in other colleges and areas, which now
host similar events on separate days. Further, this event is included as
programming for the QEP. These gatherings have turned into times when
faculty and students gather and build community. Some faculty are even
holding office hours during these times. Data from our faculty surveys and

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 245
reflections indicate perspective shifts resulting from their participation
in trainings and reading groups. With the creation and promotion of a
plug-and-Play Equity Gap Analysis Workbook, by Sociologist Dr. Allison
Wisecup, it is becoming more common for faculty to review
disaggregated class-level data--and for faculty and departments to be
discussing this information together.

In the end, with the selection of the QEP inspired by REALISE, we are
thrilled to see key elements of the program live on at the institution
beyond the three departments, the STEM college, and the life of the grant.
This new program, REALising Inclusive Student Excellence (RISE), builds
on the wisdom gained through implementing the REALISE program and
has had positive structural and cultural impacts on faculty, student
success and our institution overall.

LESSONS LEARNED

Like all projects, once we begin to implement them, new variables arise
that direct change. In some ways, the shifts in our approaches during
implementation are no different than implementing during times of
leadership and stakeholder stability--and without a pandemic. In other
ways, the continual flux forced us to work harder as we had to repeatedly
introduce new leadership to the project and restart partner relationships.
Of the many lessons learned from seeding institutional DEI change from
the middle, we focus on three.

One powerful lesson we learned was the immensely positive impact of
having an experienced, well connected, expert Diversity Educator, Dr.
Sharon Blackwell Jones, on our campus. In addition to the many DEI
trainings and book groups she led, she spent numerous hours visiting
with faculty helping them implement what they learned and process and
navigate the challenges that ensued, as well as supporting our students
of color individually and in groups as they navigated our primarily white
institution with an emergent DEI culture. The loss of her powerful
presence on campus and our inability to secure a position to rehire

246
behind her, was felt across the institution. While gains can be made
through consultants and virtual workshops, having a person in place who
can build relationships, hop on a call, or show up to help in a class has
significantly greater impact. We used this lesson to advocate for hiring
a Diversity Educator at the beginning of our QEP to set us up for a
successful implementation.

In light of the continual leadership transitions, we learned how to help
one another see the positive impacts that we have made and continue
to make in our areas. We were able to see how, collectively, those of
us in the middle were affecting change by honing our focus on our
sphere of influence and pressing forward. Helping to center the power
we have within our spheres of influence and the coalition built, aided
in reenergizing the group to keep going. Inclusive excellence is hard,
emotionally laborious work and supporting one another is critically
important to continued engagement in the work.

We learned that there are always paths forward to advance inclusive
excellence work. Adopting a positive, proactive, and nimble mindset,
ready to shift focus from structure to culture, from process to people,
from one area of the organization to another, learning when to pause
and when to push forward, helped keep the movement--and the
people--going.

   Acknowledgement

   Sincere thanks to the Howard Hughes Medical Institute's Inclusive
   Excellence in STEM Education Grant (#52008708) for funding our REALISE
   program, all the faculty and students who participated in the REALISE
   program, and all the administrators, faculty and staff who invested in
   seeding institutional change.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 247
REFERENCES

Boyce, M.E. (2003). Organizational learning is essential to achieving and
   sustaining change in higher education. Innovative Higher Education,
   28(2), 119-136.

Collins, P. H. (1993). Toward a new vision: Race, class, and gender as
   categories of analysis and connection. Race, Sex, and Class, 1(1),
   25-45.

Collins, P. H. (2013). On intellectual activism. Temple University Press.

Denofrio, L. A., Russell, B., Lopatto, D., & Lu, Y. (2007). Mentoring: Linking
   student interests to science curricula. Science, 318(5858), 1872-1873.
   https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1150788

Golom, F. D. (2018). Alternate conversations for creating whole-system
   change around diversity and inclusion. Diversity & Democracy, 21(1),
   16-19.

Kotter, J., (2018). The 8-step process for leading change. Kotter.
   https://www.kotterinc.com/8-steps-process-for-leading-change

Kuh, G. D., Kinzie, J., Schuh J. H., Whitt, E. J. & Associates. (2005).
   Student success in college: Creating conditions that matter. Jossey
   Bass.

Kuh, G. D. et al. (Eds.) (2007). Piecing together the student success
   puzzle: Research, propositions, and recommendations. ASHE Higher
   Education Report, 32, 1-182.

McNair T. B., Albertine S., Cooper M. A., McDonald N., & Major T. Jr.
   (2016). Becoming a student-ready college: A new culture of leadership
   for student success. Jossey Bass.

McNair, T. B., Bensimon, E. M., & Malcom-Piqueux, L. E. (2020). From
   equity talk to equity walk: Expanding practitioner knowledge for racial
   justice in higher education. Jossey-Bass.

Mead, G.H. (1934). Mind, self, and society from the standpoint of a social
   behaviorist. University of Chicago Press.

248
Stryker, S. [1980] (2003). Symbolic interactionism: A social structural
   version. Blackburn.

Tinto, V. (1975) Dropout from higher education: A theoretical synthesis of
   recent research. Review of Educational Research, 45, 89-125.

This program is supported in part by a grant to Virginia Tech from the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute through the Inclusive Excellence Grant.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 249
250
CHAPTER 15.

FROM THE SOUL

Learning and Leading Together toward Inclusive Excellence
CYNTHIA A. DEBOY; LAURA GOUGH; SARAH A. KENNEDY; AMANDA C.
RAIMER; AND JILL C. SIBLE

ABSTRACT
From the first gathering of the Inclusive Excellence Cohort 1 (IE1)
program directors (PDs), the Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI)
challenged us as project leaders to think and act differently in order to
make real progress toward equity and inclusion at our institutions. In the
midst of grappling with the details of our individual projects, we were
quick to embrace the mantra "fix the institution, not the student" and to
commit to leading change in curriculum, pedagogy, and even culture. At
the time, we did not anticipate the profound impact that a commitment
to inclusive excellence would have on us personally and professionally.
Here, five leaders from four of the IE1 institutions reflect on how we
adopted a learning mindset and built a community and friendships that
enabled us to lead from the soul even during the darkest hours of the
pandemic and critical period of racial reckoning.

INTRODUCTION
Leading change - it's hardly a novel topic. There are hundreds of books,
courses, and countless theories to support the work. Even through the
narrowed lens of leading change in academia, resources abound. When
we applied for grants to be in the first cohort of institutions to "engage
in the continuing process of increasing their institution's capacity for
inclusion of all students," we understood that we were being called to

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 251
adopt a different approach and mindset, to stop trying to fix perceived
deficits in our historically excluded students, and instead, to lead deep
and sustained change in the ways in which our institutions engaged with
our students. Not just meeting them where they were but understanding
and embracing where they had come from. Not creating new programs
targeting those students our institutions labeled "at risk" and
"underprepared," but dismantling and rebuilding our classes and
curricula so that all students encountered a pathway to success. We
understood the charge and were motivated to begin. But did any of
us actually know how to be the leaders we needed to be to move our
campuses toward inclusive excellence? Not at all. We honestly felt quite
overwhelmed and humbled. Had we the foresight that this work would
take place during a pandemic and a critical period of racial reckoning
following the murder of George Floyd in 2020, we undoubtedly would
have been even less confident in our capabilities as leaders. Fortunately,
the Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI) supported us in working
together as a community and adopting a learning mindset; here we delve
into how these two aspects of the Inclusive Excellence (IE) program
allowed us to effectively improve the diversity, equity, inclusion, and
justice (DEIJ) culture at our institutions.

But first, a little about who we are. As we have summarized previously
(Wojdak et al., 2020), our institutions differ greatly in size, student
demographics, and Carnegie classification, and at first, we questioned to
what extent we would find common ground. As individuals, we hold quite
different positions at our institutions and have varied levels of experience
ranging from postdoctoral fellows to administrators close to earning free
parking at their institutions. We share several aspects of our identity
(white, female, natural scientist) that likely provided some common points
of reference. Below (in the boxes), we share a little more about the selves
we brought to this leadership circle.

252
FROM COMMITTEE TO COMMUNITY

The most important tool that HHMI equipped us with as leaders was
each other. Beginning with the first program director (PD) meeting in
2017, institutions were organized into Peer Implementation Clusters
(PICs) based on relative geographical proximity. HHMI encouraged us
to work together and provided additional funding earmarked strictly for
PIC activities. We were fortunate that the distances among our campuses
were drivable, affording the opportunity for in-person annual meetings
before the pandemic (more on that later) and more frequent iterations
in a pair-wise manner (Trinity Washington-Towson and Radford-Virginia
Tech). The experiences of IE grantee institutions with their PICs varied
greatly across the country. Some found value in the partnerships; some
did not. For us, the PIC and especially the relationships that developed
among the program leaders were essential in fostering the areas where
we moved the needle toward inclusive excellence on our campuses, and
in building the resilience to move beyond challenges and failures, both
personal and professional. Here, we tell the story of our leadership circle
in the hopes that we might help others create this asset for their own
work.

At the first IE meeting in August 2017, each principle investigator (PI)
plus one additional representative from each institution met to plan our
first meeting the following spring. We discussed how we would need
regular meetings to plan the logistics of the meeting, but at the time, did
not envision anything more than a working group, and only held a couple
of meetings that year that were haphazardly scheduled. In the second
year of our grants, our PIC Assigned Liaison (PAL) at HHMI requested a
regularly scheduled monthly Zoom meeting with the four PIs.

Those monthly meetings started without any set agenda, but naturally
evolved into an opportunity for each PI to update the group on project
progress and challenges. We also used that time to ask questions of our
HHMI PAL. Because each of us were in different faculty and administrator
roles at our distinctive institutions, we often shared the particular issues
we were facing to receive feedback from each other. These issues
frequently extended beyond the bounds of our respective IE projects
and reminded us that despite our different project approaches and
institutional characteristics, we were all facing some of the exact same

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 253
challenges: e.g., faculty buy-in, administrative support, incorporating
student voice.

While we never called ourselves a community of practice (CoP; Wenger,
1999), we now recognize ourselves as such. Our commitment to our
meetings and each other was crucial to building trust and vulnerability.
Perhaps even more fitting than community of practice, is the term, "circle
of empowerment" coined by Rita Irwin (1995) in a case study analyzing a
leadership group of women arts educators in Canada. Like that group, we
share power, mentor each other, and bring our whole selves to the circle.
Our PIC leadership group also shares characteristics of the "Learning
Circles" of school administrators in Southern Australia. Like our PICs,
these circles were structured by the host organization to bring together
school leaders around a common change initiative (Peters & Le Cornu,
2005). One key difference is that the Australian learning circles were
more structured and facilitated compared to our PIC, where we were
largely left to our own devices to self-lead.

One of our greatest strengths as a group lies in the diversity of our
institutions, our projects, and our roles within those institutions. Each of
our universities is vastly different, making it easy for us to not see each
other as competitors but instead as supporters and co-conspirators.
Meanwhile, our various leadership and DEIJ experiences were extremely
valuable in providing support and helping one another brainstorm and
problem-solve; finding our common ground led to creative fusions of
ideas and innovations. This diversity made it even more powerful when
we found threads across all of our programs that were successful, such as
bringing faculty together in informal reading groups learning about DEIJ
and higher education.

Reflecting on the past six years, we realize that we somewhat organically
adopted the community norms for our CoP that our DEIJ professional
colleagues use in our inclusive excellence workshops at our individual
institutions and PIC meetings. These include listening deeply for
understanding, participating with kindness and respect, and
remembering that what is learned in these sessions can be shared,
but the specifics of the conversation are private. This is one of several
examples of how the activities we engaged in to move towards IE in one

254
setting influenced how we participated in similar activities in different
settings.

A COMMUNITY OF LEADERS... AND LEARNERS

The second tool HHMI instilled in us was evoking a learning mindset:
most of our annual PD meetings engaged us in professional development
to improve our competencies related to DEIJ. The HHMI program
directors emphasized that they were learning right along with us. We
were told to consider our projects as experiments and were given latitude
to pivot when something failed or an unanticipated opportunity arose.
Our annual reports, called PIER (Progress toward Inclusive Excellence
through Reflection), were like no grant reports we had ever written. They
were purely reflective with no figures or tables allowed. We came to
appreciate that HHMI valued what we had learned even more than what
we had done.

Interactions with our DEIJ professional colleagues reinforced the idea
that we are all continually learning in this arena. Our CoP became a
space in which we could all learn from each other, continuing our role as
learners while leading. Perhaps none of us realized at first how expansive
this project was intended to be until we were tasked with transforming
our institution for inclusive excellence. We were only beginning our
journey to understand what inclusive excellence meant, let alone knowing
how to transform an institution! This endeavor required navigating the
workings of our institution, working with administration, faculty, staff, and
students, and applying a systems-based approach. In the learning circles
described by Peters and Le Cornu (2005), the academic leaders were
similarly situated as learners. While our charge was less explicit, we found
ourselves adopting this role as well.

Month after month and year after year, we met (usually online) and
learned from the approaches we each took at our own institutions. By
knowing the elements of each other's projects, we could ask for advice
or resources, such as effective workshop facilitators or assessment tools.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 255
We were also able to hold each other informally accountable as we
shared accomplishments as well as goals yet to be met and provided
space for reflection and discussion. Because of the safe environment
we created by being open about challenges, the CoP also became a
sounding board for new ideas and approaches. This allowed us to have
a broader perspective for the approaches we were implementing to
increase inclusion. We gained insight into the successes and challenges
of various approaches at different types of institutions, which guided our
own approaches toward solutions; with a mix of roles within our CoP
we were further able to explore different ways to initiate change for
faculty and administrators. Importantly, we recognized the similarities of
challenges and how these often had root causes coming from a broader
context within the culture of academia and society. By seeking to bring
institutional change to not only one institution, but collectively at our
four institutions, we aimed to make a small but meaningful shift in
ideas, practices and culture and awareness toward greater inclusion. The
value that we each placed on the importance of this work added to our
cohesion and the need for support among the group. To lead inclusive
excellence projects requires us to push and dismantle institutional
norms, which requires confidence, perseverance, and courage. The
support from the group and knowledge that this type of work was being
conducted at other institutions was inspiring and encouraging. A monthly
opportunity to celebrate progress and successes was also critical in
keeping us motivated.

AND JUST WHEN WE THOUGHT WE KNEW WHAT WE
WERE DOING...

...2020 happened, and along with the rest of the world, our IE projects,
our institutions, and our lives were disrupted. Fortunately, we had each
other. When we went into pandemic lockdown, we continued our monthly
meetings which allowed us to share how our institutions were handling
the situation, share resources, and acknowledge how difficult everything
had become for our institutions and particularly for our students.

256
Together, we recognized the ways in which we were able to bring an
inclusive lens to bear on how our departments and institutions were
responding to moving all instruction online, and this monthly dialogue
helped us consider other approaches and student and faculty needs. It
was also at this time that our meetings began including more personal
elements, partly because of the incredibly stressful situation of being in
lockdown.

In 2020, not only was our CoP a source of professional support to
maintain our IE focus in the face of an unprecedented pandemic, but
our CoP also created support after George Floyd was murdered. By that
time we had been meeting monthly for two years, and we had established
an atmosphere of trust and vulnerability that made it easier to be open
about the difficulties we were facing personally and professionally. We
discussed the ways in which our projects were or were not addressing
structural racism at our institutions and how we might become better
equipped to do so.

It was also around this time that the PDs realized we needed to meet
without a representative from HHMI. Although we appreciated the desire
of HHMI personnel to be learning partners with us, because they
provided the funding for our projects and we were reporting back to them
annually, the power dynamic prevented the PDs from being entirely open.
We continue to hold monthly PD meetings now, during the sixth year of
our projects.

In our IE professional development workshops, we have spent a great
deal of time discussing the "whole student" and how we can't ignore
a student's life outside of our classroom or laboratory. In our CoP, we
began to embrace the analogous situation of discussing the "whole
faculty member" and recognizing that the pandemic, racial reckoning,
and our personal lives were affecting our ability to accomplish our project
goals and affecting the faculty and staff who work on IE projects with us.
As to be expected in any group such as ours, life events also occurred
during these six years to members of our CoP: a new baby, a retirement,
death of a parent, spouse illness, along with the challenges and joys
of parenting. We shared these experiences and gained support that
was critical for our own emotional and mental health so that we could
continue with our IE work. While our meetings remain agenda-less, we

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 257
organically create space for sharing our personal and professional joys
and challenges as well as the business of our shared work.

CONTINUING AND EXPANDING THE COMMUNITY

Beyond our monthly meetings, we seek each other out at conferences
and gather socially. Our larger PIC community convenes for an annual
conference-style meeting, with each institution taking a turn as host.
We also get a lot done together. We have published together and co-
presented at conferences (e.g. Transforming STEM Education hosted by
the American Association of Colleges and Universities). As a group, we
mobilized collaborative projects among our universities. Through our
yearly PIC meeting, we provide opportunities for our faculty to mingle
with each other and build cross-institutional relationships. Two
collaborative projects stemming from this work include dissemination of
IE work at American Chemical Society meetings and the creation of a
VT/Radford STEM inclusive pedagogy book group. In our final years of
the grant, our PIC is working together to disseminate our work (in this
collaborative book) and also to create avenues for our students to present
their undergraduate research.

WHAT'S THE SECRET TO A GREAT COP?

Unlike a traditional research grant, the HHMI IE grants were intended to
transform people and institutions. This work demanded that individuals
reflect on their teaching, disaggregate their student success data, and
be honest about who their programs are best serving. While the most
tangible artifacts of this work at institutions might be course-based
undergraduate research experiences (CUREs), project-based learning, or
inclusive curricula, the hardest work was encouraging faculty to question

258
their assumptions, adopt a growth mindset toward students, and take
ownership of their role in removing barriers to student success.

   Our leadership CoP was critical for this most difficult part of
   the work. Why did this group become so essential? What was
   the magic? We believe the key elements to its success
   include:

          · A shared purpose and passion for the work. Each of us viewed the
              work of Inclusive Excellence as essential, not just at our individual
              institutions but across higher education.

          · Time together. We committed to our monthly meetings, made
              additional time to support one another as needed, and sought
              opportunities to gather.

          · Our diversity. The differences in our roles and institutions gave us a
              range of perspectives and positioned us well to collaborate, rather
              than compete.

          · A safe space. We built a leadership circle where it was OK to share
              our failures, frustrations, and fears. We built one another up during
              the most difficult times.

          · Joy! We remembered to celebrate the wins, personal and
              professional. We ate together (sometimes virtually) and laughed
              often.

This group was exactly what was needed to help move all of our
institutions forward towards inclusive excellence.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 259
HEARING FROM THE IE LEADERSHIP

   Jill

   While I joined this project as a
   seasoned administrator with
   experience leading other STEM
   education grants, I can't say that all
   those years translated into certainty
   about how to create wholly
   equitable experiences for our
   students. I serve as the Associate
   Vice Provost for Undergraduate
   Education at Virginia Tech. I hope
   that my roots as a first-generation
   college student and a faculty
   member (Professor in Biological
   Sciences) have kept me grounded
   in ways that always center students
   in our work and hold faculty with the
   utmost regard for the many hats
   they wear and the ways in which Jill
   many put their hearts and souls into
   their teaching and mentorship of our students. One of the greatest "aha!"
   moments for me over the course of this project has been the realization that
   if we are to support faculty in adopting a growth mindset toward our
   students, then we must do the same for them.

   Our PIC leadership community of practice has provided an unanticipated
   space for me to extend that growth mindset to myself as an academic leader.
   My peers have provided the support and encouragement to bolster me to be
   a little bolder in my DEIJ work and more resilient in the face of opposition
   and setbacks. I seek to become the servant leader that Dan Cable describes
   as possessing "confident vulnerability" (Cable, 2023), although I admit that
   I am still working on the confident part of that equation. My PIC colleagues
   have helped with that. And beyond the professional benefits of our "circle of
   empowerment," I have made cherished friendships, for which I am deeply
   grateful.

260
Sarah

Unlike my co-authors from VT,
Towson, and Trinity Washington, I
was not the PD from the outset of
Radford's Inclusive Excellent grant
and was not at Radford when the
grant was written. I was invited onto
Radford's IE project's (REALISE)
leadership team in the grant's first
year (2018) while I was an Assistant
Professor and part of the first
Faculty Learning Community
cohort. I attended AAC&U's Project
Kaleidoscope 2019 STEM
Leadership Institute to solidify my
leadership skills and support my
growth in the inclusive excellence
area. Little did I realize, the
groundwork of this PIC CoP was Sarah
being laid as I was beginning my IE
leadership journey and it would become a critical support structure for me.
In Spring 2021, during my first year as an Associate Professor, our REALISE
Program Manager transitioned to another university and asked me to step
into grant management. A few months later, our Program Director was
appointed as Interim Provost and asked me to take the helm of the REALISE
program. In my new role as PD, I was overwhelmed as I didn't have
experience leading a large STEM grant. However, having familiarity with Jill,
Laura, and Cynthia from the annual PIC meetings, I was able to join in their
monthly PD virtual meetings with a level of comfort, knowing them as
thoughtful and caring women STEM IE leaders. These monthly meetings
helped me combat imposter syndrome and feel confident that I was the right
person to lead REALISE at Radford. In the second year of leading REALISE,
Amanda Raimer took the helm as Program Manager and while I was on
maternity leave in Fall 2022, Amanda joined the supportive CoP network of
the PIC program directors. Jill, Laura, and Cynthia provided wonderful
examples of how to lead effective teams and sparked ideas about how to
engage our leadership team and faculty. Our CoP was a safe space to share

                       FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                       EDUCATION 261
   about challenges and get critical feedback that would enhance our
   programs. I was welcomed back from maternity leave and my daughter made
   a few appearances at our meetings too!
   Inclusion work in higher education requires us to examine inequities,
   understand and embrace diversity, and advocate for removal of
   barriers to student success. Specifically, following the murder of George
   Floyd, I delved deeper into inclusive excellence and anti-racism literature to
   examine systemic practices in higher education that exclude Black students.
   The CoP became a space to have difficult conversations and to provide
   support to each other as campus leaders who are advocates for our
   vulnerable students. Having shared identities as cis-gendered, white women
   STEM leaders, we recognized our critical role as allies, advocates, and
   change agents. This CoP equipped me with knowledge, confidence, and
   a safety net; it allowed me to be brave in DEIJ space. At Radford, under
   my leadership (even through battling imposter syndrome), the REALISE
   Program is becoming institutionalized as our university-wide Quality
   Enhancement Plan RISE: Realizing Inclusive Student Excellence.

262
Amanda

As Sarah mentioned, I'm the
"newbie" and came into this
wonderful group in a roundabout
way. I joined Radford University and
the REALISE Program in Summer
2020 as a Postdoctoral Teaching
Fellow in biology. My main role was
to provide reassigned time for
faculty going through our learning
communities and also help with
various aspects of the REALISE
grant. While I had some training in
teaching, I had little experience
with DEIJ work and saw myself as
solely a learner in this space. My Amanda
time with REALISE helped me build
more confidence in incorporating
DEIJ into my teaching, classroom, and other interactions with students,
faculty and staff. I could see myself as a mentor for students but did not feel
prepared to be a leader. Being one of few postdocs on campus and newer to
this journey left me unsure of my capabilities.

As fate would have it, my role in the REALISE program would change
drastically over a short period of time and challenge my perceptions of
myself as a leader. After two years at Radford, I became the program
manager for the grant, and then within a few months became the interim
director while Sarah was on maternity leave. I was already hesitant about
assuming the role of program manager since I felt I had little to no
background in that skill set, but then to add on the PD position had me
feeling completely out of my depth. So when Sarah invited me to my first
directors meeting, I was very nervous. Here was this group of women who
in my eyes were (and still are) absolute powerhouses in this work, while
here I am just beginning to really find my footing. Talk about some serious
imposter syndrome! However, within the span of one meeting, this group
turned from something I was dreading to something that I look forward
to every month. I quickly saw that these women were not only peers, but
friends and true allies in this work that were happy to welcome me to

                       FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                       EDUCATION 263
   their team. They clearly took the time to learn each other's projects and
   offered valuable ideas and feedback from their various backgrounds and
   experiences. They also celebrated each other's successes and supported
   each other through challenging times, both professional and personal. Their
   vulnerability with each other helped me see that we were all learning,
   making mistakes, and growing at some level, which in turn has helped
   me feel more comfortable in my role as a leader. Even though Sarah is
   back in the director's seat, I still attend the weekly meetings; these ladies
   are an invaluable group of mentors and our conversations fill my cup every
   time.

264
Cynthia

At Trinity, our project developed
from the vision we created as a
team of five. My role as a leader was
to incorporate ideas from each
person to create a cohesive,
achievable project and foster a
unified team. Each member from
our diverse group brought strengths
and passions that contributed to
the project impact. We developed
an identity as a STEM team working
towards inclusive excellence. We
participated in many PD workshops
together and applied what we
learned to revise our science
program. We explored topics Cynthia
including implicit bias, positionality,
combatting microaggressions, cultural competency, and learned about
ourselves and each other. We were committed to be become better for our
students, ourselves and each other. The process of learning together and
incorporating ideas from everyone within our team meant listening and
recognizing each member's valuable input and experiences. Working as a
team meant working through challenges. We used these experiences
through open and honest dialogue to become more inclusive in our
communication, a stronger team, and better for our students. Working as an
effective team took cooperation, concession, collaboration and sometimes
apologies, self-reflection and moving on, all while learning from the
experience. Most importantly however is that we value each other and the
contributions we each make.

As our team grew as additional faculty members joined, I aimed to align
each person's interests with a meaningful project goal to maintain cohesion.
Integral to our team identity and capacity to make change remained
acknowledging the value and contributions each person brought to the
process. The practice of informal celebration contributed to pride for being
part of this team. For example, faculty might share with each other about an
impactful class session and the team would affirm and share in the success.

                       FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                       EDUCATION 265
   Inherent in our team's successes making change is the value we have
   placed on our team's diversity and recognition that individually we
   each provide value, while together we create a synergy to impact
   changes towards inclusive excellence and positively impact students.
   In addition to the Trinity team, connections made with leaders from our PIC
   institutions became a supportive community. Our PIC community became
   a space in which I could step away from a narrower lens of norms at
   my own institution to develop perspective for the work, successes and
   challenges I was encountering from a broader vantage point. Each member
   of this PIC leadership community provided understanding, encouragement,
   problem solving strategies, and compassion with nonjudgmental support.
   From these meetings, for example, I learned about professional
   development opportunities and strategies for pivoting to online and hybrid
   teaching for science labs during the Covid pandemic. Our meetings
   therefore provided practical advice, inspiration, perspective and recharging
   for working on our project at Trinity.
   Leadership on this project has been in large part about contributing to
   developing supportive communities both at Trinity and within the PIC.
   Leading has been about learning and working with teams of people with
   similar goals who when working together have vast experiences and
   knowledge to effectively create transformative change towards inclusive
   excellence.

266
Laura

I joined the Department of
Biological Sciences at Towson
University (TU) as Chair and
Professor in August 2015. Shortly
after I arrived, a colleague told me
about the HHMI IE proposal he and
others had begun to develop and
asked if I would lead the project.
From my previous institution I was
already familiar with the
pedagogical approach for the
proposal and quickly agreed. One
reason I accepted the position at Laura
TU was to be able to make change
for a large group of diverse students, and this proposal fit right into that goal
given the demographics of TU's student body. Although I had a track record
of federal funding to support my plant ecology research, I had never run a
STEM education focused project before. As we began our professional
development sponsored by HHMI and our own faculty professional
development for our program, I found myself continuously thinking about
how what I was learning could be applied at the level of my department and
potentially be scaled up to our college. As a department chair, I was able to
implement new approaches to curriculum and advising for the entire
department, not just the faculty participating in our HHMI IE program. I
brought data and summarized workshops at our college-level leadership
meetings to share with the other STEM chairs and our Dean. I also had
contacts throughout the university whom I could readily engage in
discussions such as the director of the Career Center, our Vice President for
Inclusion and Institutional Equity, and our center for faculty teaching and
learning because as a chair, I was already interacting with them in other
ways. Although leading a project like this while chair was challenging, being
in this position allowed me to leverage my administrative role as
department chair to further IE as approaches I learned through our IE
workshops and activities applied to everything we do as a department.
And through it all, the CoP supported me. Leading a large science
department through the pandemic lockdown (and at the same time a move

                       FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                       EDUCATION 267
   into a new science building) was brutal, yet every month I was able to talk
   with the CoP members to hear how their institutions were handling the
   situation and again, I could leverage my position by bringing their ideas
   to our college leadership. And as I faced personal challenges over the
   past six years, the CoP members listened and offered support. Every DEIJ
   professional I have met describes how difficult this work can be, how slow
   it is, and how the rewards and successes feel incremental and far between.
   Having the regular meetings of the CoP and the trust and support of the
   group has helped me recognize the successes for myself and also mark
   them with my colleagues at TU so that we are reminded that we are making
   progress in the right direction.

268
REFERENCES
Cable, D. (2023, January 23). Confident vulnerability: Three ways for

   leaders to inspire others. Forbes. https://www.forbes.com/sites/
   lbsbusinessstrategyreview/2023/01/23/confident-vulnerability-three-
   ways-for-leaders-to-inspire-others
Irwin, R. L. (1995). A circle of empowerment: Women, education, and
leadership. SUNY Press.
Peters, J. & Le Cornu, R. (2005). Beyond communities of practice:
   Learning circles for transformational school leadership. In P. Carden
   & T. Stehlik (Eds.), Beyond communities of practice: Theory as
   experience (pp. 107-132). Post Pressed.
Wenger, E. (1999). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and
identity. Cambridge University Press.
Wojdak, J., Phelps-Durr, T., Gough, L., Atuobi, T., DeBoy, C., Moss, P.,
   Sible, J., & Mouchrek, N. (2020). Learning together: Four institutions'
   collective approach to building sustained inclusive excellence in STEM.
   In K. White, A. Beach, N. Finkelstein, C. Henderson, S. Simkins, L.
   Slakey, M. Stains, G. Weaver, & L. Whitehead (Eds.), Transforming
   institutions: Accelerating change in higher education. Pressbooks.
   http://openbooks.library.umass.edu/ascnti2020/chapter/wojdak-etal

This program is supported in part by a grant to Virginia Tech from the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute through the Inclusive Excellence Grant.

                           FOSTERING COMMUNITIES OF TRANSFORMATION IN STEM HIGHER
                                                                                                           EDUCATION 269
Dive into the multifaceted landscape of

inclusive excellence in STEM education

with 'Fostering Communities of Transfor-

mation in STEM Higher Education'. This

scholarly work examines transformative

initiatives from Virginia Tech, Radford

University, Trinity Washington University,

and Towson University, showcasing their

role as catalysts in cultivating inclusive

excellence across diverse STEM

disciplines. Take inspiration from their

projects and guidance from their lessons

learned  with  this  collection.

         ISBN: 978-1-957213-84-2
         DOI: https://doi.org/10.21061/fosteringcommunities
         License: CC BY 4.0
         Cover design: Catherine Freed
