 Introduction to Library
and Information Science
INTRODUCTION TO
LIBRARY AND
INFORMATION SCIENCE

REED HEPLER AND DAVID HORALEK

College of Southern Idaho
Twin Falls
Introduction to Library and Information Science Copyright © 2023 by College
of Southern Idaho is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International License, except where otherwise
noted.
CONTENTS

Introduction                         1

H5P Information                      5

Part I. Library History and
Essential Functions

1. Data, Information, and Knowledge  9

2. History of Libraries              16

3. Library Services                  27

4. Acquisitions                      45

5. Collection Development            49

6. Classification and Cataloging     57

7. Facilities and Funding            65

8. Circulation                       70

9. Reference Librarianship           84

10. Preservation                     92
Part II. Improvements and
Adaptations in the Modern World

11. Intellectual Freedom                 99

12. Digital Initiatives and Library 2.0  108

13. Representation in the Library        116

14. Copyright                            120

Part III. Supporting the Public to
Obtain Public Support

15. Patron Services                      131

16. Reader's Advisory                    136

17. The Modern Library Experience        140

Part IV. Conclusion

18. Conclusion                           151

Glossary                                 159
              INTRODUCTION | 1

INTRODUCTION

Hello! My name is Reed Hepler. I am the Digital Initiatives
Librarian and Archivist at the College of Southern Idaho. This
textbook was written in 2023 to provide a straightforward and
comprehensive resource regarding the basics of library and
information science. In particular, this textbook will cover the
applications of the principles of library science rather than
droning on about theory. Theory is important, but application
of theoretical principles promotes real, long-lasting learning.
The last half of the textbook examines the advent of digital
initiatives and electronic resources and how these have altered
library science. It also reflects on the ideal experience of a
patron visiting a modern library and how patron-facing
services can foster informational literacy.

   This book is intended to give you a basic understanding of
the common services that most libraries provide. While there
are many different types of libraries, all of them provide most
if not all of the basic services referred to in this textbook. All
of them have patrons, although those patrons may have needs
best suited to particular libraries. Whether you are going to be
a medical, public, or academic librarian, this textbook can help
you learn how you can best serve each of your patrons using a
variety of resources and functions.
2 | INTRODUCTION

   The goal of this textbook is to explain the different facets
of general librarianship in a concise, thorough manner.
Interspersed with these explanations will be interactive
assessments and experiences in which you can test and
demonstrate your knowledge. The average textbook is around
50,000 to 100,000 words. This textbook is around 25,000
words. Even when I update it or add sections, I want to remain
in that range. At the most, I will change it to be 30,000 words.
There is nothing more pointless than including excessive
detail. This is an introductory textbook, and it provides links
to more detailed sources of information if you would like to
browse those.

   One of the most common critiques of the library, which
is completely unwarranted, is that since the Internet exists,
libraries are going to be obsolete in the near future. Nothing
could be more false. As modern librarians, we have harnessed
a knowledge of the internet to provide quick and seemingly
effortless access to ranges of data that were not accessible by
the general public even ten years ago. The offerings of database
and data access to patrons began almost immediately after the
beginning of the Internet. The 1990s saw a huge surge in the
use of the Internet for library technical services as well as
patron-facing services. Now, the Internet holds some of the
library's own holdings, including ebooks and audio books, in
addition to providing database access.

   We will explore the history, theory, services, modernization,
and patron-centered nature of the library. We will not go into
                                                                  INTRODUCTION | 3

detail about any of these topics, but you will eventually see
how all of these facets fit together. If you ever are confused
about the definition of a term, please consult ODLIS, which
stands for the Online Dictionary for Library and Information
Science. I will not link to it, because as a library scientist, you
should know how to search for things and find them.
Technically, I should not put any links in this book because I
want you to know how to look for information by yourself.
However, I like links and conciseness of information and data.
Furthermore, I like to give people as much data as possible to

 make their lives easier. So I have links to other sites throughout

this book. You're welcome. I've spoiled you.
   I'll give you another resource, too. This one I will give you

the link to, but you may have to find it for yourself again
because the Internet Archive hates external traffic to its site
sometimes. The LIS Wiki was a massive open source
encyclopedia about all things Library Science related.
However, its use dropped gradually as people used social media
and other websites to communicate about issues and topics. In
2019, a few years before I found out about it, the project was
shuttered for good. I went to the Internet Archive and found
a snapshot of the site from a month before it closed. It can be
accessed at https://web.archive.org/web/20190509193404/
https://liswiki.org/wiki/Main_Page.

   Truly, the modern library has the potential to provide a
unique experience to all patrons. Our job is to help patrons use
all resources, digital and analog, at their disposal in the library.
4 | INTRODUCTION

I hope that you will enjoy this textbook as much as I enjoyed
creating it. If you would like more in-depth information about
cataloging in libraries, look at our other textbook: Cataloging
with MARC, RDA, and Classification Systems.

   Every time that you use this textbook, please contact Reed
Hepler at rhepler@csi.edu and provide the course title and
the number of students involved. If you are using it for
professional development, please give the institution and
approximately how many people are going to use it at your
institution. If you are a lone researcher, worker, or student,
feel free to reach out and contact Reed with any revisions,
questions, or other comments. This allows him to monitor the
impact of the textbook and its associated assessments.
                                                              H5P INFORMATION | 5

H5P INFORMATION

This textbook and course includes interactive activities made
possible through H5P, which is a learning system created with
the HTTP5 language. You will be able to interact with the
knowledge you have gained in a variety of ways, including
drag-and-drop, fill-in-the-blank, multiple choice, and other
varieties. The goal of these activities is to help you internalize
your knowledge. Depending on the results of your trials, you
will be receive certain feedback. You will only be graded upon
your final score and you will always be allowed to retry these
activities unless your instructor decides to disable that option.
There are a few guidelines you should know about typing and
interacting with these activities:

 1. Spelling is important. This is good training for
      librarianship in general. There are options to allow for
      imperfect spelling. I have disabled these options. As a
      librarian, you will be expected to be precise when
      entering information in a catalog record and searching
      for information and data. Spell things accurately

 2. When you come across an entry that has a long dash, put
      it in a blank as "-."

 3. When you see an ampersand, write it out as "and."
6 | H5P INFORMATION

 4. Don't give up! Use the feedback that comes with your
      answers to improve your score.

 5. If you are confused about an assignment or believe that
      you got a wrong answer in error, click the "Confused"
      button on the bottom right corner of the H5P window.
                     LIBRARY HISTORY AND ESSENTIAL FUNCTIONS | 7

PART I

LIBRARY HISTORY
AND ESSENTIAL
FUNCTIONS
8 | LIBRARY HISTORY AND ESSENTIAL FUNCTIONS
                               DATA, INFORMATION, AND KNOWLEDGE | 9

1.

DATA, INFORMATION,
AND KNOWLEDGE

Before we explore the functions, services, and benefits of
libraries and library science, we need to ensure that we are
all working with the same definitions of key words. In other
professions, the words "knowledge," "data" and "information"
are used interchangeably. However, in library science they are
three related but distinct things. Patrons (and librarians)
peruse the information provided by interpretations of data in
order to receive and retain knowledge. They may also peruse
data (especially in academic, medical, or scientific libraries),
but the main stored resource in libraries is information.

   Data is the building blocks of all items contained in a
library. It is the bare facts of reality, the strategically collected
information that has been recorded in a standardized, or at
least understandable, way. There are two types of data.
Quantitative data is data that has been recorded as an amount
of something. For example, four seconds or eighteen ounces.
10 | DATA, INFORMATION, AND KNOWLEDGE

                                       "We had
                                       the data"
                                       by
                                       fiona.wal
                                       sh2015 is
                                       licensed
                                       under CC
                                       BY 2.0. To
                                       view a
                                       copy of
                                       this
                                       license,
                                       visit
                                       https://cr
                                       eativeco
                                       mmons.o
                                       rg/
                                       licenses/
                                       by/
                                       2.0/?ref=
                                       openvers
                                       e.

Qualitative data, on the other hand, is something that is not
communicated through the use of numbers. This type of data
is recorded through words or other media that cannot be
assigned numbers. In order to ensure that qualitative data is
collected consistently and accurately, researchers will use
controlled vocabularies to record these qualities or at least
approximate them. Then, the quantitative data of the use of
these standardized vocabularies can be analyzed. The use of
                              DATA, INFORMATION, AND KNOWLEDGE | 11

both of these types of data varies from field to field, but all data
is in one of these two forms.

   Information is produced when a researcher or another
person takes the data obtained by research and analyzes and
interprets it. This is always done in qualitative form. Examples
of sources of data-derived information include the text of
articles in academic journals, nonfiction books, and
professional websites. Information takes data and inputs it
into a particular narrative. Ideally, the narrative of information
is free from bias. However, bias inevitably creeps into data
analysis despite researchers' and interpreters' best efforts.
Thus, Information Literacy is a vital skill for librarians and
their patrons to possess.

   Knowledge is obtained when readers internalize the
information and data presented to them by items in the library
collections. Readers internalize all of the information present
in the items. Hopefully, they will retain the information.
Internalization of information and action upon it as a
demonstration of knowledge has been regarded as the highest
form of intellectual achievement by many cultures. For
example, in Buddhism the highest form of knowledge was
demonstrated by becoming a Bodhisattva and living according
to the precepts of the Buddha's sutras, which were learned
through reading and discussion.
12 | DATA, INFORMATION, AND KNOWLEDGE

                                       The
                                       Bodhisatt
                                       vas of the
                                       Ten
                                       Stages in
                                       Attaining
                                       the Most
                                       Perfect
                                       Knowled
                                       ge was
                                       painted
                                       in 1454 in
                                       China.
                                       This
                                       digital
                                       reproduct
                                       ion was
                                       provided
                                       by the
                                       Cleveland
                                       Museum
                                       of Art. It
                                       is
                                       licensed
                                       under the
                                       CC0 1.0
                                       Universal
                                       Public
                                       Domain
                                       License.

The chief goal of librarians is to help their patrons accurately
interpret data and internalize correct and authoritative
information so they can have correct knowledge and act
accordingly. The correct application of knowledge is called
                              DATA, INFORMATION, AND KNOWLEDGE | 13

wisdom, and is considered by some to be the fourth and
highest tier of understanding. However, this classification is
somewhat arbitrary and will therefore be considered part of
the knowledge aspect of understanding.

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/lis/?p=111#h5p-15

Storing and Accessing Data,
Information, and Knowledge

Libraries play a crucial role in organizing, preserving and
providing access to data, information and knowledge. One of
the most important aspects of this is the use of a well-
defined Organization Schema, which helps to classify and
categorize the materials in a logical and meaningful way.

   Classification systems such as the Dewey Decimal
Classification System or the Library of Congress
Classification System are commonly used to organize and
arrange materials on library shelves. This allows patrons to
quickly and easily locate the materials they need by browsing
through a well-defined and consistent schema.
14 | DATA, INFORMATION, AND KNOWLEDGE

   Another important aspect of library data management is
Preservation. Libraries take great care to preserve their
collections for future generations by using techniques such
as temperature and humidity control, light management, and
digitization. This helps to ensure that the materials will be
available for use long into the future.

   Metadata is also a key component of library data
management. Metadata is data that describes other data, and
it plays a critical role in providing information about the
materials in a library's collection. This can include information
such as the title, author, publication date, and subject matter.
Metadata is also used to provide information about the
physical characteristics of a record, such as its format, size, and
condition.

   Finally, libraries use one Record for each of its items to keep
track of the materials in their collections. This can include
information such as the title, author, publication date, and
subject matter. Additionally, libraries use records to keep track
of patron borrowing and to keep track of the location of
materials within the library.

   The purpose of using this wide range of tools is to ensure
that patrons can easily find the precise information and items
they are looking for. Additionally, they can also browse and
find a wide range of information resources if they are looking
for multiple resources on a particular subject.
                     DATA, INFORMATION, AND KNOWLEDGE | 15

           An interactive H5P element has been
           excluded from this version of the text. You
can view it online here:
https://csi.pressbooks.pub/lis/?p=111#h5p-14
16 | HISTORY OF LIBRARIES

2.

HISTORY OF LIBRARIES

We have already explored several terms that may have other
meanings in external fields of research but that have specific
meanings in library science. In order for you to understand
the terms and trends in the field, you will need to develop a
knowledge of its lexicon. A Lexicon is a specialized collection
of words that are unique, or at least have a unique meaning,
for a particular field. For example, the word "Record" has been
defined as a formatted collection of all of an item's metadata.
You would not, however, refer to a medical history record as
a collection of all metadata about a patient. A medical history
record is a chart or data collection about a patient's treatments
and health throughout a given period of time. These
definitions are similar, and comparable, but are not entirely
appropriate when applied to each others' fields.

Libraries in the Ancient and
Pre-American World

Ironically, in order to understand the concept of libraries you
will need to understand a different definition of the word
                                                       HISTORY OF LIBRARIES | 17

"lexicon." Originally, it was a term for a dictionary or thesaurus

that recorded all of the words in a given language. Ancient

civilizations used to create lexicons with each others' languages

as a type of training manual. These were among the first books

to be written down. Many ancient Greek lexicons exist.

                                                                  "Old
                                                                  Persian
                                                                  Cuneifor
                                                                  m" by
                                                                  Ben
                                                                  Piven is
                                                                  licensed
                                                                  under CC
                                                                  BY-NC
                                                                  2.0. To
                                                                  view a
                                                                  copy of
                                                                  this
                                                                  license,
                                                                  visit
                                                                  https://cr
                                                                  eativeco
                                                                  mmons.o
                                                                  rg/
                                                                  licenses/
                                                                  by-nc/
                                                                  2.0/?ref=
                                                                  openvers
                                                                  e.

The first writing system, however, was not the Greek language.

The honor of creating the first written language belongs to

the ancient kingdom of Sumer. Sumerians developed a system
18 | HISTORY OF LIBRARIES

of writing called Cuneiform. This language utilized a pattern

of symbols carved into stone and clay. The earliest examples

of cuneiform writing describe day-to-day activities such as

purchasing groceries and larger matters such as settling land

disputes. Cuneiform usage spread throughout the area and

became standard in several other kingdoms during the Bronze

Age.

                                                                  "Genuine
                                                                  Egyptian
                                                                  papyrus
                                                                  (2005-06
                                                                  -011)" by
                                                                  Argenber
                                                                  g is
                                                                  licensed
                                                                  under CC
                                                                  BY 2.0. To
                                                                  view a
                                                                  copy of
                                                                  this
                                                                  license,
                                                                  visit
                                                                  https://cr
                                                                  eativeco
                                                                  mmons.o
                                                                  rg/
                                                                  licenses/
                                                                  by/
                                                                  2.0/?ref=
                                                                  openvers
                                                                  e.

Papyrus was the first light and easily-transportable material
                                                       HISTORY OF LIBRARIES | 19

on which one could write information. This plant material
was pressed into sheets by the Ancient Egyptians around 2900
B.C.E. It became the dominant medium for writing things
down throughout the ancient world, even being used by the
ancient Greeks. Papyrus documents were not folded into the
book-shaped form we know today. Rather, they were rolled
together.

   The standard form of books came much later. Religious
scholars and monks wrote texts on sheets of paper, and some
of these were folded into small books called "quartos." After
a long time of handwritten text and large block printing, the
Printing Revolution came in the 1450s, when Johannes
Gutenberg printed his Gutenberg Bible. Many books,
including previous works and new ones, swiftly followed the
Gutenberg Bible. Information spread throughout the Western
world, chiefly carried by books.
20 | HISTORY OF LIBRARIES

                           "File:Salle
                           de lecture
                           Bibliothe
                           que
                           Sainte-G
                           enevieve
                           n01.jpg"
                           by
                           Marie-La
                           n Nguyen
                           is
                           licensed
                           under CC
                           BY 2.0. To
                           view a
                           copy of
                           this
                           license,
                           visit
                           https://cr
                           eativeco
                           mmons.o
                           rg/
                           licenses/
                           by/2.0/fr/
                           deed.en?r
                           ef=openv
                           erse.

During the 17th and 18th centuries, some of the more
important European libraries were founded, such as the
Bodleian Library at Oxford, the British Museum Library in
London, the Mazarine Library and the Bibliothèque Sainte-
Geneviève in Paris, the Austrian National Library in Vienna,
                                                          HISTORY OF LIBRARIES | 21

  the National Central Library in Florence, the Prussian State
  Library in Berlin, the Zaluski Library in Warsaw and the M.E.
  Saltykov-Shchedrin State Public Library of St Petersburg. 1
  The 18th century is when we see the beginning of the modern
  public library. In France, the French Revolution saw the
  confiscation in 1789 of church libraries and rich nobles'
  private libraries, and their collections became state property.
  The confiscated stock became part of a new national library -
  the Bibliothèque Nationale. Two famous librarians, Hubert-
  Pascal Ameilhon and Joseph Van Praet, selected and identified
  over 300,000 books and manuscripts that became the property
  of the people in the Bibliothèque Nationale. During the French
  Revolution, librarians were solely responsible for the
  bibliographic planning of the nation. Out of this came the
  implementation of the concept of library service - the
  democratic extension of library services to the general public
  regardless of wealth or education.2

 Libraries in the United States

  Libraries were an important part of the beginning of the
  United States. In addition to academic libraries essential to

1. Stockwell, Foster (2000). A History of Information and Storage
  Retrieval. ISBN 0-7864-0840-5.

2. Mukherjee, A. K. (1966) Librarianship: its Philosophy and History. Asia Publishing
  House; p. 112.
22 | HISTORY OF LIBRARIES

educational systems created in colonial settlements in the
American colonies, libraries in private residences provided
access to much of the information necessary to foment the
American Revolution and create the first American
government. Libraries are so important to the federal
government that in 1800, John Adams approved the creation
of a Library of Congress. This library was damaged by the fire
started by British soldiers in the War of 1812, but it was more
than replenished when Thomas Jefferson donated his personal
library of almost 6,500 books to its collections. Physical books
were the main holdings of the library, and its scope was limited
to members of Congress, although the public was welcome to
look at popular books. In 1897, the library received its own
building and became the largest library in the entire world at
that time.
                                                       HISTORY OF LIBRARIES | 23

                                                                  South
                                                                  Hall of
                                                                  the
                                                                  Entrance
                                                                  Pavilion,
                                                                  Library of
                                                                  Congress,
                                                                  Washingt
                                                                  on, D.C.
                                                                  was
                                                                  provided
                                                                  by the
                                                                  New York
                                                                  Public
                                                                  Library
                                                                  and is in
                                                                  the
                                                                  Public
                                                                  Domain.

Since then, the Library of Congress has adapted and evolved
into a unique, global institution, widely known for its free,
non-partisan service to Congress, librarians, scholars, and the
public--in the United States and around the world. It has
become the gold standard for libraries everywhere. This is why
we follow the procedures, practices, and classifying norms we
do-because the Library of Congress has collaborated with
professionals around the world to create internationally-
recognized standards.

Institutions and Realities of the
24 | HISTORY OF LIBRARIES

Modern World of Librarianship

The other major organizations in modern librarianship in the
United States are OCLC and the American Library
Association. The ALA was founded on October 6, 1876. Its
purpose was originally to facilitate connections between
librarians rather than serve as a massive organization and
network for libraries as institutions. Gradually, it morphed
into that latter definition. It promotes the use of librarianship
and information literacy education to encourage advocacy,
diversity, and lifelong learning. In addition to the norms of
LCC, the Code of Ethics and the Bill of Rights provided by
the ALA are the guiding documents of the profession.
Librarians in all types of libraries adhere to these principles.

   OCLC, which used to refer to the Ohio College Library
Center and then the Online Computer Library Center, now
stands for nothing. Literally. That is the name of the
organization. This group produces the most effective trainings
and products for librarianship. They are the force behind
Interlibrary Loan, WebDewey, Connexion, and WorldCat.
While they have somewhat misappropriated their influence
to form a monopoly, they have also created tools that are
invaluable. The Library of Congress Classification Web service
can be used in conjunction with these to help in many
technical services aspects of librarianship. WorldCat can even
help with some patron service aspects as well.

   In today's modern world, there are more information and
                                                       HISTORY OF LIBRARIES | 25

data carriers than books or other verbal media. Audiovisual,
audio, and image carriers are also wonderful ways to obtain
data and information and cement knowledge into our minds.
This book explores the many different types of libraries and the
similar functions and services they all offer to their patrons.

   When we think of libraries today, we usually visualize the
public library. However, the public library is a relatively new
development in the history of library science. While books
and libraries are typically seen as the great equalizer in terms
of information, the original libraries only served the wealthy
members of society. Thus, power that was originally in the
hands of the clergy because of lack of information only spread
to the wealthy and educated upper class. Libraries only gave
items to those who sponsored their collections and
maintenance. This original library iteration was known as the
Subscription Library. Although subscription libraries exist
today, member institutions often extend their privileges to
students and others. For example, a library may create an
institutional account to the "subscription library"-esque site
of Encyclopedia Britannica. All of its members can thus access
all of Encyclopedia Britannica's pages.

   How did the first libraries categorize and catalog their
holdings and collections? There were no set criteria for
cataloging items or works. Organization depended largely on
the whim of the local librarian. The first major break from this
trend was the creation of the Dewey Decimal Classification
System by Melvil Dewey in the late nineteenth century. This
26 | HISTORY OF LIBRARIES

system is currently in its 23rd iteration. It is increasingly being
replaced by the Library of Congress Classification System.
However, the DDC is still significant in that it was the first
comprehensive attempt to categorize all knowledge contained
in library items.

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/lis/?p=5#h5p-1
                                                            LIBRARY SERVICES | 27

3.

LIBRARY SERVICES

In order for any library to effectively serve its patrons, it has to
research them first. It also has to research them continuously.
One of the most important data sets you should research is
population Demographics. This is the data regarding the
ethnic, racial, economic, cultural, and other groups in your
population. Interests and research topics could also be
included in this type of data. When a library understands the
demographics of its population, it will be more adequately
prepared to give patrons the information resources they are
most likely going to request. Keep in mind that one should not
succumb to following stereotypes when developing collections
for demographic populations. At the same time, however,
knowing the demographics of your library's relevant
population can let you know which issues or interests relevant
to those groups may need to be supported in your collections.

   Each library will have a different population for which
demographics should be taken. For example, the population
of a public library is all residents of a specific geographic area.
An academic library, on the other hand, needs to analyze the
demographics of its institution's student body and faculty.
28 | LIBRARY SERVICES

Combining and separating data points for these two groups
will help the library prepare academic resources for courses
and research projects. Other libraries have their unique
populations and demographics. Medical libraries, for example,
need to focus their collections on the most likely medical needs
to be presented at their institution. Health demographics are
important in determining the likelihood of certain issues.

   Once demographics and other data have been obtained,
they are incorporated into every service and department of
the library. Some library departments are less patron-facing
than others(cataloging, for example) but they are all centered
around providing the most effective experience for all patrons.
As libraries modernize and evolve, the digital capabilities, or
lack thereof, of their patron population is an increasingly
important demographic to obtain. This can inform
programming and individual interactions with patrons.

Library Services

There are many types of services that libraries provide to their
patrons. Not all libraries have all of these services, but all
libraries should strive for at least one thing under each of these
umbrellas. For example, a special library may not have
programs inside its grounds, but it may create a display or a
digital exhibit that can be seen by the public outside of its
physical constraints.

   Patron Services, also called public services, include any
                                                            LIBRARY SERVICES | 29

function of the library that facilitates patron-librarian
interactions. These sometimes overlap with reference and
circulation departments. In fact, sometimes Circulation is
considered a subset of Patron Services. Other examples of
Patron Services include programming, booklist creation,
computer labs, informational videos, and other initiatives.
30 | LIBRARY SERVICES

                       Public
                       services
                       includes
                       germane
                       tasks like
                       helping
                       patrons
                       and
                       unique
                       tasks like
                       working
                       with
                       specialize
                       d topics
                       or media.
                       "Public
                       Library,
                       Country
                       Exchange
                       Service,
                       August
                       1952" by
                       Queensla
                       nd State
                       Archives
                       is marked
                       with
                       Public
                       Domain
                       Mark 1.0.
                       To view
                       the
                       terms,
                       visit
                       https://cr
                       eativeco
                       mmons.o
     LIBRARY SERVICES | 31

rg/  InterLibrary Loan (ILL) is a service where

publicdo individual libraries agree to share their collections

main/

mark/ and to supply materials on demand to one

1.0/?ref=oanother for patron use. ILL borrowing is

penverse. comparable to a special order at a retail store.

When the color, size, and brand of a jacket you want is out of

stock, the store might offer to call another branch of the store

to see if they have it and can send it to your local store.

ILL should never be used instead of developing a library's

own collection but is used instead as a supplement to their

collection. If an item is repeatedly requested, it shows that

there is a need for the item and it should be purchased. For

more information on ILL guidelines and standards go to

Interlibrary Loan Code for the United States, which is a source

from the American Library Association detailing how

InterLibrary Loan procedures should be carried out.

Reference departments have three primary purposes: to

directly assist specific users in their pursuit of information, to

educate and assist users in using resources effectively, and to

instruct users on how to perform searches so they can become

self-sufficient at finding resources. there are four types of

questions reference librarians are asked: direction, ready

reference, specific search, and research. Each of these requires

unique skills and knowledge, and some are easier to answer

than others. The chapter on Reference Librarianship will go

over these types of questions in more detail. While some

libraries have designated reference librarians, others do not.
32 | LIBRARY SERVICES

Whether or not you are a designated reference librarian, you
should always be prepared and willing to answer any reference
questions. Detailed questions, such as research questions,
should probably be referred to the appropriate reference
librarian if your library has one. No one wants their
responsibilities to be supplanted by someone else.. However,
initial help should be given in the meantime if possible.

   Technical Services includes cataloging, collections
development, acquisitions, and other aspects of the library that
occur without much direct patron involvement.

   The purpose of Cataloging involves two separate activities.
First, a shelf address or location must be assigned to each book,
CD, video, pamphlet, or other item. Second, specific
information for each item must be entered into the library
holdings database.

   Within the activity of providing specific information about
each item, there are two types of cataloging taking place:

  · Descriptive cataloging describes the physical
      characteristics of the item, such as size and physical
      dimensions, number of pages, or length of running time.

  · Subjective cataloging focuses on identifying the primary
      subjects and assigning the most appropriate subject
      headings. Subjective cataloging enables a searcher to
      locate specific items in which they are interested.

At one time, cataloging was accomplished one item at a time
                                                            LIBRARY SERVICES | 33

(original cataloging). This was very labor intensive and the
work was duplicated by each library. With the advent of the
Library of Congress' catalog card distribution system and then
cooperative catalogs and worldwide bibliographic utilities,
copy cataloging became the routine avenue for most items.
Today, a cataloger is able to search large, reliable databases,
such as OCLC, and download the information into their own
records. This saves many hours of work for each item. Original
cataloging must still be performed on unique items.

   Over the last 25 years, cataloging processes have changed
dramatically. Most libraries perform original cataloging on less
than 10% of their acquisitions, and many small libraries are
able to find acceptable cataloging for all except 1-2% of their
new items.

   Acquisitions can be considered the "business" part of
Technical Services. This department's purpose is to obtain
selected items and provide payment. They work in
coordination with book vendors, publishers, and license
providers to secure access for library staff and patrons.
Acquisitions often works in tandem with the Collections
Development Department.

   Preservation is a technical facet of librarianship usually
reserved for special libraries, like archives or government
repositories. However, it can, and is, also performed at public,
school, and academic libraries for items that are worn down,
especially if these items are high in circulation. Preservation
can occur through taking steps to preserve the physical item,
34 | LIBRARY SERVICES

transferring the information-containing parts from their
original binding to a new binding or physical format, and
digital preservation.

Digital Divide and the Modern Library

Digital preservation is just one of the facets of the ever-
increasing modernization and digitization of library services.
This change was inevitable as digital items proliferated in many
formats, from mp3s to text files to pdfs to websites. Digital
literacy is becoming increasingly synonymous with
information literacy. the plain truth is that technology, and
thus digital files and navigation, have become an intrinsic part
of our daily life. We check the weather, load our health data,
listen to music, and learn about popular and political news
stories. Social media is also a major part of many peoples'
lifestyles. As information repositories, libraries have
incorporated these changes into collections and programs. It
is our job to help people become more comfortable with the
digital reality of the present and the digital promises of the
future. There are two main types of people when we speak of
digital information literacy. The first are digital natives, and
the second are digital immigrants. The aspect of their lives that
separates them is referred to as the digital divide.
LIBRARY SERVICES | 35

               The
               digital
               divide is a
               separatio
               n of
               comfort,
               ability,
               literacy,
               and other
               aspects
               of
               lifestyle
               between
               those
               who
               know
               how to
               use
               digital
               media
               and
               those
               who do
               not for
               various
               reasons.
               "digital
               divide" by
               brandiat
               muhkuh
               is
               licensed
               under CC
               BY 2.0. To
               view a
               copy of
               this
36 | LIBRARY SERVICES

license,    Digital Natives are those individuals who have
visit       grown up with technology. Their whole lives, or
https://cr  most of it, have been spent in the Digital or
eativeco    Information Age. The first people to truly do this
mmons.o     were the Millennials, who were born between the
rg/         early 1980s and the late 1990s. These were people
licenses/   who grew up as cell phones, digital portable music
by/         players, and other technological advancements
2.0/?ref=   were being invented, tested, released, and widely
openvers
e.

used. As they aged, they had even more inventions to explore.

They learned how to navigate and take advantage of

technology at the same time they were learning their first

language and other life skills. Thus, technology is literally part

of their nature. The same is true of all people who have been

exposed to technology who were born after Millennials. These

groups are colloquially called Generation Z and Generation

Alpha. They did not grow up as initial technologies were

developed, but they were born in a time when these inventions

had already become a ubiquitous part of their environment.

They also grew up alongside other inventions that grew from

the first. All children who are raised in the present and the

future will be digital natives.

Digital Immigrants are those who were born before the

1980s. They did not grow up with technology. Instead, they

were inhabitants of a world whose chief sources of

information were print text materials such as books and

newspapers. Audiovisual material was provided at the theater
                                                            LIBRARY SERVICES | 37

or on television. Audio material was only found via cassette
tapes or compact discs. The development of technology came
later in their lives, as they were teenagers or even middle- or
old-aged. Navigating these developments did not come as
intuitively to most of these people as it did to their children,
students, and other young friends.

   The Digital Divide is the fact that digital natives have
confidence and abilities related to digital technologies and
resources while digital immigrants do not have these assets.
This poses a problem, as two major groups are jockeying for
different types of resources. Some digital immigrants will decry
the use of technology and insist that all library resources be
analog. Some digital natives will have never picked up a
physical book in their life. Instead, they will completely rely on
digital replacements for physical information resources. The
result is that digital immigrants will not know how to navigate
library digital resources and digital natives will have the same
problem with physical resources. Both of these groups need
to learn how to work together, develop their information and
technology literacy skills, and acknowledge the advantages of
each other's primary information media. Programming is a
major way to help both of these communities. In fact, you
could have a series of programs in which digital immigrants
help digital natives find physical materials, and digital natives
reciprocate with online materials.
38 | LIBRARY SERVICES

Types of Libraries

Libraries can be divided into four broad types:

  · public
  · school
  · academic
  · special

The missions and goals of these four types are very different.

Academic Library

Academic libraries serve public and private post-secondary
institutions of higher education (colleges and universities).
These libraries support the mission of their college or
university. They provide books, and other materials to meet
the instruction and research needs of the faculty and students.
They don't usually collect a lot of leisure reading materials
(popular fiction) but do have extensive reference materials to
help with in-depth research.

   An important development with academic libraries is the
change in focus and criterion for measurement of success.
Before 1990, libraries were a storehouse for books and it was
the volume count upon which they were measured. This focus
changed to providing access to information in all its varied
forms. Access to, rather than ownership of information
resources is now how libraries are measured. This
                                                            LIBRARY SERVICES | 39

developmental shift has impacted library services and the roles
of staff.

School Library

School libraries (also known as School Library Media Centers)
focus on the age and grade levels at that school, and they serve
the students and faculties there. They usually have a lot of
age-appropriate leisure reading materials (picture books for
elementary school kids, or Harry Potter-type books for middle
school and high school, etc.).

   The mission of the school library media center is to support
the curriculum of the institution to which they belong and to
promote information literacy. Teaching students the process
by which to find needed information enables them to become
lifelong learners and to function effectively as citizens in the
economic and political arenas.

   The history of school libraries only reaches back about fifty
to seventy years. It wasn't until the 1950s that most secondary
schools had libraries, and it wasn't until the 1970s that
elementary schools were provided with libraries.

Public Library

Public libraries serve a very wide range of patrons and their
information needs. Mission statements for public libraries
show that they provide all things to all people: leisure reading
for everyone from toddlers to senior citizens, and information
40 | LIBRARY SERVICES

needs for first-graders to scholars. the typical public library
comes under the jurisdiction of a municipal governmental
agency (city or county). But the specific mission of each
individual public library must take into consideration the
particular needs of their community. Different hours may be
required, different collections of materials may be necessary
to fulfill the information needs, and different services may be
crucial in providing what is demanded by patrons.

   A public library may be a single facility or many branches
throughout their service area. Public libraries in rural areas
may be in the form of a bookmobile that makes regular rounds
to a dispersed population.

   As the information needs of communities change, so must
the objectives of a public library to keep pace. Throughout the
nineteenth century, adult education was seen as the primary
objective. But as the twentieth century came, recreational
reading and reference were added to the list of objectives. By
the 1960s, when a wave of social consciousness took hold,
public libraries increased their efforts to help poor and
uneducated people fit into the more highly scientific and
technical society. With the advent of the Internet, the way that
Americans view information has changed. This phenomenon
has caused all types of librarians to question, "Is a library a
place or a function?"

   An additional function of the public library is to provide
Internet access - often the only place for some patrons to
access information that is only available online. The digital
                                                             LIBRARY SERVICES | 41

divide is another example of the information "have" and "have
nots." It is an objective of the public library to help those on
the wrong side of the digital divide to bridge the gap.

Special Library

Special libraries include corporate, medical, law, religious,
governmental, prison, not-for-profit organization libraries,
and other highly specialized collections. Often businesses or
agencies will have their own libraries with very specialized
collections to support the information needs of those who
work there. For example, many law firms have their own legal
library, and the State Department of Wildlife and Fisheries has
a library with materials about wildlife, hunting and fishing,
maps, conservation, etc. Each library will tailor their
collections (what they own or have) to meet the specific needs
of their patrons, or customers. The term "special library" is
often used as a catch-all term to describe any library that is
not a public, academic, or school library. The primary
characteristic that is common to these libraries is that their
collections include materials relating to specialized subject
areas. The mission of the special library is to directly support
and further the objectives of its parent organization. A special
library focuses on seeking out and providing information that
the parent organization's clients or patrons need rather than
acquiring and preserving the information in a collection.

   Other terms by which special libraries are known are
knowledge management centers and information centers.
42 | LIBRARY SERVICES

Librarians of special libraries must market their services as
being at the cutting edge. The importance of the special library
to its parent organization strongly affects the financing,
governance, resources, and services available to the library. The
more highly regarded, the easier it is to obtain financing to
increase the resources and services provided.

   A prominent variety of the special library is the research
library. This type has traditionally been associated with
academic libraries but is also found outside the realm of
academia. Most of these libraries' origins began with
endowments by wealthy benefactors. Some of these libraries
are part of other libraries. For example, the New York Public
Library has research section that behaves much like a special
library.
LIBRARY SERVICES | 43

               Public
               libraries
               can also
               serve as
               quasi-spe
               cial
               libraries
               when
               they
               reserve
               parts of
               their
               collection
               s or
               research
               areas for
               pre-appr
               oved
               individual
               s or
               groups.
               "File:NYC
               Public
               Library
               Research
               Room Jan
               2006-1-
               3.jpg" by
               Diliff is
               licensed
               under CC
               BY 2.5. To
               view a
               copy of
               this
               license,
               visit
44 | LIBRARY SERVICES

https://cr Another segment of special libraries is federal

eativeco government libraries. These include national
mmons.o
            health, agriculture, technical, federal reservations,
rg/

licenses/ federal prisons, military bases, and many others.

by/         The three national libraries, which are the Library

2.5/?ref=o
penverse. of Congress (LC), the National Library of

            Medicine (NLM), and the National Agriculture

Library (NAL), also fall under this category. These three

libraries represent one-third of the total federal collections,

one-half of all federal library expenditures, and two-fifths of all

the personnel in federal libraries. The Library of Congress

alone has a staff of almost five thousand employees.

Corporate libraries are another kind of special library. The

companies to which these libraries belong are very dependent

on the fast retrieval of information. These libraries may belong

to law firms, marketing firms, insurance companies, finance

institutions, and high-tech firms. Take a minute to think of the

various information needs of these companies.

                An interactive H5P element has been
                excluded from this version of the text. You
                can view it online here:
     https://csi.pressbooks.pub/lis/?p=28#h5p-2
              ACQUISITIONS | 45

4.

ACQUISITIONS

Acquisitions is concerned with obtaining selected items, in
coordination with the Collections Development department,
and providing payment to the publishing companies that
produce them. Acquisitions are obtained for materials that
serve the needs of the primary service population. Originally,
this meant that only the voices of the majority population
were heard. However, libraries are working to be more
representative in their acquisitions and collections. When
accomplishing these tasks, there is often a middleman involved
- the book vendor, also known as a wholesaler or a jobber.

   Book Vendors supply books, CDs, DVDs, etc. to libraries
from hundreds of individual publishers, eliminating the need
to deal with each publisher directly. Jobbers frequently offer
other library services, such as customized processing and
cataloging of materials, special bindings, bar codes, and
opening-day collections.

   Approval plans are another service offered by some vendors.
When subscribing to an approval plan, the library submits
specific criteria for item selection to the jobber. The jobber
then automatically ships materials that match the criteria.
46 | ACQUISITIONS

After the items are reviewed, unwanted items are sent back.
Approval plans are also called blanket orders and can be a
relatively simple way for a library to bulk up its collections on
a particular subject.

   In recent years, licensing has become another aspect of
acquisitions, especially with regard to Database access. With
the inclusion of electronic sources of information, the act of
acquiring licensing agreements became a standard element of
the acquisition process. A license gives the library access only
for a specific period of time; the product is not usually
purchased outright.

   Serials are items that are published periodically. Thus, some
serials are called periodicals. Other examples of serials include
newspapers, proceedings, reports, memoirs, annuals, and
monographs.

   Once serial titles are selected, the Serial Technician checks
in each item as it arrives and readies it for the shelf. Since
most serials are published with predictable frequency, (weekly,
monthly, quarterly, etc.) a continual flow of fresh information
is infused into the library collection. Periodical publications
can generally be divided into four types:

  · Magazines - Written for the layperson - easily
      understood by the average reader. This type of
      publication is frequently full of glossy, full-color
      photographs and advertisements.

  · Journals - Written for a particular academic or
                                                                   ACQUISITIONS | 47

      professional audience. Scholars and professors in the
      field are the major contributors and journals are
      commonly reviewed or juried by highly respected peers.
      Though
  · Graphs and charts are commonplace in journals, there
      are usually very few advertisements or illustrations.
  · Trade periodicals - Combination of magazines and
      journals. The trade periodical is written for a specific
      professional or industry group, but the reading level is
      usually understandable to the layperson.
  · Newspapers - Range from prominent national dailies to
      weekly rural editions. Newspapers focus on reporting
      current events, weather, sports, and other current topics.

Acquisitions usually is in charge of recording the initial
metadata of an item, including its URI or ISSN. URIs are
chains of characters that stand for each manifestation in a
library's collection. Initially, these were only recorded for
digital items but physical, tangible items have been increasingly
receiving these identifiers as well. An ISSN is an identifying
number created specifically for serials.

   When a book has been acquired, it is recommended that a
record of this holding be placed with OCLC. This will allow
them to include it in MARC Record search results and
metadata on Connexion as well as make it available for
InterLibrary Loan on WorldCat.

   Acquisitions or cataloging creates a Shelflist for all of the
48 | ACQUISITIONS

library. A shelflist is a bibliographic list of all works in a
library's collections. This aids patrons who want to discover
items related to a particular work by examining where in the
collections a particular item has been placed with respect to
other items. Once an item has been recorded in the shelflist,
it is ready for processing, or material preparation. The most
common steps include, but are not limited to:

  · Stamping materials with library ownership stamps
  · Adhering call number labels and label protectors
  · Installing magnetic security strips/tapes or RFID tags

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/lis/?p=30#h5p-4
                                             COLLECTION DEVELOPMENT | 49

5.

COLLECTION
DEVELOPMENT

In today's world, a library's collection not only includes what
is physically owned, but what the library can provide access to.
Different collections can include:

  · Hard copy (Physical)
          Books
          Journals/Magazines
          Newspapers
          Videos/DVDs
          CDs/CD-ROMs
          Pamphlets/Maps/Images

  · Electronic (Digital) (free and subscription-based)
          Ebooks
          Journals/Magazines/Newspapers
          Audiobooks
          Streaming video
          Databases
          Images
50 | COLLECTION DEVELOPMENT

Collections, or the groups of books, audiovisual materials,
artwork, and all other items kept in the library, are developed
by a detailed and closely-followed Collection Development
Policy. These policies ensure that resources of all types are
being spent in a way that conforms with the library's
preestablished priorities, goals, and purposes. The collection
development policy outlines the criteria for selecting resources,
assessing collections, weeding, preserving, and deciding
appropriate formats. Common collection development policy
criteria include:

  · Topic
  · Reading Level
  · Currency
  · Demand
  · Cost
  · Author's credentials
  · Publisher or Producer's Reputation
  · Features
  · Resource Sharing
  · Format

For more information on creating an effective collection
development policy, look at the Guidelines created by the
International Federation of LIbrary Associations and
Institutions. This was created twenty-two years ago, but its
basic principles are still recommended today. For good
                                              COLLECTION DEVELOPMENT | 51

examples, check out the search results from Google for the
phrase "collection development policy." As they should be,
many libraries of all different types are transparent about their
policies and the way they created them. This is a good practice
for all of the library services discussed in this book. Google the
phrases you think are important, and add the word "library"
if the results are too generic. Policies should proliferate in the
results page. Feel free to message me your favorite policies and
I will add them to this book.

   In order to make selection and purchasing decisions,
librarians depend on industry tools, input directly from their
users, and their own personal knowledge. Evaluative reviews
aid librarians in determining the relevance and quality of
resources prior to acquisition. Tools to use during item review
include:

  · Reviewing media, including:
          AudioFile
          Booklist
          Choice
          Hornbook
          Kirkus Reviews
          Library Journal
          London Review of Books
          New York Times Book Review
          Publishers Weekly
          School Library Journal
         
52 | COLLECTION DEVELOPMENT

  · Core collection lists or bibliographies, including:
          Best Books for Children: Preschool Through
            Grade 6 edited by John T. Gillespie. Published by
            R. R. Bowker.
          Best Books for Young Teen Readers: Grades 7-10
            edited by John T. Gillespie. Published by R. R.
            Bowker.
          Best Books for Young Adult Readers by Stephen J.
            Calvert. Published by R. R. Bowker.
          Choice's Outstanding Academic Books, 2017.
            Published by the American Library Association.
          Guide to Reference Materials for School Library
            Media Centers by Barbara Ripp Safford. Published
            by Teacher Ideas Press.
          Magazines for Libraries by Bill Katz and Linda
            Sternberg Katz. Published by R.R. Bowker.
          Recommended Reference Books for Small and
            Medium-Sized Libraries and Media Centers edited
            by Bohdan Wynar. Published by Libraries
            Unlimited.

  · Library listservs (electronic discussion groups), forums,
      and social media groups such as Library Think Tank.

The Collections Development Policy of a library should be in
keeping with its mission statement. Library mission statements
vary depending on the size and type of library. You can learn
                                             COLLECTION DEVELOPMENT | 53

about writing a mission statement at this page in WebJunction
by OCLC.

   Just as adding books to a library's collection is a central
aspect of collection development, so is removing books that
are no longer needed or useful in the library. This is one of
the reasons why the term is collections development rather than
collections building. The term for removing books from a
library's collections is "deacquisitioning." However, no one
likes that word because it is too unwieldy. Therefore, we use
the term Weeding to describe this process. Weeding is
performed by analyzing the circulation data of an item as well
as conducting a re-appraisal of the item through the lens of the
collections development policy. The collections development
policy, mission statement, edition information, and
circulation data are all considered during the weeding process.

Digital Aspects of the Library

Since the last half of the twentieth century, electronic resources
have been an increasing aspect of library collections, programs,
and services. The first electronic items offered included audio
recordings and audiobooks. Now these offerings have
expanded as audiobooks can be hosted on the Internet without
the need for cassettes or CDs. Additionally, films and other
audiovisual resources have been increasingly offered at the
library. First, these resources were only available physically.
However, libraries have also adapted to digital forms of
54 | COLLECTION DEVELOPMENT

audiovisual resources. As a result, electronic resources
decreasingly refer to physical electronic items and increasingly
refer to online resources. Thus, the terms for these resources
have become interchangeable. Digital Holdings/Electronic
Resources are items that use technology to convey
information. They are often considered to be under the
umbrella of Digital Initiatives. This term means different
things to different libraries. Some consider digital initiatives
to only refer to digital exhibits, collections, and digitization
of analog materials. Others include ebooks and online-hosted
library holdings under that umbrella. Those who do not
include electronic holdings of libraries usually reserve them
for reference librarians. If this is the case, a digital initiatives
librarian will have to make themselves useful and productive.
The key term in Digital Initiatives is "initiative." Take
advantage of preexisting resources and procedures. Also, create
new ones. This could be as simple as creating digital outreach
services or programs.

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/lis/?p=32#h5p-3

A Case Study: Baltimore County Public
         COLLECTION DEVELOPMENT | 55

Library

Collection development in libraries is a crucial aspect of
providing patrons with access to the information and resources
they need. However, this process is not always straightforward
and can sometimes lead to controversy. One such example is
the Baltimore County Public Library's (BCPL) collection
development decisions as detailed in Nora Rawlinson's article,
"Give `Em What They Want!" in Library Journal (November
15, 1981).

   In her article, Rawlinson highlights the BCPL's decision
to prioritize popular materials over more literary or scholarly
works. This decision was based on the idea that providing
patrons with what they want would increase circulation and
overall usage of the library. However, this decision was met
with criticism from some members of the community, who
argued that the library had a responsibility to provide patrons
with access to a wide range of materials, including literary and
scholarly works.

   One of the main criticisms of the BCPL's collection
development decisions was that it resulted in the library's
collection being heavily skewed towards popular materials.
This led to a lack of representation of certain groups and
perspectives, particularly those of marginalized communities.
Additionally, some patrons argued that the library's focus on
popular materials resulted in a lack of access to more
challenging or thought-provoking works.
56 | COLLECTION DEVELOPMENT

   To address these criticisms, the BCPL implemented a
number of changes to its collection development policies. For
example, they increased their budget for the acquisition of
literary and scholarly materials and also began to actively seek
out and acquire materials that represented the diverse
perspectives and experiences of the community. Additionally,
the library began to work with community groups and
organizations to ensure that the collection reflected the needs
and interests of all patrons.

   Despite these changes, the controversy surrounding the
BCPL's collection development decisions highlights the
ongoing challenges that libraries face in balancing the needs
and wants of patrons with their responsibility to provide access
to a wide range of materials and perspectives. The case of
Baltimore County Public Library shows that it is important
for libraries to listen to their patrons and take into account
their feedback and concerns when making collection
development decisions. Furthermore, it is important to
prioritize the representation of marginalized communities and
perspectives and to work with community groups and
organizations to ensure that the collection is inclusive and
responsive to the needs of all patrons.
                                     CLASSIFICATION AND CATALOGING | 57

6.

CLASSIFICATION AND
CATALOGING

This section covers cataloging very broadly. If you would like
more in-depth information about cataloging in libraries, look
at our other textbook: Cataloging with MARC, RDA, and
Classification Systems.

   Without a system of organization, specific information
would be impossible to locate in a library. With this in mind,
libraries organize and shelf items of the same subject content
together. Successful organization systems enable users to find
the precise information they are seeking.

   Libraries in the United States use two main classification
systems:

  · Dewey Decimal Classification System - The Dewey
      Decimal Classification System is generally used in public
      and school libraries.

  · Library of Congress Classification System - The
      Library of Congress Classification System is usually
      found in academic and special (research) libraries.
58 | CLASSIFICATION AND CATALOGING

Dewey Decimal System

Since 1876 the Dewey Decimal Classification has been the
basis of library organization. It was created for the purpose of
arranging resources in a logical order using Arabic numerals.
Knowledge is divided into ten classes, representing traditional
academic disciplines. The intent of the ten classes was to cover
the universe of knowledge.

   Within the ten classes are subclasses which can also be
subdivided to gain greater and greater specificity. Example:
700s = The Arts, 740 = Drawing and Decorative Arts, 748 =
Glass, and 748.5 = Stained, painted, leaded, mosaic. Further
divisions are possible after the decimal for more specificity. See
the table below for the ten classes.

   MAIN CLASSES

  · 000 Generalities
  · 100 Philosophy, parapsychology and occultism,

      psychology
  · 200 Religion
  · 300 Social Sciences
  · 400 Language
  · 500 Natural sciences and mathematics (Pure science)
  · 600 Technology (Applied Sciences)
  · 700 The Arts
  · 800 Literature and rhetoric
  · 900 Geography, history, and auxiliary disciplines
                                     CLASSIFICATION AND CATALOGING | 59

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
        can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/lis/?p=34#h5p-5

Library of Congress System

In the early 1900s, the Library of Congress in Washington,
D.C. developed the Library of Congress Classification System.
The new system was devised because it was felt that the Dewey
Decimal Classification System was not flexible enough for the
vast collections of the Library of Congress. As time passed,
most U.S. research and academic libraries adopted this system.

   With this system, knowledge is divided into twenty-one
broad categories - labeled A-Z (omitting I, O, W, X, and Y).
These categories are then subdivided by adding one or two
additional letters and a set of numbers. This alpha-numeric
system uses specific subclasses for a variety of the main classes.
See the table below for the Library of Congress Classification
classes.

   MAIN CLASSES

  · A General Works
  · B Philosophy; Psychology and Religion
  · C Auxiliary Sciences of History; Civilization
60 | CLASSIFICATION AND CATALOGING

  · D General and Old World History
  · E History of North America
  · F Local U.S. History. Canada. Latin America
  · G Geography; Maps, Anthropology; Recreation
  · H Social Sciences; Economics and Sociology
  · J Political Science
  · K Law (General)
  · L Education
  · M Music
  · N Fine Arts
  · P Language and Literature
  · Q Science
  · R Medicine
  · S Agriculture
  · T Technology
  · U Military Science
  · V Naval Science
  · Z Bibliography, Library Science, Information

      Resources

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
        can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/lis/?p=34#h5p-6
                                     CLASSIFICATION AND CATALOGING | 61

Theory, Practice, and Catalog Record
Parts

In order to understand the current norms in the field of
cataloging, you need to understand some more library history.
AACR2, or Anglo-American Cataloging Rules 2, was the
accepted set of rules for catalogers for many years. However,
it gradually become obsolete in the modern world of digital
technology. Therefore, a team of librarians and other
information professionals came together to create a new
edition. Much like the Constitutional Convention of 1789,
they ended up completely straying from that goal and the
world is much better for it. The result of their series of
meetings was RDA, or Resource Description and Access. It
kept the same theoretical framework of AACR2, which was
called FRBR, but it updated the terminology and policies to
fit the Internet-based library. FRBR stands for Functional
Requirements for Bibliographic Records and emphasizes the
importance of placing an item in the context of its author,
parent works, and other manifestations of the same work. This
ensures that inaccurate records are kept at a minimum. RDA
helps with ensuring that format, information medium type
and other determining aspects of library items are recorded in
a manner that is as accurate and standardized as possible.

   MARC records were first developed in 1966 by the Library
of Congress and have become the standard format for
recording and sharing information about a bibliographic item.
62 | CLASSIFICATION AND CATALOGING

With the use of content designators (tags, subfield codes, and
indicators), information is stored electronically and can be
retrieved and interpreted by any other computer that is
programmed to read MARC. This creation was the basis for
the automation of library bibliographic records. Some of the
most important MARC Fields are:

  · 010 LC card number
  · 020 ISBN
  · 050 Library of Congress Classification Number
  · 082 Dewey Decimal Classification Number
  · 100 Personal author main entry
  · 245 Title proper, subtitle, and statement of

      responsibility
  · 246 Variant form of title
  · 250 Edition statement
  · 260 Publication information
  · 300 Physical description
  · 440 Series
  · 500 General note
  · 505 Contents note
  · 650 Subject heading
  · 700 Personal author added entry

Item Identifiers in Catalog Records

One of the most important aspects of a catalog record is the
                                     CLASSIFICATION AND CATALOGING | 63

identifiers of the item and those of related items. Identifiers tell
record readers exactly where to find a particular resource. The
modern library has four main types of identifiers.

   ISBN: International Standard Book Number. This number
is created by the publisher of a particular manifestation or
expression of a work. ISBNs are not particular to an item, but
you should still put them in catalog records so that users can
verify what edition or version of an item they are receiving.
The serial version of this identifier is ISSN.

   URI: Uniform Resource Identifier. This a chain of
characters that represent works and items. Originally, only
online resources were given URIs. Now, though, some physical
items have also been given URIs. A subgroup of URIs is the
IRI, or Internationalized Resource Identifier, which allows for
non-roman characters in identifiers. URLs are also a form of
URI.

   The most ubiquitous form of identification in a library
record is the item Call Number. Every item in a library has a
particular call number, even if it is as simple as BRDSD 1 for
the first Broadside in an archival library collection. Different
types of libraries have certain standards and procedures for
creating a call number. Special libraries, like archives, for
example, may only catalog collections of items or boxes of
items in a collection rather than individual items. In fact, best
practice in this type of library forbids item-by-item cataloging.
In general, though, the other types of libraries either use the
Dewey Decimal System or Library of Congress Classification
64 | CLASSIFICATION AND CATALOGING

System to produce a call number for each item in their
collections.

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/lis/?p=34#h5p-8

Real-Life Examples

Let us see how libraries apply these concepts and options in
real life. In order to understand how to provide effective
services, you need some experience on the front end, the user-
experience side, of the catalog or discovery service. In fact,
unless you are a technical librarian the part of the discovery
service you usually use will be the front end.

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/lis/?p=34#h5p-7
                                                  FACILITIES AND FUNDING | 65

7.

FACILITIES AND
FUNDING

Library facilities are as unique as our homes. From
architectural style to interior design, the options are endless.
But there are common aspects and requirements that are
considered when designing a library.

   Designing Libraries is a great website for the planning of
library buildings. Even though this website originates in
Europe there is an abundance of information relevant to
libraries in the United States. Explore this site to gain an
understanding of considerations that need to be considered.
Another major consideration is the funding you have and are
likely to receive. Be sure that you are not planning something
that will cause your library to go drastically over budget.

Necessary Design Aspects

Acoustics deal with the manipulation of sound in a library.
What does a library sound like? How can the way that sound
is handled in a space affect the user's experience of that space?
66 | FACILITIES AND FUNDING

The Designing Libraries website offers a PDF which talks
about good acoustics in libraries.

   What could be more important than accessibility?
   The Americans with Disabilities Act provides
mandatory standards so that public entities are designed and
constructed so that the facility (libraries are included) is readily
accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities.
Resilient flooring is one solution for people who have pain
when they walk. It also provides comfort for those who are
not needing accessibility help. This is a hallmark of accessibility
accommodations. Often, they can be of service to people who
are not their typical users.
   See the following websites for details of these standards and
library planning:

  · 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design
  · (Index).from ADA.gov / Department of Justice

Accessibility & Universal Design:

  · Academic Library Building Design: Resources for
      Planning: Accessibility / Universal Design . from ACRL

  · The 7 Principles of Universal Design | Ed Roberts
      Campus . (Video) by TheCIL

Aesthetics are another facet to consider. Does the space of
the library seem visually appealing? What feeling will patrons
                                                  FACILITIES AND FUNDING | 67

have when they visit and see certain dominant colors? What
about the presence or absence of light? Daylighting is a trend
in library facility management in which natural light is used to
provide illumination for a space. This can produce a calming
effect.

   Signage: Did you see that? See what? Where? You might
have a problem in your library if patrons are constantly asking
where something is. How can signage and wayfinding tools be
used to make the patron's experience much more intuitive?

   Articles:

  · Barclay, D. A., & Scott, E. D. (2012). Directions to
      library wayfinding. American Libraries, 43(3/4), 36-38.
      (Available in LISTA: Library, Information, &
      Technology Abstracts database).

  · Library Signage. from Librarian Design Share

Videos

  · 10 Common Mistakes in Wayfinding Design. from The
      Wayfinding Expert

  · 20 Best Websites and Blogs About Wayfinding. from
      Travelwayfinding.com

In the digital age, it is imperative that the library take full
advantage of the internet and its associated resources. Two
major aspects of fast and reliable internet service are the use
68 | FACILITIES AND FUNDING

of Optical fiber to carry the internet connection and the
development of a Wide Area Network to connect computers
at all branches of the library in a certain geographical area.

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/lis/?p=36#h5p-9

Funding

Libraries of all kinds need money. The amount of funding that
a library receives directly influences the quality of its services.
Public libraries are usually funded by some combination of
local, state, and federal dollars. Academic libraries are usually
funded by their college or university. School libraries are
usually funded partially by their school district. Special
libraries are usually funded by their parent organization.

   But there are also alternative funding resources:

  · grants
  · donations
  · fines
  · book sales
  · fundraising events
                                                  FACILITIES AND FUNDING | 69

Each library is unique and probably uses a combination of
funding sources.

  · Common Public Library Funding Myths. from
      WebJunction - Advocacy in Action

  · Funding Sources for School Libraries. from ICFL
  · Grants & Funding Sources for Libraries. from EBSCO

      Connect
70 | CIRCULATION

8.

CIRCULATION

The library's Circulation area serves two major functions:
inventory control and customer service. Inventory control
takes place with the checking in and out of items. At all times,
the location and status of every item must be known. Is the
item checked out, has it been sent to the bindery, or is it on
the shelf and available? But that information is not enough to
accomplish the mission of the circulation department. Many
other activities take place, such as answering directional
questions, referring the patron to other departments,
registering patrons, and collecting fines. Depending on the
type of library, other unique activities take place.

   Traditionally, the physical loaning of items to borrowers has
been the foremost means of providing access to their users. As
electronic/online access continues to develop, remote access
continues to increase as a way to access a library's holdings.
Ebooks, electronic reserve collections, databases, indexes, and
full-text periodicals are available through remote access.
                    CIRCULATION | 71

Circulation Policy

As with all of the aspects of any library, the processes and
activities of the Circulation department are governed by their
own policy. A standard aspect of circulation policies is
restriction by user type. In academic and school libraries, the
circulation parameters for instructors/teachers may allow for
more items, longer checkout periods, or access to certain items
that are unavailable to students. In a corporate setting,
permanent employees may have longer checkout periods than
temporary staff.

   Circulation may also be restricted by the age of the user.
Some CDs, DVDs, etc. may be limited to those users over the
age of 18.

   With all circulation policy options, the individual user's
access needs must be balanced with the needs of the library's
clientele as a whole. As times change, and new formats and
services come into play, policies need to be revisited and
revised. Common sense must be used in order to keep policies
realistic and sensible.

   It has been customary for borrowers who are late in
returning items to be charged a fee/fine. The underlying
principle behind this practice is to recover materials so that
they are available to other patrons. When borrowers register
with a library, the policies and fees concerning overdue items
should be explained.

   Some libraries choose not to charge overdue fines. An
72 | CIRCULATION

alternative option for academic libraries is placing holds on
student records - making them unable to register for classes
or receive financial aid. School libraries often notify parents
or postpone the release of report cards. Another option for
libraries is the limiting of library privileges. The libraries that
do not charge fines feel that the positive public relations value
is an added bonus.

   Besides overdue fines, other fines can also be accessed to
borrowers. Patrons are charged when they lose or damage
materials. Some libraries charge the actual replacement cost of
the item plus a processing fee while others have set a flat fee for
the various collections.

Patron Registration

The registration process varies from library to library. Public
libraries usually have the strictest procedures for registering
new borrowers and verifying their identification. Official
proof of their home address and official personal identification
are two common items that patrons are required to produce.

   Academic libraries generally use official campus
identification cards and verify a borrower's status through
enrollment databases. The procedures used by special libraries
vary from no registration to formal processes involving
security clearance. School libraries utilize class lists provided by
teachers or administration.

   The personal information provided by a patron must be
                                                                    CIRCULATION | 73

protected. Industry ethics and laws advocate that this
confidential information must be safeguarded. The personal
data gathered in the registration process and the circulation
records of each patron should not be shared with outside
agencies or divulged to anyone who has not been authorized by
the library to work with these records.

Library Patron and Item Interaction
Records

The libraries of past generations used a paper card catalog and
checkout cards for their records. Today the majority of libraries
own an automated circulation system. These systems link a
database of bibliographic records with patron-use records to
form an integrated system called an OPAC, which will be
discussed in a few sections. With integrated Web interfaces, a
modern library's catalog is remotely accessible to anyone from
anywhere.

   An automated circulation system is able to:

  · Record and track three key elements
          The person who borrowed the item
          the exact item borrowed
          the time the item was borrowed and when it is due
            back

  · Track the status of all items in the collection individually
  · Track the status of all patron accounts
74 | CIRCULATION

  · Match requests for holds with incoming items
  · Provide statistics relating to the circulation of items

Library Security

There are two areas to consider when discussing library
security:

  · Offenses concerning library property
          theft of library materials/equipment
          mutilation or intentional damage to library
            materials/equipment
          vandalism to the building

  · Offenses against people (staff or patrons) that take place
      in the library
          abusive conduct
          assault
          indecent exposure

Those individuals who commit the crime of theft or
mutilation of library materials come in many forms. There is
the student with no money to use the photocopy machine
that tears out pages or steals the book/journal. There is the
kleptomaniac with no real need, but feels the need to steal.
There is the self-appointed censor who believes the library
should not provide access to certain materials. And there is the
professional thief who is out to make a profit.
                                                                    CIRCULATION | 75

   The first electronic theft detection systems have been used
in libraries since the 1960s. These systems deter theft but are
by no means infallible. When used in combination with
vigilant staff efforts, theft can be reduced by as much as
80%. RFID Tags have been put in library items since the early
2000s to track whereabouts and circulation data. This has
assisted library security in supporting circulation procedures.

   Libraries open to the general public are those that are most
likely to encounter "problem patrons." The most common
problem-patron behaviors are:

  · Nuisance behavior - lonely or elderly people who
      monopolize reference personnel or carry on long-winded
      monologues

  · Criminal behavior - vandalizing materials, stealing
      materials, performing sexual lewd acts

  · Or other bizarre, unpredictable, or threatening behavior

To aid in addressing these problems, many libraries provide
special staff training conducted by experts or law enforcement
personnel. These training sessions could include:

  · Conflict resolution
  · Safety issues
  · Defusing difficult situations
76 | CIRCULATION

Circulation Designations

There are three terms used to differentiate between the
circulation statuses of items. The term Circulation
Reference is used to designate that the item is available for
in-house use only. These items are usually handbooks,
dictionaries, or other items that can be consulted briefly for
facts or overview information. These items may also be
expensive, rare, or frequently used and using them in-house
only serves the greatest number of users.

   Items with the description of circulating are just the
opposite. These items lack the restrictions of reference items
and are available to be checked out by registered patrons. But
within this area, different time periods may be assigned
according to the items. DVDs, pamphlets, maps, etc. usually
check out for a shorter time period than books.

   The third circulation status is reserve. The status of reserve
is generally found in school and academic libraries. These
materials are high-use items required for class study. Some
items on reserve may be available for in-house use only, while
others may be checked out for a short period of time.
Electronic reserve collections are growing in popularity. This
type of collection provides for the electronic delivery of lecture
notes, practice tests, required readings, and other non-book
informational resources.

   As changes occur in circulation policies and designations,
and as collections are developed through expansion, weeding,
                                                                    CIRCULATION | 77

and relocation, necessary changes in shelf placement must
occur. This is mainly the responsibility of the Circulation
Department and is called Collection Shifting. It is a vital part
of ensuring the findability of library resources, especially with
each change that occurs in a collection.

Record Discovery and Circulation

When it comes to circulation designations of physical items in
libraries, record discovery, and circulation play an important
role in helping patrons find and access the materials they need.
One of the primary ways libraries have traditionally managed
this process is through the use of Online Public Access
Catalogs (OPACs) and Integrated Library Systems (ILSs).
These systems have been the backbone of library circulation
for many years, but in recent years, a new type of system has
emerged: Discovery Systems.

   OPACs are essentially an online version of a traditional card
catalog. They allow patrons to search for and access
information about the library's physical collection. OPACs
allow patrons to search by title, author, subject, or keywords,
and they display bibliographic information such as title,
author, publication date, and call number. While OPACs are
useful for finding and accessing information about physical
items in the library, they do have some limitations. For
example, OPACs often do not include e-books, digital
resources, or other non-physical materials.
78 | CIRCULATION

                  This is a
                  type of
                  OPAC
                  that
                  includes
                  eBooks. It
                  was
                  created
                  around
                  fifteen
                  years ago
                  and is
                  one of
                  the first
                  OPACs to
                  include
                  digital
                  items.
                  "PVLD
                  live with
                  SOPAC!"
                  by
                  jblyberg
                  is
                  licensed
                  under CC
                  BY 2.0. To
                  view a
                  copy of
                  this
                  license,
                  visit
                  https://cr
                  eativeco
                  mmons.o
                  rg/
                  licenses/
          CIRCULATION | 79

by/       ILSs are more comprehensive systems that include

2.0/?ref= not only cataloging and circulation functions but
openvers
          also acquisitions, serials control, and other
e.

          functions. ILSs are the main system that libraries

use to manage their collections, and they are often the primary

system that library staff use to manage the day-to-day

operations of the library. ILSs like Aleph, Koha, and Evergreen

are open source and provide a more flexible solution compared

to commercial ILSs like Millennium, Sierra, and Voyager.

However, open-source options do not always have the same

functions as commercial resources. Also, open-source ILSs

often have bugs that are only fixed on volunteers' or non-profit

workers' free time. Proprietary software often is the better way

to go.

Discovery Systems are a relatively new addition to the

library landscape, and they are designed to address some of the

limitations of OPACs and ILSs. These systems are designed

to provide patrons with a more seamless and intuitive way

to discover and access library resources, regardless of whether

they are physical or digital. Discovery Systems typically include

an OPAC-like interface that allows patrons to search for and

access information about the library's entire collection,

including e-books, digital resources, and other non-physical

materials. They also often include advanced search capabilities,

such as the ability to search across multiple databases and

resources at once, and the ability to personalize search results

based on the patron's interests and past search history.
80 | CIRCULATION

   One of the key differences between Discovery Systems and
OPACs or ILSs is that Discovery Systems are designed to be
more user-friendly and intuitive. They often include features
such as recommended search terms, suggested resources, and
the ability to save and organize search results. Additionally,
Discovery Systems often provide a more seamless experience
for patrons, as they allow them to access and interact with
library resources from any device, including smartphones,
tablets, and computers.

   In conclusion, Discovery Systems are a modern addition to
the library landscape and have proven to be an essential part
of ILSs. They offer a more user-friendly and intuitive way for
patrons to discover and access library resources, regardless of
whether they are physical or digital. While OPACs and ILSs
are still important tools for managing and organizing library
collections, Discovery Systems provide a more seamless and
personalized experience for patrons. The practice of many
academic, professional, and public libraries is to integrate the
Discovery System into the ILS, either formally or informally.
SirsiDynix is one company that offers this service. They are
the source of the Discovery Service and ILS for the College of
Southern Idaho.

Housekeeping

As with all organizations, the library will occasionally need
housekeeping performed to keep up with patron use and
                                                                    CIRCULATION | 81

unanticipated complications. What does this look like for the
circulation department? Circulation librarians will often be
responsible for tracking problematic occurrences that have to
do with patron misuse of books. This sounds offensive and
rude, but circulation housekeeping tasks often involve fixing
patrons' mistakes, even those by well-meaning ones.

   These tasks include checking for overdue materials and
initiating reaching out to the patron if necessary. Related to
this process is the responsibility to resolve any "lost book"
reports. This may be a case of a patron lying and saying they
returned a book when they did not. Other times, they really
did return the book and it is lost somewhere in the library.
Sometimes, especially with mail-in returns, the book could
have been lost through the fault of an external process or party.
In any case, librarians in the circulation department should
work to resolve any gaps in the collections because of these
errors.
82 | CIRCULATION

                  Determini
                  ng if the
                  books on
                  a shelf
                  are in the
                  correct
                  order is
                  one of
                  the most
                  common
                  responsib
                  ilities of
                  librarians
                  in the
                  circulatio
                  n
                  departme
                  nt. This is
                  called
                  "shelfrea
                  ding."

Another housekeeping responsibility of the circulation
department is "shelf reading." This is also done by catalogers if
the circulation department needs assistance. This is the process
of reading the call numbers on each shelf and ensuring that
all numbers on that shelf are in the proper order according
to a particular classification system. This is done more or less
continuously. Once a librarian finishes shelf-reading the entire
library, there are new mistakes and other problems to see.
                                                                    CIRCULATION | 83

Therefore, she starts again at the very beginning, a very good
place to start.

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/lis/?p=38#h5p-10
84 | REFERENCE LIBRARIANSHIP

9.

REFERENCE
LIBRARIANSHIP

Reference is a key part of each librarian's responsibility.
Patrons will come to all librarians, and even library workers,
and ask them questions regarding materials in the library or
even things not directly related to the library. Libraries have a
reputation of being information centers for the community.
There are four basic types of questions asked in a library.

  · The directional question is straightforward and deals
      location or existence of a service or resource. For this
      type, a reference interview is usually not necessary and
      the librarian/technician's own knowledge is enough to
      answer the question.

  · Ready reference questions are usually quick, single-
      fact queries. It could be an isolated statistic or fact that
      requires verification and fact-finding. Sources often used
      to answer the ready reference questions are
      encyclopedias, almanacs, statistical compendiums,
      directories, dictionaries, and well as a Web search engine
      (Google, Ask). This type of question may require a
                                           REFERENCE LIBRARIANSHIP | 85

   reference interview for clarification.
· Specific search questions are more involved and more

   time-consuming that ready reference questions. This
   type of search usually begins with finding information
   for an overview or background of the subject. A wide
   range of sources may be used to fulfill the informational
   needs of this user, such as books, periodicals,
   government documents, and Web sites. The specific
   search definitely requires a reference interview in order
   to extract facts and to determine the direction that
   should be taken.
· The research question is the highest level of
   information seeking. This type of question may require
   an ongoing investigation, and will probably include
   using an assortment of primary and secondary sources.
   The reference interview in this case could be quite
   lengthy in order to determine the topic, determine what
   research and sources has already been accomplished, the
   technical level of information required, and many other
   details.

                An interactive H5P element has been
                excluded from this version of the text. You
    can view it online here:
    https://csi.pressbooks.pub/lis/?p=40#h5p-11
86 | REFERENCE LIBRARIANSHIP

In order to answer the last two types of questions, and possibly
in order to answer the second type, librarians should conduct a
Reference Interview. This gives the librarian context for the
query and helps them facilitate research abilities in the patron.
The five parts of a reference interview are:

  · Initial question: User asks the question to reference
      librarian/technician.

  · Clarification of question: Librarian starts a dialog in
      an effort to clarify the real needs of the user and to try to
      obtain more information.

  · Translating the question into potential library
      sources: Librarian takes the lead by suggesting potential
      sources and determining what has already been
      consulted, and then they devise a search strategy.

  · The search: The reference librarian or technician leads
      the user through the search of appropriate sources. At
      the same time, they implement point-of-use instruction
      with each resource consulted so that the user gains some
      knowledge for future independent searching.

  · Follow-up: As the search progresses, the librarian
      should ask the patron, "Is this what you are looking
      for?" to be sure that the search is on the right track.
      When leaving the patron, the librarian should always
      add, "Let me know if you need more help." This lets the
      user know that they can come back for more help.
                                               REFERENCE LIBRARIANSHIP | 87

Virtual Reference is a facet of reference librarianship that
occurs when either the patron or the librarian, or both, cannot
meet with each other face to face for any reason. This was
a resource that became popular in the 2000s but became
absolutely vital during the Covid-19 Pandemic. Norms
formed during that time have affected the norms now, even
though the medical necessity of physical separation has ended.
Virtual reference is a key part of the modern library.

   According to the American Library Association,
Information Literacy is a set of abilities requiring individuals
to `recognize when information is needed and have the ability
to locate, evaluate, and use effectively the needed information.
With advances in technologies in the classroom and in the
library, it is important that students are well-educated on how
to locate and evaluate information. This is one skill that will
be used by the student throughout their life. The American
Library Association has created a detailed LibGuide for linking
to information literacy resources. The Association of College
& Research Libraries (a division of the American Libraries
Association) has published a Framework for Information
Literacy for Higher Education that is geared toward students.
It gives them hallmarks of research "experts" and describes
how "novice learners" can progress to become experts in
information literacy. Another wonderful resource about
information literacy is The Information Literacy User's Guide:
An Open, Online Textbook.
88 | REFERENCE LIBRARIANSHIP

Important Features of Library Items

An important aspect of the reference interview is teaching
patrons how to find the right items. If they are researching
a topic, this includes helping them discover accurate and
verifiable information in the best sources. There are multiple
facets of a research item that should be stressed by the librarian
when conducting a reference interview for a research question.
If applicable, similar facets of other types of items should be
stressed during reference interviews for other types of items.

   An Abstract is a brief summary of an academic book,
article, or other work. It usually explains the bases of the work
and its arguments, the credentials of the author(s), and the
conclusion of the work and future research that could be done
based on this conclusion. Typically, the abstract includes
keywords that can inform the reader what the general tone and
feel of the work will be. Abstracts are excellent places to begin
research when you have gathered a body of possible resources
from databases and other search results.

   Authoritative resources are those that have either stood the
test of time or are so important despite their relative youth that
they are held up as a litmus test and gold standard for other
works in their field. They are so well-researched that almost
anything they say is taken as valid. Authoritative works are
usually written by academic authors, but there is an increasing
movement for academia to accept the viewpoints of non-
academic experienced workers and others who have valid
                                               REFERENCE LIBRARIANSHIP | 89

perspectives. It is important to note that an individual who
has written an authoritative work or body of work in one field
is not an authority in all fields. For example, Neil deGrasse
Tyson is not an expert on Islamic jurisprudence. William Byrd
was not an expert in geology but was an authoritative Baroque
composer. Ensure that authoritative works and authors are
speaking on things they actually know about.

   Association is the quality of being connected with a
particular movement, school of thought, institution, or
person. The association of a work with an established and
respected university at the top of a particular field (the
Huntsman Cancer Institute, for example), will help the
credibility of an article (a paper on the perception of
millennials on cancer). It is again important to note that the
association of an item or its author(s) is not the most
important factor when determining its accuracy and reliability.
In writing this textbook and the previous one on Cataloging,
I consulted academic, public, private, and open-source
materials. Do not discount an item or author because of their
associations or lack of associations.

   A Bibliography is an excellent place to start, particularly
ones from articles you have already deemed appropriate,
accurate, and well-written. Look at the sources they cite most.
Look at their acknowledgments. Look for bibliographies of
works by the authors of the page. Ideally, you would do brief
read-throughs of keywords in the abstracts of each of these
papers. However, time constraints may limit your ability to do
90 | REFERENCE LIBRARIANSHIP

that. I only do that myself if a bibliography has up to twenty
resources, which occurs very rarely. My practice is to go
through and pick one from every five papers in a long
bibliography. Then, I assess them by the criteria mentioned in
this list.

   Credentials are signals of two things: achievement and
knowledge and association. Where one gets one's credential
probably has more weight than it should on how well their
research is received. However, the ability, knowledge, skills,
and tenacity required to achieve credentials from anywhere
show that the author probably knows what they are talking
about. IT also signifies that they know how to engage in
effective and accurate research in their chosen field.

   Ephemera are things that are virtually useless in research
most times. However, they may be useful in some pinches.
They mostly occur in special library collections such as those
found in archives. They can also be found in articles and books
if you look hard enough. These include things like excessive
details in acknowledgments, passing comments, and other
items. These can provide clues to background information,
possible biases, sources of emphasis in the authors' work, and
other things. You should not go into a research resource
looking for ephemera, but they can give context for your
understanding.

   Peer Review is the process through which the best
academic resources must go for approval and publishing. If
an article or academic book has not been peer-reviewed, you
                                               REFERENCE LIBRARIANSHIP | 91

should probably not use it in your research and you should
definitely not use it in any work product or publication you
make. While corporate and private work products have not
probably been peer-reviewed, there are comparable quality
standards and benchmarks you should look for. In the absence
of a meaningful peer review or any review of a work that does
not claim to be academic in nature, give extra emphasis to
credentials and associations.

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/lis/?p=40#h5p-12
92 | PRESERVATION

10.

PRESERVATION

When a librarian preserves an item, the prime focus is to
preserve the information within the item. The physical nature
of the item is not paramount in and of itself. The only
exception to this is if the physical format is necessary to the
understanding of the information contained within in an
item. Now, of course, librarians still seek to preserve the
physical nature of the item because completely changing
everything would waste time.

   At the same time, as much as we try there are sometimes in
which the original format of an item will need to be sacrificed
in order to preserve the data or information within it. There
are multiple recourses to use when faced with this challenging
decision. If the item is a book that cannot be replaced, the
pages can be removed from the binding and rebound with
a different cover and stronger binding. Alternatively, a less
enticing solution would be to take the pages and put them on
specialized paper with a specific type of glue. then, these would
be placed in a loose-leaf folder that is non-acidic.

   If the item is a photograph, image, or painting and must
be viewed at all times, it can be placed between mattes and
                                                                 PRESERVATION | 93

framed. If it can be removed from sight, it should be placed
in cold, humidity-controlled environment if possible. Whether
or not this is possible, photographs should be kept in isolated
containers. Some libraries put photographs in special slips to
prevent contamination by particles and other corroding
agents. Artworks are ideally always displayed and hung up.
Contrary to what one may think, the best way to preserve
a painting is to display it and inspect it routinely for
conservation issues. If an artwork must be removed from
display, it should be placed in a room-temperature room and
the image side of the painting should be protected with a thick,
stiff board.

   Preservation guides and trainings may seem to be few and
far between, and courses and certification programs are
expensive and time-consuming. However, you do not have to
wait to be certified to practice good preservation techniques.
Here are some good preservation guides as well as a good
database to look for training and education materials:

  · A Simple Book Repair Manual by Dartmouth College.
      This manual describes how to repair all sorts of damage
      that happen to books.

  · Library of Congress Preservation Directorate, which
      holds information about preserving many different
      items, including digital items.

  · Bookbinding: A Tutorial, by Douglas Jones of the
      University of Iowa Department of Computer Science.
94 | PRESERVATION

      This page was created in 1995 and is therefore almost
      thirty years old, but its information is valid.
  · The Care and Handling of Special Collections Materials
      LibGuide by Yale Library. The sections on "Books and
      Other Bound Materials" and "Objects and 3-D
      Artworks" will be especially useful to most libraries.
  · Conservation OnLine (CoOL), a massive forum
      providing preservation advice, sometimes in the form of
      trainings. If you search entries in the database, you can
      limit them by the institution or publication that offered
      the advice. For example, I would recommend that for
      most books and paper issues, you would select the
      BPGA, which stands for "Book and Paper Group
      Annual." This is a journal published by the American
      Institute for Conservation. You look at lists of
      conservation advice by topic.

Digital Preservation

If preservation of a common book is not possible, the library
may decide to weed that copy and get a newer edition or a
like-new copy of the same edition. Another option, and one
that has become increasingly accessible and popular since the
2000s, is to digitally preserve the item. Digital preservation
does not mean that once a digital copy is made, the original
is destroyed or hidden away and never thought about or
preserved physically.
PRESERVATION | 95

           All of
           these
           audio and
           textual
           formats
           an media
           are in
           danger of
           becoming
           obsolete,
           if they
           have not
           already.
           Digital
           preservat
           ion seeks
           to
           preserve
           data and
           informati
           on stored
           in these
           formats
           on these
           media.
           "Library
           of
           Congress
           Pavilion:
           Digital
           Preservat
           ion" by
           Ryan
           Somma is
           licensed
           under CC
           BY 2.0. To
96 | PRESERVATION

view a      Digital preservation seeks to preserve a surrogate
copy of     image of a library item at its peak so its
this        information can be stored and preserved for long
license,    after the physical item has lost its usability. A side
visit       effect of this type of preservation is a massive
https://cr  increase in access to the information contained in
eativeco    the physical item. People from all over the world
mmons.o     could possibly view the digitally-preserved item,
rg/         provided there is no membership or pay wall on a
licenses/   library's digital collections. There are a myriad of
by/         factors to consider when preserving items
2.0/?ref=
openvers
e.

digitally, including minimum redundancy, the inevitable

creation of digital collections that mirror physical collections

and whether or not these should be made similar to born-

digital items, preservation formats, sizes, storage space, storage

location, migration, and many other factors. However, the

point of this section is just to say that digital preservation of

items is possible.
                  IMPROVEMENTS AND ADAPTATIONS IN THE MODERN
                                                                            WORLD | 97

PART II

IMPROVEMENTS
AND ADAPTATIONS
IN THE MODERN
WORLD
98 | IMPROVEMENTS AND ADAPTATIONS IN THE MODERN
WORLD
                                                  INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM | 99

11.

INTELLECTUAL
FREEDOM

When it comes to ideas and information, the library is a place
that provides Free Access to items and databases to its patrons.
This free access can be Free in the context of publishers'
whims, or it can be completely Open Access. Ofttimes, free
access only extends to the free limited access provided by the
lending policies of the library. In any case, information is freely
available to patrons. Patrons have a large array of backgrounds
and preferences. Thus, it is important that the library protect
the Intellectual Freedom of all patrons. What does this
mean? It means that patrons should be allowed to form their
own ideas and interact with whatever materials, groups,
institutions, and resources they desire. They should also be
allowed, encouraged, and protected in their efforts to gain
access to publicly available information. Their reasonable and
legal efforts to gain materials and resources that are
copyrighted should also be facilitated. This is partly why
libraries, archives, and museums have been granted some
exceptions to the constraints in the Copyright Law of the
United States. This is just one evidence, and a compelling one,
100 | INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM

of the important part that libraries and information
institutions play in the modern world.

   In any conversation regarding intellectual freedom and the
library, the ALA Bill of Rights should be mentioned. Here it
is, as adapted in 2019:

   I. Books and other library resources should be provided for
the interest, information, and enlightenment of all people of
the community the library serves. Materials should not be
excluded because of the origin, background, or views of those
contributing to their creation.

   II. Libraries should provide materials and information
presenting all points of view on current and historical issues.
Materials should not be proscribed or removed because of
partisan or doctrinal disapproval.

   III. Libraries should challenge censorship in the fulfillment
of their responsibility to provide information and
enlightenment.

   IV. Libraries should cooperate with all persons and groups
concerned with resisting the abridgment of free expression and
free access to ideas.

   V. A person's right to use a library should not be denied or
abridged because of origin, age, background, or views.

   VI. Libraries which make exhibit spaces and meeting rooms
available to the public they serve should make such facilities
available on an equitable basis, regardless of the beliefs or
affiliations of individuals or groups requesting their use.

   VII. All people, regardless of origin, age, background, or
                                                 INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM | 101

views, possess a right to privacy and confidentiality in their
library use. Libraries should advocate for, educate about, and
protect people's privacy, safeguarding all library use data,
including personally identifiable information.

                   One or more interactive elements has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view them online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/lis/?p=48#oembed-1

The Code of Ethics of the American Library Association
states:

  · We provide the highest level of service to all library users
      through appropriate and usefully organized resources;
      equitable service policies; equitable access; and accurate,
      unbiased, and courteous responses to all requests.

  · We uphold the principles of intellectual freedom and
      resist all efforts to censor library resources.

  · We protect each library user's right to privacy and
      confidentiality with respect to information sought or
      received and resources consulted, borrowed, acquired or
      transmitted.

  · We respect intellectual property rights and advocate
      balance between the interests of information users and
102 | INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM

      rights holders.
  · We treat co-workers and other colleagues with respect,

      fairness, and good faith, and advocate conditions of
      employment that safeguard the rights and welfare of all
      employees of our institutions.
  · We do not advance private interests at the expense of
      library users, colleagues, or our employing institutions.
  · We distinguish between our personal convictions and
      professional duties and do not allow our personal beliefs
      to interfere with fair representation of the aims of our
      institutions or the provision of access to their
      information resources.
  · We strive for excellence in the profession by maintaining
      and enhancing our own knowledge and skills, by
      encouraging the professional development of co-
      workers, and by fostering the aspirations of potential
      members of the profession.
  · We affirm the inherent dignity and rights of every
      person. We work to recognize and dismantle systemic
      and individual biases; to confront inequity and
      oppression; to enhance diversity and inclusion; and to
      advance racial and social justice in our libraries,
      communities, profession, and associations through
      awareness, advocacy, education, collaboration, services,
      and allocation of resources and spaces.

Intellectual freedom plus free and equal access are both key
                                                 INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM | 103

ethical doctrines of libraries. Martha M. Smith (North
Carolina Libraries) describes the dynamic relationship
between three components which creates ethical dilemmas.
These three components are:

  · (1) freedom, meaning intellectual freedom
  · (2) information democracy, promoting the need for

      social equity in information
  · (3) responsibility, or the obligation to promote the social

      good

Let's look at Intellectual Freedom from the context of the
American Library Association, which felt so strongly about
this topic that it created an entire Office in its organization to
support it.

                   One or more interactive elements has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
        can view them online here: https://csi.pressbooks.pub/
        lis/?p=48#oembed-2

Ethical decisions are rarely easy ones to make. Keeping in mind
the principles of intellectual freedom and free and equal access,
to what extent do libraries serve to improve and protect
society? Does a library have the obligation to limit access to
104 | INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM

materials that might be socially unhealthy or promote
materials that are considered beneficial to the health of society?
Where does "protecting society" end and "censorship" begin?
There is a fine line dividing these two concepts.

   Ethics are also a factor when making collection selection
decisions. It is obvious that selections should be made that
benefit the library's users. But it becomes an ethical issue when
the selector chooses items that are of particular interest to
themselves, rather than to their patrons or considers items that
are selected because of pressure from administrators or
powerful members of the community (large donors).
Sometimes there is pressure to not select items because they
are controversial. This can be a great disservice to the library's
patrons as well.

   Suppression of certain ideas, cultures, practices, or
portrayals is called Censorship. It has long been a subject of
debate, as has its cousin concept Banned Books. Both of these
are detrimental to Intellectual Freedom. Both of these tools
have especially been used in efforts to protect children from
allegedly harmful materials. For information regarding the use
of Banned Books to control children's and others' access to
information, look at A Look Back at the History of Banned
Books Week. from the National Council of Teachers of
English. Another potential tool of censorship is the Challenge
process. This process is intended to remove material that is
harmful and problematic, but some patrons can misuse it.
Thus, most libraries state that all challenges must be heard by
                                                 INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM | 105

their Board of Directors or Trustees or a committee assigned
by them.

   Here are ten books that have been banned by schools,
libraries, and communities for various reasons:

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/lis/?p=48#h5p-18

In 2022, the Nampa, Idaho school district board decided to
ban over twenty books from its school libraries. This was one
of several occurrences in a flood of book banning and
challenges. Let's see different viewpoints on the processes of
challenging and banning books. The first is a news
presentation on the topic of school libraries and book
banning.

                   One or more interactive elements has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view them online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/lis/?p=48#oembed-3
106 | INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM

Here is another viewpoint from Missouri, also created in 2022:

                   One or more interactive elements has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view them online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/lis/?p=48#oembed-4

Another prominent library-related issue regarding children is
the access children can have to the Internet using library
resources. Various groups have attempted to protect children,
and rightfully so, from inadvertently going to harmful internet
pages. There have also been efforts to protect children from
crimes committed against them via the Internet. As the library
is a common place for children to access the internet, even
if it is only to look for books, it is imperative that librarians
understand the risks and policies related to children.

   Take a look at these pages:

  · (CIPA) The Children's Internet Protection Act
  · Children and the Internet: Policies that Work . from

      PLA and ALSC

Privacy is one of the most important concepts regarding
interactions with patrons. It is paramount that library records
are kept confidential. All personally identifiable information
                                                 INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM | 107

that links a user's choices of taste, interest, or research to that
user's identity must be protected. This includes database
search records, reference interviews, circulation records,
interlibrary loan records, and any other personally identifiable
uses of library materials, facilities, or services. View this
excellent resource from the North Dakota State Library:

                   One or more interactive elements has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view them online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/lis/?p=48#oembed-5

Examples:

  · When someone asks who has an item checked out, you
      don't tell them.

  · When checked-out items are returned, all ties are broken
      between the item and the patron.

  · When teachers or others in authoritarian positions ask
      what someone is researching, you don't tell.

RESPECT YOUR PATRONS!
108 | DIGITAL INITIATIVES AND LIBRARY 2.0

12.

DIGITAL INITIATIVES
AND LIBRARY 2.0

We have already talked about electronic resources and digital
initiatives as part of the broader offerings of libraries, but they
still warrant specific mention in their section. Part of being
a librarian in the modern world is understanding digital
technologies enough to teach patrons how to use these abilities
themselves.

   The modern library, also known as Library 2.0, is a new
approach to library services that emphasizes user-centeredness,
collaboration, and the use of technology. This new paradigm
shifts the focus from traditional library services to one that is
more responsive to the changing needs of library users and the
wider community.

   One of the key features of Library 2.0 is the use of Digital
Initiatives to enhance library services. This includes the use
of digital technologies such as the Internet, social media, and
mobile devices to provide access to information and resources.
For example, libraries now offer online databases, e-books, and
digital exhibits and collections that can be accessed from
anywhere. The use of open-source programs like Omeka has
                                DIGITAL INITIATIVES AND LIBRARY 2.0 | 109

made patron-focused online exhibits and collections creation
increasingly easy and intuitive. Modern libraries also provide
access to digital tools such as 3D printers and virtual reality
headsets to support learning and innovation.

   Another important aspect of Library 2.0 is the emphasis
on collaboration and user-centeredness. Libraries are now
working closely with community organizations and other
partners to co-create services and programs that meet the needs
of their users. This approach encourages active participation
and engagement and allows libraries to respond more
effectively to the changing needs of their communities. Digital
initiatives can also allow libraries to collect feedback and data
from patrons who visit the associated websites, which can help
them better understand and respond to the needs and
preferences of their users.

   Digital literacy is also an important aspect of Library 2.0.
Libraries are now providing digital literacy training and
resources to help patrons learn how to access, evaluate, and
use digital information effectively and safely. This includes
training on how to use digital tools, how to identify credible
sources of information, and how to protect personal
information online.

   Overall, the modern library, or Library 2.0, is a new
approach to library services that emphasizes user-centeredness,
collaboration, and the use of technology. It represents a shift
from traditional library services to one that is more responsive
to the changing needs of library users and the wider
110 | DIGITAL INITIATIVES AND LIBRARY 2.0

community. With the help of digital initiatives, libraries are
now providing access to information and resources that are
more convenient and accessible than ever before. This
approach is helping to create a more informed, engaged, and
digitally literate society.

Artificial Intelligence and Library 2.0

                                                                  With the
                                                                  advent of
                                                                  GPT 3.5,
                                                                  GPT 4,
                                                                  and other
                                                                  AI tools,
                                                                  knowled
                                                                  ge of
                                                                  artificial
                                                                  intelligen
                                                                  ce and
                                                                  how to
                                                                  interact
                                                                  with it is
                                                                  becoming
                                                                  increasin
                                                                  gly
                                                                  importan
                                                                  t in the
                                                                  context
                                                                  of digital
                                                                  literacy.

When we first wrote this textbook, we used an artificial
                                  DIGITAL INITIATIVES AND LIBRARY 2.0 | 111

intelligence tool known as ChatGPT, also known now as GPT
3.5, to create several of its chapters. We did not imagine that a
more powerful and capable version of GPT would be created
by OpenAI.ChatGPT is a natural language processing model
that uses syntax, context, and its rigorous body of text that
it has already analyzed to provide thorough and accurate
responses to uses prompts and queries. While there are many
limitations and drawbacks to ChatGPT's operations, there are
also many benefits to using this technology and other
technologies in education. As students and many other
members of the public are using ChatGPT at an increasing
rate for a wide range of activities, librarians should at least
know how to use this technology. If they do not use it
themselves, they will at least be able to help others navigate the
use of this tool.

   ChatGPT was released by Open AI in November 2022.
Almost immediately, students, researchers, and others began
to harness a wide range of uses for this artificial intelligence.
ChatGPT was used to write school essays and academic
research papers, advertisements, and public service
announcements. Even religious scholars used ChatGPT to
write sermons. As noted above, we used ChatGPT to write
some parts of this textbook. Some of these uses were ethical.
For example, we took ChatGPT's output and edited it to be as
correct as possible and fit within the context of the textbook
we were writing. Other uses can be argued to not be ethical,
such as using ChatGPT to write a school paper when it is
112 | DIGITAL INITIATIVES AND LIBRARY 2.0

assumed that one will write the paper on their own without
any external assistance. Some professionals even regard the use
of ChatGPT in professional contexts to be unethical. For
example, the journal Science completely banned any content
that was generated with artificial intelligence. Even content
that has been modified heavily since it was generated through
AI is not allowed. Other journals have less strict rules.

   Artificial Intelligence is much more than ChatGPT. For
example, it has been built upon and improved in the next
model created by OpenAI, GPT 4. ChatGPT was renamed to
GPT 3.5, and ChatGPT refers to both services. GPT 3.5 refers
to the legacy version of ChatGPT. The old version primarily
responded in narrative text in English. It could occasionally
form tables and code, and could even create basic musical
notation using the ABC computer-readable system. GPT 4,
on the other hand, can take basic text, or phrases, and generate
a wide range of outputs, including tables, music notation, text
in languages other than English, and whole website templates.
It can also explain mathematical principles and applications
in easy-to-understand texts. In addition to narrative products,
GPT 4 can also write in rhyming poetry.

   Other artificial intelligence tools include Nolej, which uses
GPT-3 to generate interactive educational formative
assessments that use H5P. Another use of AI is Jasper.ai, which
incorporates GPT 3 into marketing and advertising assets.
Bing, Google, and BandLab are other organizations that have
                                 DIGITAL INITIATIVES AND LIBRARY 2.0 | 113

incorporated ChatGPT and similar AI tools into their
preexisting services and products.

   How should Library 2.0 respond to these developments?
Should librarians assist patrons in learning how to use AI if
they suspect that the patrons have unethical motives? Should
there be age or context restrictions regarding ChatGPT use
like there are for other websites and technologies? These are
all answers that individual libraries and librarians will have to
answer for themselves.

   If there is to be any educational programming or services
related to GPT in the library, it should probably be related
to the art of prompt engineering. Prompt engineering is the
process of creating the most effective input for an artificial
intelligence tool, service, or system. If the prompt has been
engineered enough, the results, output, or product, will be
close to the goal of the user. If a user does not make much
of an effort to refine or calibrate their input, the tool will not
have much guidance on what exactly is desired in the output.
Therefore, you will have to continuously refine the prompt
or ask it to repeat its previous output but change specific
elements. At times, even well-engineered prompts will result
in content that must be run through multiple refinements.
This is a process called "iteration." Occasionally, especially in
regards to ChatGPT 3.5, the result of the last prompt will
lose one or more of the desirable qualities of the products
generated for the first prompt. Still, sometimes it is helpful to
have a broader prompt at first and then be increasingly specific.
114 | DIGITAL INITIATIVES AND LIBRARY 2.0

At the very least, though, you should make a plan of what
exactly you are wanting to receive from the AI tool. Librarians,
educators, and other professionals can help members of the
public learn how to create the most effective prompts for AI
through classes, seminars, and handouts.

Generative Artificial Intelligence Tools

Here are some tools that the authors have found useful in their
work with various outputs. All of these are open or at least
have a persistently-free tier available to users. The authors are
committed to promoting equitable access to technology and
open, or at least free, technological tools.

Text

ChatGPT: chat.openai.com

Google Bard: bard.google.com

Bing.AI: bing.com/?/ai

Image

Getimg.ai: getimg.ai

Dall-e 2: openai.com/dall-e-2

Canva Free Text-to-Image Generator: canva.com/your-apps
                                 DIGITAL INITIATIVES AND LIBRARY 2.0 | 115

Microsoft Designer: designer.microsoft.com/
Stable Diffusion: https://stablediffusionweb.com/
Education
Eduaide.ai: eduaide.ai
Nolej.ai: nolej.ai
App.QuestionWell.org: app.questionwell.org
Claude.ai: https://claude.ai/chats.
AI Content Checker
Crossplag
Copyleaks
116 | REPRESENTATION IN THE LIBRARY

13.

REPRESENTATION IN
THE LIBRARY

Diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) is an important aspect
of library services and operations. It refers to the recognition,
understanding, and acceptance of the diverse backgrounds,
perspectives, and experiences of library users and staff. DEI is
essential for creating an inclusive and equitable environment
where all individuals feel valued and respected.

   One key aspect of DEI in the library is minority
representation. Libraries that focus on DEI demonstrate their
commitment by hiring a diverse staff, acquiring a diverse
collection of materials, and offering programming that reflects
the interests and needs of different minority groups. By
providing representation and visibility for minority groups,
libraries can help to promote understanding and acceptance of
diversity.

Fostering Pluralism in the Community

Cultural and religious pluralism is another important aspect
of DEI in the library. This means recognizing and respecting
                                     REPRESENTATION IN THE LIBRARY | 117

the diversity of cultures and religions within the community
and providing resources and services that reflect this diversity.
This includes acquiring materials in various languages, offering
programming and events that celebrate different cultures and
religions, and providing access to resources that support the
spiritual and cultural needs of library users. By promoting
cultural and religious pluralism, libraries can help to foster a
deeper understanding and appreciation of different cultures
and religions.

   One library program supporting cultural pluralism, which
has been practiced by many libraries, is a "Cultural Heritage
Month" series, where each month the library focuses on the
culture and history of a specific underrepresented community
within the local area. The program can include events such
as book clubs, guest speakers, and workshops that highlight
the literature, art, and traditions of the featured community.
Additionally, the library would also acquire materials such as
books, films, and music that reflect the culture and experiences
of the community. This program would not only promote
cultural awareness and understanding, but also provide a safe
and inclusive space for members of underrepresented
communities to connect with others and share their heritage.

Representation in Library Collections

When a library's collections reflect the diverse backgrounds
and perspectives of its patrons, it can make those patrons feel
118 | REPRESENTATION IN THE LIBRARY

seen, valued, and represented. This can lead to a more positive
and inclusive experience for patrons who may have previously
felt marginalized or underrepresented.

   Having a diverse collection of materials can also provide
patrons with access to a wider range of information and
resources. It can expose them to new perspectives and ideas
and can help to promote understanding and acceptance of
diversity. This can be especially important for minority
patrons who may not have had access to materials that reflect
their own experiences and backgrounds in the past.

   Moreover, diversity in the collection can also make the
library a more welcoming and inclusive place for all patrons.
It can create a sense of community and can help to foster a
deeper understanding and appreciation of different cultures
and perspectives. This can lead to more positive and
meaningful interactions between patrons and can help to
create a more inclusive and equitable environment for all.

Beyond Mere Representation

However, it's also important to acknowledge that
representation alone is not enough, it's necessary to actively
work towards equity, which means providing equal
opportunities and resources to all individuals regardless of
their background. This means addressing and dismantling
systemic barriers that may prevent certain groups from
accessing library services and resources. This can include
                                     REPRESENTATION IN THE LIBRARY | 119

providing language and accessibility accommodations, offering
training and education for staff on cultural competency, and
actively engaging and seeking feedback from underrepresented
groups.

   In addition to representation and equity, libraries must also
actively work towards creating an inclusive environment where
all individuals feel welcome and respected. This means actively
promoting an environment that is free from discrimination
and bias, as well as providing training and education for staff
on how to interact with and serve diverse populations.
Collections diversity will mean little of patrons who are
members of minority groups do not feel welcome in that space.
120 | COPYRIGHT

14.

COPYRIGHT

Intellectual Property and Copyright

Intellectual Property refers to creations of the mind -
everything from works of art to inventions, computer
programs to trademarks, and other commercial signs. This
booklet introduces the main types of IP and explains how
the law protects them. It also introduces the work of WIPO,
the global forum for IP services, policy, information and
cooperation. Copyright is a form of protection for intellectual
property provided by the laws of the United States to the
authors of "original works of authorship" that are fixed in a
tangible form of expression. An original work of authorship is
a work that is independently created by a human author and
possesses at least some minimal degree of creativity. A work is
"fixed" when it is captured (either by or under the authority
of an author) in a sufficiently permanent medium such that
the work can be perceived, reproduced, or communicated for
more than a short time. Copyright protection in the United
States exists automatically from the moment the original work
of authorship is fixed.
                                                                         COPYRIGHT | 121

 Fair Use and Implications for
 Copyright

  Fair Use is a legal doctrine that promotes freedom of
  expression by permitting the unlicensed use of copyright-
  protected works in certain circumstances. Section 107 of the
  Copyright Act provides the statutory framework for
  determining whether something is a fair use and identifies
  certain types of uses--such as criticism, comment, news
  reporting, teaching, scholarship, and research--as examples of
  activities that may qualify as fair use. There are four sections
  one must consider when examining whether or not their
  potential use may be justified under a fair use defense:1

   1. Purpose and character of the use (commercial, non-
        commercial, audience size and nature, etc.): Courts
        examine how the party claiming fair use is using the
        copyrighted work, and are more likely to find that
        nonprofit educational and noncommercial uses are fair.
        This does not mean, however, that all nonprofit
        education and noncommercial uses are fair and all
        commercial uses are not fair. Each of the four factors in
        this section is weighed against each other. Additionally,

1. We would like to thank Eastern Kentucky University for their wonderful
  LibGuide page on Fair Use arguments. This is located at
  https://libguides.eku.edu/copyright/fairuse.
122 | COPYRIGHT

      "transformative" uses are more likely to be considered
      fair. Transformative uses are those that add something
      new, with a further purpose or different character and
      do not substitute for the original use of the work.
 2. Nature of the copyrighted work: This factor analyzes
      the degree to which the work that was used relates to the
      copyright's purpose of encouraging creative expression.
      Using a factual work (such as a technical article or news
      item) can be more justifiable than using a creative work,
      such as a book or a play. In addition, the use of
      unpublished work is less likely to be considered fair.
 3. Amount and substantiality of the portion used in
      relation to the copyrighted work as a whole: The
      quantity and quality of the copyrighted material used in
      the supposedly derivative work are both examined in this
      factor. For example, if the use includes a large portion of
      the copyrighted work, fair use is less likely to be found; if
      the use incorporates only a small amount of copyrighted
      material, fair use is more likely. Sometimes, the use of an
      entire copyrighted work was found to be fair under
      certain circumstances, including efforts to preserve
      copyrighted works for future access. The amount that
      may be legally copied depends on the type and
      geographic location of a work. In the United States,
      twenty-five percent of a text may be copied. At the same
      time, music works can only have ten percent of their
      pages copied if they are being disseminated to groups. In
                                                                     COPYRIGHT | 123

      any case, users cannot copyright the most important or
      influential portions of a work. These parts of a work are
      considered the "heart" of the work.
 4. Effect of the use upon the potential market for or
      value of the copyrighted work: Here, courts review
      whether, and to what extent, the unlicensed use harms
      the existing or future market for the copyright owner's
      original work. In assessing this factor, courts consider
      whether the use is hurting the current market for the
      original work and whether the use could cause
      substantial harm if it were to become widespread.

In addition to the above, other factors may also be considered
by a court in weighing a fair use question, depending upon the
circumstances. Courts evaluate fair use claims on a case-by-case
basis, and the outcome of any given case depends on a fact-
based inquiry. This means that there is no formula to ensure
that a predetermined percentage or amount of a work--or a
specific number of words, lines, pages, or copies--may be used
without permission.

Public Domain

A work of authorship is in the "public domain" if it is no
longer under copyright protection or if it failed to meet the
requirements for copyright protection. Works in the public
124 | COPYRIGHT

domain may be used freely without the permission of the
former copyright owner

Modern Alternatives to the
Copyright-Public Domain Dichotomy

Now that I have depressed and stressed you about copyright,
it is time to learn that there are alternatives to public domain
materials when it comes to acquiring free information and
data. Creative Commons licenses, open access materials, and
open educational resources are all examples of alternative
models of resource propagation that protects intellectual
freedom while not require exorbitant sums of money and
prohibiting reuse. These models have been developed to
promote the sharing and use of creative works, while still
providing creators with some level of control over their work.

   One of the biggest benefits of Creative Commons licenses
is that they allow creators to share their work with others in
a way that is legally protected. This allows for the free and
open sharing of knowledge and information, which can lead
to increased creativity, innovation, and collaboration.
Additionally, Creative Commons licenses can be used to
encourage the reuse and remixing of existing works, which can
lead to new and interesting creations.

   Open access is another alternative model that has been
gaining traction in recent years. This model allows for free
and open access to scholarly research and other forms of
                                                                     COPYRIGHT | 125

knowledge. This is important because it allows for the
dissemination of information to a wider audience, which can
lead to increased collaboration, innovation, and knowledge
sharing. Additionally, open access can increase the visibility
and impact of research, which can be beneficial for researchers
and the scientific community as a whole. A plethora of open-
access article text and visual work databases and research
forums exist for a wide range of topics, including:

 1. JSTOR (https://www.jstor.org/) - a digital library that
      provides access to thousands of academic journals,
      books, and primary sources.

 2. Project MUSE (https://muse.jhu.edu/) - provides access
      to scholarly journals in the humanities and social
      sciences.

 3. Directory of Open Access Journals (https://doaj.org/) -
      provides access to thousands of open access journals in
      various disciplines.

 4. PubMed Central (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/)
      - a free digital archive of biomedical and life sciences
      journal literature.

 5. Directory of Open Access Books
      (https://www.doabooks.org/) - a searchable index of
      academic books that have been made available for free by
      their publishers.

 6. Open Library (https://openlibrary.org/) - an online
      library with a mission to provide "one web page for every
126 | COPYRIGHT

      book ever published."
 7. Artstor (https://www.artstor.org/) - a digital library of

      over two million images in the arts, architecture,
      humanities, and social sciences.
 8. The European Library
      (http://www.theeuropeanlibrary.org/) - provides access
      to the resources of the national libraries of Europe.
 9. The Internet Archive (https://archive.org/) - a digital
      library of Internet sites and other cultural artifacts in
      digital form.
10. The Digital Public Library of America (https://dp.la/) -
      brings together the riches of America's libraries, archives,
      and museums, and makes them freely available to the
      world.

Open-access databases also exist for raw or slightly-
manipulated open access datasets:

 1. The Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social
      Research (ICPSR) (https://www.icpsr.umich.edu/) - a
      membership-based organization that provides access to a
      large collection of social science data.

 2. Data.gov (https://www.data.gov/) - a repository of
      datasets from various government agencies in the United
      States.

 3. The World Bank Open Data
      (https://data.worldbank.org/) - provides access to data
                                                                     COPYRIGHT | 127

      on development indicators from the World Bank.
 4. The European Union Open Data Portal

      (https://data.europa.eu/) - provides access to datasets
      from various EU institutions and agencies.
 5. Harvard Dataverse (https://dataverse.harvard.edu/) - a
      repository of research data from Harvard University and
      other institutions.
 6. The Dryad Digital Repository (https://datadryad.org/)
      - a curated repository of data underlying scientific and
      medical publications.
 7. Zenodo (https://zenodo.org/) - a platform for
      researchers to share and preserve their research data.
 8. The Data Repository for the University of Minnesota
      (https://www.data.umn.edu/) - provides access to a
      wide range of datasets from the university.
 9. Open Science Framework (https://osf.io/) - a platform
      that provides tools and services for data management
      and sharing.
10. figshare (https://figshare.com/) - a platform that allows
      researchers to share their data, figures, and other research
      outputs.

Open educational resources (OER) are a form of open access
that specifically focuses on educational materials. These
resources are free and openly licensed, which makes them
accessible to anyone with an internet connection. This has
a significant impact on higher education, where the cost of
128 | COPYRIGHT

textbooks and other materials can be a significant burden for
students. However, OER can also have other benefits such as
allowing educators to customize and adapt materials to their
specific needs, promote innovation and creativity in teaching
and learning, and increase access to educational opportunities
for students globally.

   Creative Commons licenses, open access, and open
educational resources are all examples of alternative models
that challenge the traditional copyright-public domain
dichotomy. These models promote the sharing and use of
creative works and have the potential to revolutionize the way
we think about intellectual property. By promoting the free
and open sharing of knowledge and information, these models
can lead to increased creativity, innovation, and collaboration.
Additionally, they can increase the visibility and impact of
research, and provide access to educational opportunities for
students globally. As the world becomes increasingly digital
and connected, the use of Creative Commons licenses, open
access, and open educational resources will likely continue to
grow, and they will continue to play an important role in
shaping the way we think about intellectual property and the
sharing of knowledge.
      SUPPORTING THE PUBLIC TO OBTAIN PUBLIC SUPPORT | 129

PART III

SUPPORTING THE
PUBLIC TO OBTAIN
PUBLIC SUPPORT
130 | SUPPORTING THE PUBLIC TO OBTAIN PUBLIC SUPPORT
     PATRON SERVICES | 131

15.

PATRON SERVICES

Patron Services is the general term for all services in which
a library staff member and a patron interact. This includes
face-to-face interaction and digital interaction. All interactions
with patrons must be carried out in a professional manner. In
addition to the benefits this provides for outreach purposes, it
is just good manners to treat people respectfully when they are
interacting with you. This is one of the basics of Customer
Service. Customer service is the general attitude held by
professionals in all fields. Whether or not the customer or
patron is right, they should be treated with respect and helped
to find the information or solution they are seeking. Librarians
and library staff should not be overbearing or intimidating.
There are multiple moments in which good customer service
skills can help you navigate complicated interactions with a
patron, including:

  · A patron requests that the library host an event
      promoting a controversial political candidate, but the
      librarian feels that doing so would violate the library's
      policy of remaining neutral on political issues. A
132 | PATRON SERVICES

      solution could be to provide the patron with
      information on how to reserve a room at the library for
      their own event and to provide them with resources on
      how to promote their event in a neutral manner.
  · A patron complains that a group of homeless people is
      using the library as a shelter, but the librarian is hesitant
      to ask them to leave because the library is a public space
      and the patron does not have a clear legal basis for the
      request. A solution could be to provide the patron with
      information on local organizations that provide services
      to homeless individuals and to offer the patron training
      on how to interact with homeless individuals in a
      respectful and non-judgmental manner.
  · A patron requests that the library remove a book from
      the collection because it contains offensive language, but
      the librarian believes that the book has literary merit and
      should be available for patrons to make their own
      judgments about. A solution could be to provide the
      patron with alternative materials that they may find
      more suitable, while also informing them of the library's
      collection development policy and the reasons why the
      book is important to keep in the collection.
  · A patron requests that the library block access to certain
      websites on the library's computers, but the librarian is
      concerned about violating other patrons' First
      Amendment rights. A solution could be to provide the
      patron with resources on how to use parental controls
                                                        PATRON SERVICES | 133

   on their own devices, while also providing them with
   information on the library's internet filtering policy and
   the reasons why certain websites may be blocked.
· A patron requests access to data collected by the library
   on the reading habits of patrons, but the librarian is
   concerned about violating the patron's privacy. A
   solution could be to provide the patron with
   information on the library's data collection and privacy
   policies, and to offer them the option to review and
   control the data that the library has collected on them.
   Additionally, the librarian could also offer the patron
   resources on data privacy and inform them about the
   library's data security measures.
· A patron requests access to another patron's reading
   history, but the librarian is concerned about violating the
   privacy rights of the patron whose information is being
   requested. The librarian could inform the patron
   requesting the information that due to privacy concerns,
   the library cannot disclose that information. The
   librarian could also offer alternative resources or
   suggestions for the patron to find the information they
   are looking for. The librarian can also contact social
   workers or other peace officers if they feel that the
   patron's life or lifestyle is in danger.
· A patron is denied a Library card due to outstanding
   fines, but the patron argues that they are unable to pay
   the fines and that they are being denied access to
134 | PATRON SERVICES

      education and information. The librarian could work
      with the patron to come up with a payment plan or
      community service options to clear the outstanding
      fines. The librarian could also direct the patron to
      resources such as online databases or digital materials
      that are available for free. Another option is to eliminate
      fees and fines altogether related to library material use.
  · A patron complains about the lack of diversity in the
      library's collection, but the librarian is concerned about
      the cost of acquiring new materials and the limited
      budget for collection development. The librarian could
      work with the patron to identify specific titles or authors
      that they would like to see in the collection and use that
      information to advocate for budget increases or to seek
      out donations or grants to acquire those materials. The
      librarian could also direct the patron to alternative
      resources such as interlibrary loan or online databases
      that may have a more diverse collection.
  · A patron wants to access certain sites that are blocked by
      the library's internet filtering software, arguing that they
      are being denied access to information, while the
      librarian argues that it is to protect children from
      inappropriate content. The librarian could work with
      the patron to understand their specific needs and
      research alternative ways for the patron to access the
      information they need. The librarian could also consider
      adjusting the library's internet filtering settings to allow
                                                           PATRON SERVICES | 135

      for more access while still protecting children from
      inappropriate content.
  · A patron wants to use the library's computer to access
      their personal online accounts, but the librarian is
      concerned about the patron's data being compromised
      and the library's liability if the patron's account is
      hacked. The librarian could inform the patron about the
      potential risks and suggest using their own device or
      using a secure network. The librarian could also provide
      the patron with resources such as guides on how to
      protect their online privacy or direct them to a cyber
      security expert for more information.

All of these examples show the foundational skills in Patron-
Centered Service, which is the library form of customer
service. It takes the principles of decency, respect, efficiency,
and openness a step further. Unlike a business, whose chief
aim is to make money and be as logistically effective as possible,
the purpose of the library is to serve the entire public and
the individual coming through the door at the same time. We
might be thought of as a hybrid public service and business.
Logistics are still important, but money-making is not our end
goal.
136 | READER'S ADVISORY

16.

READER'S ADVISORY

Reader's Advisory is a service that helps readers find
appropriate recommendations based on their interests, reading
level, and other factors. Each library has a unique method of
managing Reader's Advisory requests. Some systems
incorporate Lexile ratings, which indicate the difficulty of
understanding a particular book. These ratings are typically
associated with age levels for a particular work. However, age
should not be a determining factor when conducting Reader's
Advisory.

   After you have finished determining potential future reads
for a patron, you need to locate the book in your collections
or in another library. WorldCat is a massive service provided
by OCLC that turns all of its participating libraries into a
consortium of sorts. When you have found a particular
manifestation of a work you are interested in obtaining, the
bottom of the page will have a list of all nearby libraries that
have a copy. You can reach out through Interlibrary Loan for
access to the book. Alternatively, you may decide to purchase
the book for your collection. WorldCat also has notes on
                                                         READER'S ADVISORY | 137

similar items to a particular work, so you can use it for limited
Reader's Advisory purposes.

Places to Look for RA Searches

A Book List is a specialized list of books that are appropriate
for a particular audience or that are all dealing with the same
subject. Examples of book lists include summer reading lists
for academic or entertainment purposes or lists of
authoritative books specified by organizations or institutions
for professional development. Awards lists include all works
that have won a certain award. Book lists can be found in
physical and digital iterations. Literary Hub, New York Times,
BookRiot, NPR, Read.gov, and other websites contain
booklists for many categories.

   A Book Review is also a good resource for information
about applicable texts. Again, NPR and the New York Times
have book reviews. Kirkus Reviews is also an okay resource,
although it focuses on books its companion institution, Kirkus
Publishing, has published. A wider range of companies,
institutions, and public services publish book reviews than
publish book lists.

   There are a wide range of websites librarians and patrons
can use during Reader's Advisory sessions. NoveList, a readers'
advisory service, not only provides access to information on
155,000 fiction titles, but it also offers a wide range of feature
content that will serve fiction readers of all ages with author
138 | READER'S ADVISORY

read-alikes, book discussion guides, reading lists and more. It is
provided by EBSCOHost, which means that patrons will have
to utilize library access in order to reach the website.

   Goodreads is the world's largest site for readers and book
recommendations (goodreads.com)."

   Their service allows you to create a free account and:

  · "See what books your friends are reading.
  · Track the books you're reading, have read, and want to

      read.
  · Check out your personalized book recommendations.

      Our recommendation engine analyzes 20 billion data
      points to give suggestions tailored to your literary tastes.
  · Find out if a book is a good fit for you from our
      community's reviews."

Librarians and other book lovers have created entire websites
dedicated to fulfilling reader's advisory tasks. Examples
include Kitchen Sink RA, What Should I Read Next?,
Fantastic Fiction, Your Next Read, Whichbook,
LibraryThing, and Gnooks. Take your time and familiarize
yourself with these websites, if not for yourself then at least for
the sake of your patrons.
                                                        READER'S ADVISORY | 139

Finding Reader's Advisory Results at
Your Library

Finding acceptable resources for the reader is only half the
battle. In order for the entire process to be effective, you have
to ensure that your reader has a way to know about the item
and have access to it. In other words, they need to see it in
the catalog or request it through interlibrary loan procedures.
They also have to know the metadata of the item. Let's go
through the metadata of some records at the CSI Library and
WorldCat.

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/lis/?p=62#h5p-13
140 | THE MODERN LIBRARY EXPERIENCE

17.

THE MODERN LIBRARY
EXPERIENCE

The modern library experience refers to the ways in which
libraries have adapted and evolved to meet the changing needs
and expectations of patrons in the digital age. This includes
providing access to a wide range of digital and physical
resources, such as e-books, databases, and online learning
resources, as well as offering new and innovative services such
as maker spaces, digital literacy training, and technology
lending programs.

   The modern library experience also emphasizes a more
personalized and patron-centered approach to service, with
librarians trained to help patrons navigate and make the most
of the resources available to them. This can include providing
research assistance, offering personalized reading
recommendations, and helping patrons access and use digital
technologies such as laptops and mobile devices.

   In addition, many libraries are also becoming community
hubs, offering programs and events that foster learning and
engagement, such as author talks, book clubs, and workshops
                                   THE MODERN LIBRARY EXPERIENCE | 141

on various topics. Many libraries also serve as safe and inclusive
spaces for patrons of all ages, cultures, and backgrounds.

   Overall, the modern library experience is centered on
providing patrons with the resources and support they need
to access and make use of the wealth of information and
knowledge available in the digital age.

Interactivity and Accessibility

Interactivity is the ability of an information resource to be
directly manipulated in real-time by a patron and to have that
manipulation divulge information to the patron. It is a key
part of modern, technology-integrated learning. Interactive
resources do not need to be massive, like virtual reality headsets
or AR screens. They can be models, simulations, and other
engaging materials. Topics can range from history to science to
language to technical skills to etiquette.

   Makerspace areas show up in many types of libraries.
Initially, they were created in academic library settings to allow
students to incorporate data and research findings directly into
their experiments. MIT was the first major library institution
to have a maker space. It was the institution at which Niel
Gershenfeld worked. Gershenfeld was and is the director of
the Center for Bits and Atoms at the university. In order to
increase student creativity, he created the "Fab Lab." Making
things in libraries has been a vital part of the library's role
as a community center since the 19th century when women
142 | THE MODERN LIBRARY EXPERIENCE

gathered at the library to create quilts and other items for the

less fortunate. Modern digital technology use is simply another

way of making.

                                                                  "Let's
                                                                  Make -
                                                                  new
                                                                  makerspa
                                                                  ce in
                                                                  Nuneato
                                                                  n library"
                                                                  by
                                                                  librarieste
                                                                  am is
                                                                  licensed
                                                                  under CC
                                                                  BY 2.0. To
                                                                  view a
                                                                  copy of
                                                                  this
                                                                  license,
                                                                  visit
                                                                  https://cr
                                                                  eativeco
                                                                  mmons.o
                                                                  rg/
                                                                  licenses/
                                                                  by/
                                                                  2.0/?ref=
                                                                  openvers
                                                                  e.

   Outreach is a side effect of all of these initiatives. Libraries
                                  THE MODERN LIBRARY EXPERIENCE | 143

must reach out to their patrons and ensure that their needs
are being met. They must be appealing so patrons will return
and welcoming so new people will come for the first time. At
times, however, outreach as a part of reference and other main
library activities is just not enough. To expand the outreach
of the library, administrators, librarians, and staff create
programming. Programs are isolated instances or chains of
meetings that hope to attract an audience for education on
some topic. Library programs can be on mundane but
necessary topics like taxes or on creative topics like making
birdhouses. They can include science lessons for elementary
students or financial assistance for high schoolers who are
entering their first jobs or internships. Movie nights and
service projects are other programs. Opportunities in
makerspaces for recreational making also count as outreach.

                                                                  "Legos at
                                                                  CSM
                                                                  Library"
                                                                  by Colleg
                                                                  e of San
                                                                  Mateo
                                                                  Library is
                                                                  licensed
                                                                  under CC
                                                                  BY 2.0.
144 | THE MODERN LIBRARY EXPERIENCE

                   An interactive H5P element has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
        can view it online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/lis/?p=44#h5p-16

Outreach should be coordinated with patron services and
should coincide with initiatives by the other departments. The
heads of all departments should meet around once a week, if
not every day, for a brief meeting on their plans and ways they
can collaborate.

Accessibility and Diversity

Accessibility is the ability of a material to be found, used,
and navigated by people of different abilities. For example,
a resource should have accommodations for individuals who
are blind, members of the Deaf community, and people who
have cognitive disadvantages, as well as people with other
handicaps. Sometimes, the only accessibility a person needs is
a ramp or elevator because they have trouble walking. Other
times, accessibility of resources means that a specialized format
needs to be created for a specific patron. There are public and
private institutions to help librarians find accessible options
for all of their patrons. It is now high time that all individuals
have access to materials.
                                  THE MODERN LIBRARY EXPERIENCE | 145

   View this video on accessibility issues with a library in
Queens. How could this issue have been prevented? What
possible solutions exist?

                   One or more interactive elements has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view them online here:
        https://csi.pressbooks.pub/lis/?p=44#oembed-1

In relation to accessibility is diversity, equity, and inclusion, or
DEI. This has been a recent development in libraries, sadly.
As discussed in the first section on the history of the library,
the first libraries were institutions funded by, and intended for,
the elite members of society. Many articles and presentations
have been written on the fact that the elitist foundations of the
library still haunt all libraries today. Some institutions make
their patrons pay for library cards. Some only hold books that
are wanted by the real or perceived majority of society. Some
are not accessible to those who do not speak the dominant
language of their community. These slights are both
unintentional and intentional.

   Look at how the Multnomah County Library applied
diversity, inclusion, and equity in multiple ways to encourage
patron success. This includes accomplishing goals that were
not necessarily in the typical scope of library functions.
146 | THE MODERN LIBRARY EXPERIENCE

                   One or more interactive elements has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
        can view them online here: https://csi.pressbooks.pub/
        lis/?p=44#oembed-2

The key message is that we must all acknowledge where we are
and move together toward a more inclusive environment for
everyone. Minority voices should be heard not because they are
minorities and not because they are new or novel, but because
they are voices. They are real. Programs celebrating diversity
do a disservice when they stress that minority voices should be
emphasized for one month or week and then never heard from
again. This others all minorities in the community and makes
them into an enigma when what is really needed is inclusion
and mainstream acceptance.

Building an Accessible, Diverse,
Equitable, and Inclusive Library

It is not enough simply to know that we should be accepting,
accessible, and inclusive. How do we apply these principles?
Middlesex Community College developed a DEI Toolkit that
contains principles on each of these initiatives. It is one of
their strengths, and their resources have been used around the
world. While the focus of these materials was inclusivity in a
                                  THE MODERN LIBRARY EXPERIENCE | 147

school classroom, these tools and ideas can be easily adapted to
a library:

  · Discuss at the beginning of each library program with
      each participating patron that you are trying to develop
      an inclusive culture in the library

  · Discuss seating arrangements with the group if
      applicable in order to accommodate patrons with
      reasonable requests

  · Ensure that you use the most appropriate and up-to-date
      language in your communications and materials

  · Use a variety of examples in your programming and
      allow the entire patron population to consider diverse
      perspectives outside of their own experiences

  · Do not make assumptions about a patron or their
      experiences based on their disability, gender, sexual
      orientation, religion, or cultural or ethnic background

  · Use examples of diversity and allow patrons, including
      children, to question norms

  · Avoid conflating or allowing the conflation of gender
      roles and stereotypes with the lived experiences of being
      male and/or female

  · Avoid conflating and allowing the conflation of race and
      culture, as well as the use of stereotyping.

  · Use symbolism and mythology from a variety of
      religions to allow students to learn and appreciate
      multiple perspectives
148 | THE MODERN LIBRARY EXPERIENCE

  · Avoid using or allowing the use of religious designations
      as synonymous with the actions of individual believers
      (ex. Muslims and terrorists, Christians and Anti-LGBT)

  · Avoid conflating or allowing the conflation of the
      practice of religion and the educational inquiry of
      religion
                                                                  CONCLUSION | 149

PART IV

CONCLUSION
150 | CONCLUSION
            CONCLUSION | 151

18.

CONCLUSION

Now that you have read this entire book, you know about the
importance of each facet of librarianship. You know the basic
skills of library science. It is time that you apply them. As my
dad always said to me when I reported all the things I learned
at the library as a child, "It's not enough to know. It is enough
to do." As we discussed in the first chapters of this textbook,
information only becomes knowledge when you internalize
it and act upon it. Some refer to the proper application of
this knowledge as wisdom. If you want to be truly wise, learn
through experience how each of the parts of the library
support each other. Then, learn how you as a librarian can
support your patrons and expand your service population.
After all, a librarian has no purpose without a group of people
to serve.

   In order to demonstrate an understanding of the
interconnected nature of the departments of the library, you
are going to create your own library. This can be influenced
by libraries at which you currently work, but please do not
simply copy every aspect of the library as it currently exists.
To illustrate the importance of this, I quote another figure
152 | CONCLUSION

from my childhood. One day, my grandmother and I were
making a delicious dinner for my entire extended family. I was
in charge of making the gravy. I thought, "I am going to make
the best gravy my family has ever tasted. This will be utterly
delicious." I followed the recipe to the letter, or so I thought.
My grandmother took one look at my gravy, smiled, and set
it aside. Then she made an entirely new batch. Needless to
say, my heart was crushed. When I asked her why she did this,
she just told me. "The gravy was good. It's good to have good
gravy, but you should really set your sights for the best gravy."
In other words, no matter how good your current library is,
you should always perform your tasks to the highest standard.
When you create your library, create the ideal library. Hold
your library to two standards:

 1. The best practices and environments illustrated in this
      textbook and the resources to which it links, and

 2. What you would most desire of a library that served you
      as a patron.

The rubric for this assignment is as follows:
                                              CONCLUSION | 153

Criteria                             Ratings              Pts

What is the name of your             20 pts 11 pts 0 pts  20 pts
library and where is it located?     Full Partial No
Provide a name for your library      Marks Marks Marks
and its location.

What type of library did you         20 pts 11 pts 0 pts  20 pts
create?                              Full Partial No
Classify (academic, public,          Marks Marks Marks
school, special, etc.) and
provide details about this type
of library.

What is the mission of this          20 pts 11 pts 0 pts  20 pts
library?                             Full Partial No
Provide your mission statement       Marks Marks Marks
for this type of library with
details of how the mission is
being accomplished.

From where does your library         20 pts 11 pts 0 pts  20 pts
receive its funding?                 Full Partial No
Provide full details of all sources  Marks Marks Marks
of funding.

Who are your patrons/users?          30 pts 16 pts 0 pts  30 pts
Fully describe your patrons and      Full Partial No
users consistent with your type      Marks Marks Marks
of library.
154 | CONCLUSION

Criteria                           Ratings              Pts

Describe your collections.         40 pts 21 pts 0 pts  40 pts
Provide a full description of all  Full Partial No
collections found in your          Marks Marks Marks
library. Include how many and
what subjects/materials are
included.

What services does this library    25 pts 13 pts 0 pts  25 pts
offer?                             Full Partial No
Describe in detail the services    Marks Marks Marks
offered by your library.

What are your circulation          25 pts 13 pts 0 pts  25 pts
policies?                          Full Partial No
Include length of checkout,        Marks Marks Marks
fines, limits, and other details
specific to your library.

What hours is the library open?    10 pts 5 pts 0 pts   10 pts
Provide actual hours of library    Full Partial No
with details of special closures.  Marks Marks Marks
                                              CONCLUSION | 155

Criteria                             Ratings              Pts

Describe the physical aspects of     40 pts 20 pts 0 pts  40 pts
the library. Is the physical layout  Full Partial No
efficient and also convenient for    Marks Marks Marks
the users? Does it portray a
friendly atmosphere?
Provide a colorful, detailed
description of the library.
Enable readers to visualize the
library. Provide a description of
the library's atmosphere.

Describe the signage.                10 pts 5 pts 0 pts   10 pts
Provide a full description of        Full Partial No
signage and placement of all         Marks Marks Marks
signs.

Staff                                25 pts 13 pts 0 pts  25 pts
Fully describe number of staff,      Full Partial No
positions, and what each job         Marks Marks Marks
entails.

Classification System                5 pts 3 pts 0 pts    5 pts
Describe the classification          Full Partial No
system used in your library.         Marks Marks Marks
156 | CONCLUSION

Criteria                            Ratings              Pts

Public Access Catalog               5 pts 3 pts 0 pts    5 pts
Fully describe the type of          Full Partial No
catalog system used by your         Marks Marks Marks
library.

Unique features                     30 pts 16 pts 0 pts  30 pts
Colorfully describe all unique      Full Partial No
features that can be found in       Marks Marks Marks
your library.

APA format.                         25 pts 13 pts 0 pts  25 pts
                                    Full Partial No
                                    Marks Marks Marks

Mechanics/Grammar                   20 pts 10 pts 0 pts  20 pts
No grammatical errors. Correct      Full Partial No
punctuation and spelling.           Marks Marks Marks
Language is clear and precise;
sentences display consistently
strong, varied structure.

Organization                        30 pts 16 pts 0 pts  30 pts
Structure of this project is clear  Full Partial No
and easy to follow. Enjoyable to    Marks Marks Marks
read.
Criteria           Ratings  CONCLUSION | 157
Total Points: 400
                                           Pts

Have fun with this assignment! If you have trouble
determining what model you should follow, find another
library's policies or guides and use those. Be sure to cite those
examples in APA format. This assignment can be a paper, but
it does not have to be. You can create a slide presentation, a
video, an audio recording, or any number of items.

   I wish you the best of luck in your journey as a new
librarian.
158 | CONCLUSION
          GLOSSARY | 159

GLOSSARY

AACR2

      An acronym that stands for Anglo-American Cataloging
      Rules, Edition 2. This was the precursor to RDA,
      Resource Description and Access.

Abstract

      A short and concise description of a book, chapter, or
      article. If the item being described is stand-alone, the
      abstract will describe the academic qualifications of the
      work's creator.

Academic Library

      A library that serves the changing educational needs of
      its parent institution. These libraries also serve similar
      functions as school libraries to students of the
      institution, but their offerings for these clients are also
      generally more academically inclined.

Accessibility

      The quality of library resources and programs being
160 | GLOSSARY

      available to people of all abilities and backgrounds. This
      means making reasonable accommodations for people
      with disabilities and neurodivergent individuals.
      Everyone should be treated equitably. Librarians should
      not assume that an apparent disadvantage precludes
      someone from taking advantage of a resource or
      program.

Acoustics

      Properties, qualities, or elements of a space that affect
      how sound is manipulated and transmitted. These
      features may also effect how sound is perceived by
      inhabitants of that space.

Acquisitions

      The process of accepting an item submitted for intake
      to the library. This process is performed selectively. Its
      purpose is to select only those materials that serve the
      needs of the primary service population or demographic.
      Items that do not perform this function will not be
      acquisitioned. They will be recommended to another
      library or returned to the potential donor or vendor.

Aesthetics

      Properties of beauty and artistic taste that make a space
      or an item pleasing.
                                 GLOSSARY | 161

Americans with Disabilities Act

An act that was passed in 1990 requiring
accommodations for increased access and opportunities
for people who have disabilities.

Association

Subjects, groups, ideologies, and other factors that
influence a work or author. The associations of creators
and works should always be considered when considering
acquisitioning or weeding.

Authoritative

This is an appellation designated for those works that
are known to be authentic and accurate because of their
associations or those of their authors. Authoritative
works are often the gold standard, or close to the gold
standard, for research in their respective fields.

Banned Books

These are works that have been challenged in book
repositories of various sorts over the years. These
challenges were successful and the books removed from
circulation for a time.
162 | GLOSSARY

Bibliography

      A list of works that are all unified together in some way.
      They may be on the same subject, or they may be all used
      as references for another work. Or, they may have been
      created by the same author or publisher. The unifying
      factor is usually made plain in the bibliography's title or
      description.

Book List

      A compiled list of books in a particular topic that are
      recommended by a person or group for acquisition or
      reading. Libraries can make this for their patrons or for
      others libraries. When possible, book lists should be
      consulted for the best books in certain subject areas.

Book Review

      An academic review of a book that is under consideration
      for acquisition. Numerous book review sources exist for
      fiction and nonfiction books. These are relatively reliable
      but should not be completely taken at face value.
      Motivation, association, and background of the review
      author or source should always be considered.

Book Vendor

      An intermediary between publishers, clearinghouses, and
                                                                       GLOSSARY | 163

      libraries. Jobbers buy books and sell them to librarians.
      Some vendors, also called jobbers, utilize a subscription
      service and send books to libraries regularly. This
      eliminates some of the need for careful acquisition work.
      Book vendors may be thought of as surrogate acquisition
      librarians.

Call Number

      A number assigned to each item in the library that
      describes the precise physical and relational location of a
      book through association. In a less library-jargon way, it
      describes the location of a book in the order of all of the
      books.

Cataloging

      The process whereby items are put into specific
      categories according to predetermined schemata.
      Librarians participate in two main types of cataloging:
      original cataloging and copy cataloging. The ratio of
      original to copy cataloging is affected by the type of
      library in which one works and the types of items
      submitted for acquisition.

Censorship

      This is the removal of data or information from an item
      or manifestation that is deemed offensive, grossly
164 | GLOSSARY

      inaccurate, or inappropriate for a particular physical
      context or audience. It is often referred to in the same
      breath as "challenges" and "banning books." This is
      another concept that is debated in the context of modern
      ethics. Censorship is performed by people of many
      different backgrounds, social statuses, and political
      ideologies. Censorship of any kind can appear
      problematic or justifiable when viewed in a certain way.
      However, it is essential that a librarian should condemn
      all forms of censorship.

Challenge

      A formal objection to an item in a library's holdings.
      Challenges can originate for a variety of reasons, but they
      should all be submitted the same way. Each library or
      library system will have its own challenge form that must
      be filled out. Challenges are sent to a board of directors or
      a committee assigned by them to review the merits of the
      challenge.

ChatGPT

      An Artificial Intelligence tool created by OpenAI.
      ChatGPT is an advanced language model that uses syntax
      and context to provide responses to user queries and
      prompts.
                    GLOSSARY | 165

Circulating

Circulating materials are available to be check out. They
circulate form patrons to the library to other patrons and
on and on and on, 'til the night is gone.

Circulation

The segment of a library's processes that is involved with
checking out and checking in items as well as public
relations matters, including patron interactions, related
with these processes. They also collect data from these
processes and use it to make recommendations to library
administration regarding holdings, acquisition, and
weeding.

Circulation Policy

The policy that determines how long a patron can have
an item, how long an item can remain in the library
holdings without being checked out, and policies
regarding financial or access restrictions toward
problematic patrons. Fines, fees, and reservation and
holdings policies are also incorporated into this policy.
For this reason, this policy is occasionally called the
"Public Services Policy."
166 | GLOSSARY

Circulation Reference

      Reference materials are those items that cannot be
      checked out and are only available for patron use inside
      the physical confines of the library.

Classification

      The act of sorting items, whether they be books, ebooks,
      audiobooks, audiovisual materials, or other formats, into
      categories based on particular criteria. Librarians do not
      do this. Librarians catalog based on predetermined
      classification categories prescribed by a particular schema,
      such as the Dewey Decimal System and/or the Library of
      Congress Classification System.

Collection Development Policy

      The policies and procedures used by a library to justify
      decisions made regarding the creation and maintenance
      of collections. This policy includes how to acquisition
      items and how to weed them. Some policies also discuss
      procedures for transferring items from one collection to
      another and responding to challenges by patrons.

Collection Shifting

      Moving items from one shelf to another as a collection
                                                                       GLOSSARY | 167

      grows, shrinks, or is moved elsewhere in the library's
      physical space.

Copyright

      This term stands for the rights to a work and its
      associated expressions, manifestations, and derivation,
      which are almost always held by the work's creator.
      Copying a resource is only one action covered, and
      prohibited, by traditional, all-rights-reserved copyright
      licenses. Adaptations and derivations are also prohibited
      without the creator's consent.

Creative Commons

      An initiative to provide alternatives to the previous
      binary of All Rights Reserved Copyright and Public
      Domain copyright-less items. The open licenses
      supported by this initiative allow authors to specify
      requirements for attribution, non-commercial use, and/
      or duplication rights.

Credentials

      These are tangible or verifiable records or facts that prove
      that a creator has sufficient knowledge to create a work on
      a particular subject. Credentials may also testify as to the
      person's abilities.
168 | GLOSSARY

Cuneiform

      The first symbols recorded on a movable record. This
      system of writing was invented by the Sumerians around
      3200 B.C.E. Scribes wrote these symbols into stone walls
      or clay tablets.

Customer Service

      The services and functions rendered to a customer, or a
      patron, while they are in the library and out of it. The
      same level of service should be given to all patrons and
      potential patrons, regardless of religion, ethnicity,
      political ideology, economic situation, or any other factor
      barring hateful and violent beliefs and practices.

Data

      Quantitative and qualitative representations of current
      understandings of reality. These representations can be
      interpreted to produce information that is presented in
      multiple formats. Data are the most fundamental sources
      of scientific knowledge. Most data, in fact, is scientific.
      However, some information is not created through data.

Database

      A collection of datasets or points that can be searched
      to provide the most relevant data. Database searching
                                                                      GLOSSARY | 169

      involves knowledge of Boolean words, keywords, limiters,
      and other aspects of database navigation. Entire courses
      are formed around database management, navigation,
      and utilization. Librarians should know how to
      effectively use database tools in general. Adaptations may
      be required to fit the parameters of specific databases, but
      the general rules regarding tool use are typically the same
      for all databases.

Daylighting

      The illumination of indoor spaces using primarily
      natural light. When this cannot be done, lights in an
      enclosed space should mimic daylight as much as
      possible.

Demographics

      Physical, ethnic, racial, religious, economic, and other
      factors that describe a group of people in a given
      geographic area or who have another common
      denominator. All of these factors and more should be
      considered when making decisions about library policy,
      collections development, deacquisitioning, and other
      functions of the library.

Dewey Decimal Classification System

      A system created by Melvil Dewey in the late nineteenth
170 | GLOSSARY

      century to classify all knowledge into ten broad
      categories. This system has been modified twenty three
      times until the current iteration, Dewey Decimal System
      Edition 23, was created in early 2010s. It is often used on
      its own and in conjunction with the Library of Congress
      Classification System.

Digital Divide

      The gap in knowledge and ability between Digital
      Immigrants and Digital Natives.

Digital Holdings/Electronic Resources

      Digital holdings or "electronic resources" are the digitally-
      accessed items in a library's holdings. Typically the term
      electronic resources only refers to digital items, not items
      that require electronic tools to access the information
      (cassettes, DVDs, etc.). This term is restricted to only
      those things held in the library's holdings itself and does
      not extend to database access or digital libraries that are
      not maintained by the library (subscription libraries,
      external databases, online encyclopedias).

Digital Immigrants

      People who lived before the Digital Age or who have not
      lived in a society that has not had contact with modern
      digital technology.
                     GLOSSARY | 171

Digital Initiatives

Items, programs, services, and presentations developed
by the library that are primarily or completely hosted by
the Internet. Examples include database access, podcasts,
and access to ebooks. Audiobooks and cassettes are not
included in this distinction. The term digital refers to the
internet, not to all electronics.

Digital Natives

Individuals born just before, during, or after the Digital
Age began. These individuals have grown up with digital
technology and have an almost innate sense of how to
manipulate and use it.

Discovery System

An aspect of the modern OPAC, sometimes regarded,
as an external add-on, that allows patrons to search
information sources outside of the library. For example, a
Discovery Service can help patrons find items in databases
or other libraries or repositories.

Ephemera

Items that are not created to last such as long time.
Examples of ephemera include buttons, pamphlets,
brochures, tourist maps, handouts for parties, etc.
172 | GLOSSARY

Ethics

      This is the idea that every individual has a unique set of
      values and ideas that influence and govern their thoughts
      and actions. Some believe that there is an ideal code of
      ethics. Others claim that every person should have their
      own unique ethics and not conform to others' ideas.
      Shared ethics are the cornerstone of successful groups
      and organizations. They are one of the foundations of
      good interpersonal communication and relationships.
      Librarians should act ethically according to the ALA
      Code of Ethics, not according to their own personal
      ethics ideologies.

Fair Use Doctrine

      This is a principle of copyright adherence that came into
      being because of educational need. Educators and
      students can use a certain percentage of copyrighted
      works for educational purposes without consulting the
      copyright holder. This use, however, still has stipulations.
      The materials that incorporate copyrighted materials
      cannot be duplicated or redistributed. Additionally, only
      a portion of a work can be copied. For most books,
      including reference and fiction books, the percentage of a
      work that can be used under the Fair Use Doctrine is 25
      percent. Musical works, including recordings and sheet
      music, can only be copied up to ten percent. Publishers
                                                                       GLOSSARY | 173

      and copyright holders are the ones who determine what
      is and is not fair use, so one should be careful not to
      flagrantly abuse this doctrine.

FRBR

      Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records.
      This is the theoretical framework that governs the
      presence, order, format, and other aspects of metadata
      contained in all records maintained by the library.

Free Access

      This is access that has been provided free of charge by
      a publisher or author. While free access may seem to be
      the same as open access, there are a few key differences.
      Firstly, free access may only be for a limited time.
      Publishers can reinstitute paywalls or other access
      prohibitors to block access. Free access could be provided
      in a proprietary format.

Gutenberg Bible

      One of the first books printed by Johannes Gutenberg
      on a printing press in the 1450s. This was proof that
      information and data was spreadable to people by other
      means than handwriting. The proliferation of this Bible
      was made even more significant by the fact that the type
174 | GLOSSARY

      blocks used to create the Bible were mass-produced. After
      the creation of this Bible, many printed books followed.

ILS

      This acronym stands for Integrated Library System, also
      called a Library Management System. It includes OPAC,
      Discovery Service, holdings and circulation data, and
      patron-facing service software all in one package. Thus,
      all or most aspects of a library's inner workings are
      integrated together.

Information

      Information comes from two sources:
         Interpretations of qualitative and quantitative data

      that has been collected and recorded (scientific
      publications, academic journal articles, corporate and
      other reports)
      Objective and subjective inferences, narratives, and
      representations of ideas created by people who have
      recorded these items in one format or another (religious
      texts, fiction, ethical and moral works, etc.)

Information Literacy

      The ability of an individual to find, view, interpret, and
      accurately portray information from various sources.
      One of the core jobs of librarians is to help their patrons
                                                                       GLOSSARY | 175

      develop these skills. Information literacy takes similar but
      different form at each type of library.

Intellectual Freedom

      The freedom of an individual to think, believe, act, and
      spread their beliefs and thoughts as they desire. The only
      exception to this rule is ideas that deliberately cause harm
      to others. No one has a right to impose their ideas,
      ideologies, or beliefs on someone else. Parents have a right
      to introduce their children to their own worldviews and
      beliefs first, but they should also teach their children that
      others can have different values and belief systems.
      Religious groups, political institutions, and corporations
      should never exert force or undue influence on a person
      to believe a certain way. At the same time, individuals
      who believe a certain way should not be told that they
      have been manipulated or deceived by others. They have
      a right to believe and express those beliefs.

Intellectual Property

      Intellectual property is a broad term to cover the ideas,
      works, expressions, manifestations, and items that are the
      product of a creator or group of creators. If one person
      creates a work and claims it as their intellectual property,
      others cannot reuse that work without the creator's
      permission. This is the basis for all copyright claims. The
176 | GLOSSARY

      concept of intellectual property has been a subject of
      debate for decades. There are various innovative ways to
      deal with the concept of intellectual property in the fields
      of education and library science, including the concepts
      of open source creations and open access data and
      information.

Interactivity

      The quality of a program that encourages patron
      participation instead of passive attendance. The most
      engaging and educational programs are interactive.
      Librarians should make every effort to make items,
      lessons, programs, and other initiatives as interactive as
      possible, even if they are centered on a topic that seems
      droll or uninteresting.

InterLibrary Loan

      A service provided by the combination of WorldCat and
      Connexion. If an item is not available at one library, they
      can request that a copy of the same manifestation be sent
      from another library. Preferably, requests are made to the
      nearest geographic library. However, requests can be
      made from far away if necessary. Both physical items and
      surrogate digitizations of items can be exchanged
      through InterLibrary Loan. Other consortia provide
      interlibrary loan options, but their reach is not as broad.
                                                                       GLOSSARY | 177

      Public school library systems and country and regional
      public library networks often have a specialized form of
      interlibrary loan.

ISBN

      International Standard Book Number. This number is
      not the same as the call number and was created for a
      different purpose: commercial sales and proliferation
      data tracking. Publishers give each edition of a book a
      number. All items in a particular manifestation are given
      the same ISBN, and sometimes multiple manifestations
      are given the same ISBN.

ISSN

      International Standard Serial Number. This number is
      derived from the practice of using ISBNs for books. Every
      serial has its own ISSN, partly to distinguish from serials
      that have the same name or a similar name. Changing the
      name of a serial in a significant way will result in another
      ISSN being created, but there can be metadata notes to
      connect the two names.

Knowledge

      Information that has been internalized by a user of an
      item. This information can be referred to by that person
      in future times of need. Knowledge can change or even be
178 | GLOSSARY

      completely removed as a person learns new information
      and turns it into knowledge. Knowledge is fluid.

Lexicon

      This word has two meanings:
         A dictionary

      A collection of vocabulary words and phrases that are
      important to a specific group of people. Words in this
      collection are often referred to colloquially as "jargon" or
      "lingo."

         The glossary of this book follows the second
      definition. Many of these words have definitions that are
      unique to the world of librarianship (for example,
      MARC). Other definitions are similar to external
      definitions (for example, customer service).

Library of Congress Classification System

      A system created by the Library of Congress to classify
      all information resources within its holdings. All items
      are classified in a broad category under each letter of the
      alphabet. Further letters and numbers create increasingly
      specific categories until the most appropriate category for
      each item is found. Unlike the Dewey Decimal System,
      which categorizes items by subject, the LCC classifies
      items by the discipline in which they can be used.
                   GLOSSARY | 179

Makerspace

Areas of a library that are designated as spaces for patrons
to make something and explore their creative impulses.
Examples of common makerspaces include Computer
Labs, 3-D Printing Machines, Arts and Crafts areas, and
Virtual Reality programming programs.

MARC Record

MAchine-Readable Catalog Record. This is the standard
format for all item descriptions in a library's holdings.
the vast majority of libraries use this system. Even those
libraries that do not use MARC have adapted their
systems from this type of record.

Metadata

A specific subset of data that describes and gives
information about the other data in a record. One may
think of it like a MARC record about the MARC record.
"Meta" refers to something that is self-referential. A data
record often contains its own metadata within itself.

Mission Statement

A statement created by an organization or group that
outlines its broad purpose. All activities and initiatives
created, supported, and conducted by this organization
180 | GLOSSARY

      should connect in at least one way with their mission
      statement. This can be revised if necessary, and should be
      revised periodically.

OCLC

      The organization that maintains many of the gold-
      standard online services used by librarians. They are
      based in Ohio and have plenteous sources on the Dewey
      Decimal System and MARC Records. They also
      maintain the WorldCat library consortium.

OPAC

      Online Public Access Catalog. This is what most people
      think of when they refer to a catalog. It has been the
      standard catalog format since the late twentieth century.
      It has been modified from its original form with links
      to outside sources of information, integration with other
      services, and different formats. One adaptation of the
      OPAC is called the Discovery Service. These two services
      are often bundled together with other services to form an
      ILS.

Open Access

      The state of an item that can be freely accessed, reused,
      and redistributed but not repurposed into another
      format or published by a different author. These items
                                                                       GLOSSARY | 181

      can be referenced to but not incorporated into an open
      educational material. The only exception to these
      restriction is if the publisher allows reproduction and
      repurposing. Open access materials are complementary
      to open educational resources and public domain
      materials, but they are under more restrictions than those
      items.

Open Educational Resources

      The acronym for this term is OER. These are educational
      materials that are freely available and adaptable and have
      been given an open license. This means that the creator
      has released most or all of the rights to a resource. The
      "Five Rs of OER," as promulgated by instructional
      designer David Wiley, are Revise, Retain, Remix,
      Redistribute, and Reuse.

Optic fiber

      A particular kind of wiring through which data can be
      transmitted to a computer as a stream of light. This
      enables library users and staff to utilize fast Internet
      connections for access to data and information.

Organization

      Contextualizing groups of things or ideas in a way that
      will make sense to those who are looking for particular
182 | GLOSSARY

      items in that group. The most effective organization
      process involves classification of items into groups based
      on predetermined schemata.

Outreach

      This encompasses all activities performed in the library
      that are intended to increase attendance at library
      functions and expand circulation of library materials. In
      fact, library functions are themselves part of the outreach
      spectrum. There is an outreach aspect to almost
      everything librarians do.

Papyrus

      This is the first material on which words or ideas were
      written. It was invented around the 2900 BCE in Egypt.
      From there, its use spread to Ancient Greece and other
      kingdoms. It was the dominant medium for writing until
      paper was invented in China around three and a half
      thousand years later.

Patron Services

      All services that face people who come into the library
      for any purpose. All individuals are patrons, regardless of
      whether or not they check out an item. Patron services
      include circulation, programming, and outreach
      functions.
                         GLOSSARY | 183

Patron-Centered Service

The facet of library services that ensures they are
performed and prioritized with patron expectations and
needs in mind. The mission statement and policies of
the library ideally codify the concept of patron-centered
service.

Peer Review

The process in which several experts in a particular field
review a work by one of their colleagues to ensure that
its facts are legitimate and its interpretation seems
acceptable. This is a requirement in all reputable journals
for articles submitted for publication. Books, especially
academic ones, may also be peer reviewed.

Preservation

The act of taking deliberate steps to preserve an item.
In the context of librarianship, preservation of an object
is done to preserve, recover, restore, or perpetuate the
information or data contained in the object. Preservation
is not done for the sake of the item itself. If an item is
fragile, or if the library has means, digital preservation
should always be considered in one form or another. Even
non-fragile items can be preserved if time, space, and
other factors permit.
184 | GLOSSARY

Privacy

      The right of all individuals to have their private
      information and data kept secure from external viewing
      and tampering. Initially, this was perceived to be
      universal and sacrosanct. Gradually, as people have
      become more open about their lives through social
      media, popularity, and public participation in various
      ways, the concept of privacy has changed and can be fluid
      or completely ignored. A large part of ethics deals with
      privacy and the use of private information.

Public Domain

      The status of an object that has no copyright restrictions
      whatsoever. Each country has its own laws and policies
      regarding which works are considered to be in the public
      domain. There are two ways that an item can be in the
      public domain: time passage and creator identification
      of an item as belonging to the public domain. This is
      essentially the same as a Creative Commons 0 License.

Public Library

      A library that serves all residents and/or citizens of a
      particular area at every stage of their life. The only
      requirement is that one must live in a particular area.
      Sometimes, even this requirement is waived.
                   GLOSSARY | 185

RDA

     This acronym stands for Resource Description and
     Access. The successor to ACCR2, this schema provides
     the correct and precise methods and standardized entries
     for several MARC fields, including fields 336, 337, and
     338.

Reader's Advisory

     A term for when a librarian takes extra time and resources
     to find a book for a particular patron. This may include
     taking advantage of other staff members or even an inter-
     institutional network of librarians. Facebook librarian
     groups such as the Librarian Think Tank are excellent
     places to conduct Reader's Advisory.

Record

     This is the formatted collection of metadata regarding
     an item. Occasionally, especially in terms of digital
     collections or archives, the record of an item is called a
     "surrogate" or "surrogate record."

Reference

     The action of retrieving and/or providing access to
     information for a patron. This is sometimes
     stereotypically considered the only function of a
186 | GLOSSARY

      librarian. Although we are good at it, it is only part of
      what we do. Still, retrieval of relevant information is a
      vital part of a librarian's responsibilities. Reference is the
      first part of a Reference Interview, the end goal of which
      is to enable a patron to retrieve relevant information for
      themselves in the future.

Reference Interview

      An interaction between a librarian and a patron in which
      the librarian attempts to help the patron find new
      information. There are two goals of a reference interview:

         To give a patron an immediate source of information
      or data
      To help a patron develop research skills to find further
      information on their own

Reserve

      This designation is used for books that are withheld from
      public browsing for one reason or another. These books
      may be freely accessed but can only be retrieved by a
      librarian and given to the patron. These books are under
      the same use and travel restrictions as reference materials.

Resilient flooring

      Non-textile floor that provides underfoot comfort and
      bounces back from repeated traffic.
                GLOSSARY | 187

RFID Tags

Radio Frequency Identification Tags. These tags are
often placed into every item a library receives. Each item
has a unique RFID, even if it is a duplicate copy. RFID
tags help libraries track circulation data and the presence
or absence of items that should have been checked in.

Schema

A theoretical system that influences how one thinks
about a certain topic. Typically this involves some sort
of ideological hierarchy. Included in this hierarchy are
ideal forms of concepts or things. For example, every
individual has a basic, ideal version in their head of what
a restaurant should look like and how the different
functions and individuals should interact with each
other. In librarianship, FRBR and RDA affect how
cataloging is performed.

School Library

A library whose primary purpose is to help students learn
about topics. Depending on the emphases of the school,
the range of these topics may be broad or narrow.

Serial

A publication that is released, or published, at regular or
188 | GLOSSARY

      intermittent intervals rather than all at once. Examples
      of serials include newspapers, magazines, newsletters,
      academic journals, and booklists. Serials are also
      occasionally called periodicals, although this term
      typically only refers to newspapers and magazines.

Shelflist

      Originally: A list of all books held within a library,
      arranged by what order they go on the shelf. Originally
      this existed as a physical copy in the library, and then it
      transitioned to a digital list. Today, the shelflist is mostly
      a theoretical list that is not actually maintained.

         Modern: a list of catalog records arranged by their
      order in the library's shelves. This is mostly used when
      looking for works that are related to each other. For
      example, if one would want to find analyses of Williams
      Shakespeare's Macbeth, one could look in a shelflist of
      records around a copy of that work. Analyses are typically
      cataloged nearby to the work they examine.

Signage

      Graphic designs and other visual aids used to given
      directions or instructions. Occasionally, these images will
      accompany text.
                      GLOSSARY | 189

Special Library

A library that only or mostly provides materials dealing
with a specialized subject or range of subjects. In modern
times, a special library may hold materials in a wide range
of subjects but may be specialized in its holdings format
or method of service. A special library exists purely to
facilitate research or activities of a clientele that is
homogenous in one way or another.

Subscription Library

A library whose access extends only to those who pay a
subscription fee. Under certain circumstances, members
can extend their membership to other interested parties
for a limited time or to a limited scope of materials. This
type of library is similar to a database whose data can only
be accessed by paying individuals or institutions.

Technical Services

The behind-the-scenes processes that are involved in
keeping a library operational. The largest aspect of
technical services is cataloging, but acquisitions and
collections development are also major functions under
the umbrella of Technical Services.
190 | GLOSSARY

URI

      Uniform Resource Identifier. In the context of digital
      items, a URI is a string of characters that belongs to an
      item and serves as its digital, machine-readable identifier.
      URIs are increasingly being used for real-world objects
      and items as well, in addition to works, expressions, and
      manifestations. URIs that refer to real-world objects are
      called Internationalized Resource Identifiers (IRIs).
      Every URI is an IRI. Also, every URL is a URI. A URL,
      as you know, points to a specific web page or website with
      increasing specificity as you go through the site hierarchy.
      A URI cannot be used for more than one item, and
      hierarchies of URIs can be used to demonstrate
      relationships in the FRBR schema and other schemata.

Virtual Reference

      A reference experience that is facilitated via the internet,
      cell phone communication, or any other method of
      interaction other than face-to-face or regular mail
      correspondence. This is a hallmark of the integration of
      libraries into the modern world.

Weeding

      The process of selecting items and works that should be
      removed from a library's collections or holdings. This is as
      much a part of collections development as acquisitions.
                   GLOSSARY | 191

Wide Area Network

A network that has been deliberately configured to
facilitate internet access over a large geographic area.

WorldCat

The site maintained by OCLC that provides libraries and
their patrons with relevant information about works and
items, including whereabout at near libraries. This is
connected to the Connexion service which is also
provided by OCLC. WorldCat is used by OCLC to
maintain a massive consortium that stretches across state
and national boundaries.
