Methods of Teaching Early
            Literacy

   Nandita Gurjar; Sohyun Meacham; and Constance Beecher

                            Iowa State University Digital Press
                                              Ames, Iowa
Methods of Teaching Early Literacy by Nandita Gurjar; Sohyun Meacham; and Constance Beecher is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

You are free to copy, share, adapt, remix, transform, and build upon the material, so long as you follow the terms of the license.

This is a publication of the
Iowa State University Digital Press
701 Morrill Rd, Ames, IA 50011
https://www.iastatedigitalpress.com
digipress@iastate.edu

This publication was funded by
The Iowa Regents OER Grant Program
A cross-institutional grant supported by
the Governor's Emergency Education Relief (GEER) fund.
Contents

Acknowledgments                                                               iv

About the Book                                                                v

Introduction                                                                  1

Chapter 1. What is Literacy? Multiple Perspectives on Literacy                2

Constance Beecher

Chapter 2. Foundations of Early Literacy                                      22

Sohyun Meacham

Chapter 3. Phonological Awareness                                             36

Nandita Gurjar

Chapter 4. Phonics: Breaking the Code to Words                                53

Constance Beecher and Emily Hayden

Chapter 5. Supporting Literacy Learning in the Early Childhood Classroom      67

Sohyun Meacham

Chapter 6. Vocabulary                                                         97

Constance Beecher

Chapter 7. Fluency and Comprehension                                          112

Nandita Gurjar

Chapter 8. Writing                                                            139

Nandita Gurjar and Sohyun Meacham

Chapter 9. Literacy Instruction for Diverse Learners                          175

Constance Beecher; Sohyun Meacham; and Nandita Gurjar

Chapter 10. Reading and Writing Across Content Areas - Disciplinary Literacy  197

Emily Hayden and Constance Beecher

Review Statement                                                              207

About the Authors                                                             208
IV | ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Acknowledgments

I would like to acknowledge and thank the Regents OER Grant team: Abbey K. Elder, Iowa
State University; Anne Marie Gruber, University of Northern Iowa, and Mahrya Burnett, the
University of Iowa, who made this work possible through their invaluable support and
assistance.
To Nandita, thank you for your tireless work bringing this book to fruition, contributing your
time and experience to ensure that everything could come together cohesively.
Thank you to Sohyun Meacham and Constance Beecher, for your contributions. Your
collaboration, creativity, and insights enriched our interactive content and produced something
we could be proud of!
Finally, thanks are due to Dr. Emily Hayden for her contributions to chapters 4 and 10. Your
time and support were valuable additions to the production of this volume.
                ABOUT THE BOOK | V

About the Book

Methods of Teaching Early Literacy is an open educational resource (OER), which means it is free
to access online and that it is available under an open license which allows you to adapt the
material for your needs, so long as you appropriately credit the authors and this original work.
We hope that having access to this book will support the development and lifelong learning of
teachers across Iowa and the world.

The book is based on longstanding and current research in literacy instruction, theories, and
methods. It focuses on teaching early literacy in PreK-3 grades by applying an integrated
multidisciplinary, 21st-century literacy approach to literacy instruction in the early grades
while centering diversity and equity. Unlike static textbooks, this text provides a multi-modal,
accessible way to engage with the content and interactive elements to deconstruct the meaning
of the text.

In addition to the main text, educator resources and content to support preservice teachers are
integrated throughout.

The development of this book was supported by the Regents Open Educational Resources Grant
Program, managed jointly by Iowa State University, the University of Iowa, and the University
of Northern Iowa. Funding for this grant program is provided by CARES Act Governor's
Emergency Education Relief (GEER) Fund.
1 | INTRODUCTION

Introduction

We made this book because we wanted preservice teachers to have free access to information
about early literacy development and instructional methods. When students have to purchase
books, they often return them and lose valuable reference information. With this open access
resource, preservice teachers will be able to turn to the information in this book whenever they
need to. Another advantage of open access is the ability to update and edit the book easily.

Our approach

Our approach to this book was as an introduction to the topic of early literacy development.
This book is targeting pre-service teachers who are taking their first literacy methods courses.
Therefore the scope is a wide view of literacy topics instead of a deep dive into literacy
development. We anticipate pre-service teachers will continue their coursework in literacy,
deepening their conceptual knowledge. At the same time, we included topics that are not often
included in early literacy texts such as technology, family literacy, supporting diverse students
and multicultural literacy.

The content

The book begins by exploring multiple definitions of literacy with varying perspectives. Literacy
is explored through the critical literacies' framework as a human right and a meaning-making
experience involving digital tools and technologies through the lens of new literacies. The
second chapter explores the foundations of literacy instruction. In subsequent chapters, each
literacy component is further developed and discussed with concepts, strategies, and reflective
practice. One chapter focuses on trauma-informed instruction, dyslexia, ELL, culturally relevant
pedagogy, and multicultural literature. Lastly, we introduce disciplinary literacy for young
readers. While we recognize that these are not the only topics that could be introduced in an
early literacy textbook, we chose to focus on the topics we felt were essential for pre-service
teachers to begin their study of early literacy.
                                                    CHAPTER 1. WHAT IS LITERACY? MULTIPLE PERSPECTIVES ON LITERACY | 2

Chapter 1. What is Literacy? Multiple
Perspectives on Literacy

   Constance Beecher

      "Once you learn to read, you will be forever free." - Frederick Douglass

                  One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online
                  here: https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=195#oembed-1

                     Download Tar Beach - Faith Ringgold Video Transcript [DOC]

      Keywords: literacy, digital literacy, critical literacy, community-based literacies

Definitions of literacy from multiple perspectives

Literacy is the cornerstone of education by any definition. Literacy refers to the ability of
people to read and write (UNESCO, 2017). Reading and writing in turn are about encoding
and decoding information between written symbols and sound (Resnick, 1983; Tyner, 1998).
More specifically, literacy is the ability to understand the relationship between sounds and
written words such that one may read, say, and understand them (UNESCO, 2004; Vlieghe, 2015).
About 67 percent of children nationwide, and more than 80 percent of those from families with
low incomes, are not proficient readers by the end of third grade (The Nation Assessment for
Educational Progress; NAEP 2022). Children who are not reading on grade level by third grade
are 4 times more likely to drop out of school than their peers who are reading on grade level.
A large body of research clearly demonstrates that Americans with fewer years of education
have poorer health and shorter lives. In fact, since the 1990s, life expectancy has fallen for
people without a high school education. Completing more years of education creates better
3 | CHAPTER 1. WHAT IS LITERACY? MULTIPLE PERSPECTIVES ON LITERACY

access to health insurance, medical care, and the resources for living a healthier life (Saha,
2006). Americans with less education face higher rates of illness, higher rates of disability, and
shorter life expectancies. In the U.S., 25-year-olds without a high school diploma can expect
to die 9 years sooner than college graduates. For example, by 2011, the prevalence of diabetes
had reached 15% for adults without a high -school education, compared with 7% for college
graduates (Zimmerman et al., 2018).

Thus, literacy is a goal of utmost importance to society. But what does it mean to be literate, or
to be able to read? What counts as literacy?

Learning Objectives                     Here are some definitions to consider:

      · Describe two or more            "Literacy is the ability to identify, understand,
          definitions of literacy and   interpret, create, communicate, and compute, using
          the differences between       printed and written materials associated with varying
          them.                         contexts. Literacy involves a continuum of learning in
                                        enabling individuals to achieve their goals, to develop
      · Define digital and critical     their knowledge and potential, and to participate fully
          literacy.                     in their community and wider society." - United
                                        Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural
      · Distinguish between digital     Organization (UNESCO)
          literacy, critical literacy,
          and community-based           "The ability to understand, use, and respond
          literacies.                   appropriately to written texts." - National Center for
                                        Education Statistics (NCES), citing the Program for
      · Explain multiple                the International Assessment of Adult Competencies
          perspectives on literacy.     (PIAAC)

                                               "An individual's ability to read, write, and speak in
                                               English, compute, and solve problems, at levels of
proficiency necessary to function on the job, in the family of the individual, and in society."
- Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA), Section 203

"The ability to identify, understand, interpret, create, communicate, and compute, using
printed and written materials associated with varying contexts. Literacy involves a
continuum of learning in enabling individuals to achieve their goals, to develop their
knowledge and potential, and to participate fully in their community and wider society."
                                                    CHAPTER 1. WHAT IS LITERACY? MULTIPLE PERSPECTIVES ON LITERACY | 4

       - Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development's (OECD) Program for the
       International Assessment of Adult Competencies (PIAAC), as cited by the American
       Library Association's Committee on Literacy

       "Using printed and written information to function in society, to achieve one's goals,
       and to develop one's knowledge and potential." - Kutner, Greenberg, Jin, Boyle, Hsu, &
       Dunleavy (2007). Literacy in Everyday Life: Results from the 2003 National Assessment of
       Adult Literacy (NCES 2007-480)

  Reflection Questions

     Which one of these above definitions resonates with you? Why?

New literacy practices as meaning-making practices

In the 21st century, literacy increasingly includes understanding the roles of digital media and
technology in literacy. In 1996, the New London Group coined the term "multiliteracies" or
"new literacies" to describe a modern view of literacy that reflected multiple communication
forms and contexts of cultural and linguistic diversity within a globalized society. They defined
multiliteracies as a combination of multiple ways of communicating and making meaning,
including such modes as visual, audio, spatial, behavioral, and gestural (New London Group,
1996). Most of the text's students come across today are digital (like this textbook!). Instead of
books and magazines, students are reading blogs and text messages.

For a short video on the importance of digital literacy, watch The New Media Literacies.

The National Council for Teachers of English (NCTE, 2019) makes it clear that our definitions
of literacy must continue to evolve and grow (NCTE definition of digital literacy).

         "Literacy has always been a collection of communicative and sociocultural practices
         shared among communities. As society and technology change, so does literacy. The
         world demands that a literate person possess and intentionally apply a wide range of
         skills, competencies, and dispositions. These literacies are interconnected, dynamic,
         and malleable. As in the past, they are inextricably linked with histories, narratives,
5 | CHAPTER 1. WHAT IS LITERACY? MULTIPLE PERSPECTIVES ON LITERACY

         life possibilities, and social trajectories of all individuals and groups. Active, successful
         participants in a global society must be able to:

          participate effectively and critically in a networked world.
          explore and engage critically and thoughtfully across a wide variety of inclusive texts

            and tools/modalities.
          consume, curate, and create actively across contexts.
          advocate for equitable access to and accessibility of texts, tools, and information.
          build and sustain intentional global and cross-cultural connections and relationships

            with others to pose and solve problems collaboratively and strengthen independent
            thought.
          promote culturally sustaining communication and recognize the bias and privilege
            present in the interactions.
          examine the rights, responsibilities, and ethical implications of the use and creation
            of information.
          determine how and to what extent texts and tools amplify one's own and others'
            narratives as well as counterproductive narratives.
          recognize and honor the multilingual literacy identities and culture experiences
            individuals bring to learning environments, and provide opportunities to promote,
            amplify, and encourage these variations of language (e.g., dialect, jargon, and
            register)."

      Socio-cultural context refers to the idea that language does not exist in isolation and is closely
      linked to the culture and society in which it is used and taught. Activities that can raise
      awareness of socio-cultural context include using stories from different countries, analyzing
      newspaper headlines, and looking at slang and idiomatic language.
                     CHAPTER 1. WHAT IS LITERACY? MULTIPLE PERSPECTIVES ON LITERACY | 6

Learning Activities

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=195#h5p-28

In other words, literacy is not just the ability to read and write. It is also being able to effectively
use digital technology to find and analyze information. Students who are digitally literate know
how to do research, find reliable sources, and make judgments about what they read online and
in print. Next, we will learn more about digital literacy.

  Important terms

         · Malleable: can be changed.
         · Culturally sustaining: the pedagogical preservation of the cultural and linguistic

             competence of young people pertaining to their communities of origin while
             simultaneously affording dominant-culture competence.
         · Bias: a tendency to believe that some people, ideas, etc., are better than others, usually
             resulting in unfair treatment.
         · Privilege: a right or benefit that is given to some people and not to others.
         · Unproductive narrative: negative commonly held beliefs such as "all students from low-
             income backgrounds will struggle in school." (Narratives are phrases or ideas that are
             repeated over and over and become "shared narratives." You can spot them in common
             expressions and stories that almost everyone knows and holds as ingrained values or
             beliefs.)
7 | CHAPTER 1. WHAT IS LITERACY? MULTIPLE PERSPECTIVES ON LITERACY

Literacy in the digital age

The Iowa Core recognizes that today, literacy includes technology. The goal for students who
graduate from the public education system in Iowa is:

    "Each Iowa student will be empowered with the technological knowledge and skills to learn
    effectively and live productively. This vision, developed by the Iowa Core 21st Century Skills
    Committee, reflects the fact that Iowans in the 21st century live in a global environment
    marked by a high use of technology, giving citizens and workers the ability to collaborate
    and make individual contributions as never before. Iowa's students live in a media-suffused
    environment, marked by access to an abundance of information and rapidly changing
    technological tools useful for critical thinking and problem-solving processes. Therefore,
    technological literacy supports preparation of students as global citizens capable of self-
    directed learning in preparation for an ever-changing world" (Iowa Core Standards 21st
    Century Skills, n.d.).

NOTE: The essential concepts and skills of technology literacy are taken from the International
Society for Technology in Education's National Educational Technology Standards for Students:
Grades K-2 | Technology Literacy Standards

       The following section is an adaptation of Digital Literacies and the Skills of the Digital Age by
                                      Cathy L. Green, used under a CC BY 4.0. license.

Literacy in any context is defined as the ability " to access, manage, integrate, evaluate, and
create information in order to function in a knowledge society" (ICT Literacy Panel, 2002). "
When we teach only for facts (specifics)... rather than for how to go beyond facts, we teach
students how to get out of date " (Sternberg, 2008). This statement is particularly significant
when applied to technology literacy. The Iowa essential concepts for technology literacy reflect
broad, universal processes and skills.

Unlike the previous generations, learning in the digital age is marked using rapidly evolving
technology, a deluge of information, and a highly networked global community (Dede, 2010).
In such a dynamic environment, learners need skills beyond the basic cognitive ability to
consume and process language. To understand the characteristics of the digital age, and what
this means for how people learn in this new and changing landscape, one may turn to the
                                                    CHAPTER 1. WHAT IS LITERACY? MULTIPLE PERSPECTIVES ON LITERACY | 8

evolving discussion of literacy or, as one might say now, of digital literacy. The history of
literacy contextualizes digital literacy and illustrates changes in literacy over time. By looking
at literacy as an evolving historical phenomenon, we can glean the fundamental characteristics
of the digital age. These characteristics in turn illuminate the skills needed to take advantage
of digital environments. The following discussion is an overview of digital literacy, its essential
components, and why it is important for learning in the digital age.

Literacy is often considered a skill or competency. Children and adults alike can spend years
developing the appropriate skills for encoding and decoding information. Over the course of
thousands of years, literacy has become much more common and widespread, with a global
literacy rate ranging from 81% to 90% depending on age and gender (UNESCO, 2016). From a
time when literacy was the domain of an elite few, it has grown to include huge swaths of the
global population. There are several reasons for this, not the least of which are some of the
advantages the written word can provide. Kaestle (1985) tells us that "literacy makes it possible
to preserve information as a snapshot in time, allows for recording, tracking and remembering
information, and sharing information more easily across distances among others" (p. 16). In
short, literacy led "to the replacement of myth by history and the replacement of magic by
skepticism and science."

If literacy involves the skills of reading and writing, digital literacy requires the ability to extend
those skills to effectively take advantage of the digital world (American Library Association
[ALA], 2013). More general definitions express digital literacy as the ability to read and
understand information from digital sources as well as to create information in various digital
formats (Bawden, 2008; Gilster, 1997; Tyner, 1998; UNESCO, 2004). Developing digital skills
allows digital learners to manage a vast array of rapidly changing information and is key
to both learning and working in the evolving digital landscape (Dede, 2010; Koltay, 2011;
Mohammadyari & Singh, 2015). As such, it is important for people to develop certain
competencies specifically for handling digital content.

ALA Digital Literacy Framework

To fully understand the many digital literacies, we will look at the American Library Association
(ALA) framework. The ALA framework is laid out in terms of basic functions with enough
specificity to make it easy to understand and remember but broad enough to cover a wide range
of skills. The ALA framework includes the following areas:
9 | CHAPTER 1. WHAT IS LITERACY? MULTIPLE PERSPECTIVES ON LITERACY

  · finding,
  · understanding,
  · evaluating,
  · creating, and
  · communicating (American Library Association, 2013).

Finding

Finding information in a digital environment represents a significant departure from the way
human beings have searched for information for centuries. The learner must abandon older
linear or sequential approaches to finding information such as reading a book, using a card
catalog, index, or table of contents, and instead use more horizontal approaches like natural
language searches, hypermedia text, keywords, search engines, online databases and so on
(Dede, 2010; Eshet, 2002). The shift involves developing the ability to create meaningful search
limits (SCONUL, 2016). Previously, finding the information would have meant simply looking
up page numbers based on an index or sorting through a card catalog. Although finding
information may depend to some degree on the search tool being used (library, internet search
engine, online database, etc.) the search results also depend on how well a person is able to
generate appropriate keywords and construct useful Boolean searches. Failure in these two
areas could easily return too many results to be helpful, vague, or generic results, or potentially
no useful results at all (Hangen, 2015).

Part of the challenge of finding information is the ability to manage the results. Because there
is so much data, changing so quickly, in so many different formats, it can be challenging
to organize and store them in such a way as to be useful. SCONUL (2016) talks about this
as the ability to organize, store, manage, and cite digital resources, while the Educational
Testing Service also specifically mentions the skills of accessing and managing information.
Some ways to accomplish these tasks is using social bookmarking tools such as Diigo, clipping
and organizing software such as Evernote and OneNote, and bibliographic software. Many
sites, such as YouTube, allow individuals with an account to bookmark videos, as well as
create channels or collections of videos for specific topics or uses. Other websites have similar
features.

Understanding

Understanding in the context of digital literacy perhaps most closely resembles traditional
                                                   CHAPTER 1. WHAT IS LITERACY? MULTIPLE PERSPECTIVES ON LITERACY | 10

literacy because it is the ability to read and interpret text (Jones-Kavalier & Flannigan, 2006).
In the digital age, however, the ability to read and understand extends much further than text
alone. For example, searches may return results with any combination of text, video, sound, and
audio, as well as still and moving pictures. As the internet has evolved, a whole host of visual
languages have also evolved, such as moving images, emoticons, icons, data visualizations,
videos, and combinations of all the above. Lankshear & Knoble (2008) refer to these modes of
communication as "post typographic textual practice." Understanding the variety of modes of
digital material may also be referred to as multimedia literacy (Jones-Kavalier & Flannigan,
2006), visual literacy (Tyner, 1998), or digital literacy (Buckingham, 2006).

Evaluating

Evaluating digital media requires competencies ranging from assessing the importance of a
piece of information to determining its accuracy and source. Evaluating information is not new
to the digital age, but the nature of digital information can make it more difficult to understand
who the source of information is and whether it can be trusted (Jenkins, 2018). When there
are abundant and rapidly changing data across heavily populated networks, anyone with access
can generate information online. This results in the learner needing to make decisions about
its authenticity, trustworthiness, relevance, and significance. Learning evaluative digital skills
means learning to ask questions about who is writing the information, why they are writing
it, and who the intended audience is (Buckingham, 2006). Developing critical thinking skills
is part of the literacy of evaluating and assessing the suitability for use of a specific piece of
information (SCONUL, 2016).

Creating

Creating in the digital world makes the production of knowledge and ideas in digital formats
explicit. While writing is a critical component of traditional literacy, it is not the only creative
tool in the digital toolbox. Other tools are available and include creative activities such as
podcasting, making audio-visual presentations, building data visualizations, 3D printing, and
writing blogs. Tools that haven't been thought of before are constantly appearing. In short, a
digitally literate individual will want to be able to use all formats in which digital information
may be conveyed in the creation of a product. A key component of creating with digital tools
is understanding what constitutes fair use and what is considered plagiarism. While this is not
11 | CHAPTER 1. WHAT IS LITERACY? MULTIPLE PERSPECTIVES ON LITERACY

new to the digital age, it may be more challenging these days to find the line between copying
and extending someone else's work.

In part, the reason for the increased difficulty in discerning between plagiarism and new work
is the "cut and paste culture" of the Internet, referred to as "reproduction literacy" (Eshet 2002,
p.4), or appropriation in Jenkins' New Media Literacies (Jenkins, 2018). The question is, what kind
and how much change is required to avoid the accusation of plagiarism? This skill requires
the ability to think critically, evaluate a work, and make appropriate decisions. There are tools
and information to help understand and find those answers, such as the Creative Commons.
Learning about such resources and how to use them is part of digital literacy.

Communicating

Communicating is the final category of digital skills in the ALA digital framework. The capacity
to connect with individuals all over the world creates unique opportunities for learning and
sharing information, for which developing digital communication skills is vital. Some of the
skills required for communicating in the digital environment include digital citizenship,
collaboration, and cultural awareness. This is not to say that one does not need to develop
communication skills outside of the digital environment, but that the skills required for digital
communication go beyond what is required in a non-digital environment. Most of us are adept
at personal, face- to-face communication, but digital communication needs the ability to engage
in asynchronous environments such as email, online forums, blogs, social media, and learning
platforms where what is written may not be deleted and may be misinterpreted. Add that to an
environment where people number in the millions and the opportunities for misunderstanding
and cultural miscues are likely.

The communication category of digital literacies covers an extensive array of skills above and
beyond what one might need for face-to-face interactions. It is comprised of competencies
around ethical and moral behavior, responsible communication for engagement in social and
civic activities (Adam Becker et al., 2017), an awareness of audience, and an ability to evaluate
the potential impact of one's online actions. It also includes skills for handling privacy and
security in online environments. These activities fall into two main categories: digital
citizenship and collaboration.

Digital citizenship refers to one's ability to interact effectively in the digital world. Part of this
skill is good manners, often referred to as "netiquette." There is a level of context which is often
                                                   CHAPTER 1. WHAT IS LITERACY? MULTIPLE PERSPECTIVES ON LITERACY | 12

missing in digital communication due to physical distance, lack of personal familiarity with
the people online, and the sheer volume of the people who may encounter our words. People
who know us well may understand exactly what we mean when we say something sarcastic
or ironic, but people online do not know us, and vocal and facial cues are missing in most
digital communication, making it more likely we will be misunderstood. Furthermore, we are
more likely to misunderstand or be misunderstood if we are unaware of cultural differences. So,
digital citizenship includes an awareness of who we are, what we intend to say, and how it might
be perceived by other people we do not know (Buckingham, 2006). It is also a process of learning
to communicate clearly in ways that help others understand what we mean.

Another key digital skill is collaboration, and it is essential for effective participation in digital
projects via the Internet. The Internet allows people to engage with others they may never see in
person and work towards common goals, be they social, civic, or business oriented. Creating a
community and working together requires a degree of trust and familiarity that can be difficult
to build when there is physical distance between the participants. Greater effort must be made
to be inclusive , and to overcome perceived or actual distance and disconnectedness. So, while
the potential of digital technology for connecting people is impressive, it is not automatic or
effortless, and it requires new skills.

  Learning Activities

     Literacy narratives are stories about reading or composing a message in any form or context.
     They often include poignant memories that involve a personal experience with literacy. Digital
     literacy narratives can sometimes be categorized as ones that focus on how the writer came to
     understand the importance of technology in their life or pedagogy. More often, they are simply
     narratives that use a medium beyond the print-based essay to tell the story:

              Create your own literacy narrative that tells of a significant experience you had with digital
              literacy. Use a multi-modal tool that includes audio and images or video. Share it with your
              classmates and discuss the most important ideas you notice in each other's narratives.

Critical literacy

Literacy scholars recognize that although literacy is a cognitive skill, it is also a set of practices
13 | CHAPTER 1. WHAT IS LITERACY? MULTIPLE PERSPECTIVES ON LITERACY

that communities and people participate in. Next, we turn to another perspective on literacy -
critical literacy. "Critical" here is not meant as having a negative point of view, but rather using
an analytic lens that detects power, privilege, and representation to understand different ways
of looking at texts. For example, when groups or individuals stage a protest, do the media refer
to them as "protesters" or "rioters?" What is the reason for choosing the label they do, and what
are the consequences?

  Learning Activities

                         An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
                         https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=195#h5p-30

Critical literacy does not have a set definition or typical history of use, but the following key
tenets have been described in the literature, which will vary in their application based on the
individual social context (Vasquez, 2019). Table 1 presents some key aspects of critical literacy,
but this area of literacy research is growing and evolving rapidly, so this is not an exhaustive list.
            CHAPTER 1. WHAT IS LITERACY? MULTIPLE PERSPECTIVES ON LITERACY | 14

            Table 1. Key Aspects of Critical Literacy

Key aspect                                         Example

Reading includes the everyday texts students       Students write down the messages that they see in
encounter in their lives, not just books assigned  public, take photographs of graffiti or signs, or
at school.                                         collect candy wrappers to bring to class.
Diverse students' knowledge (coming from the
classroom and the children's homes) (Gonzalez,     Invite children to bring and share meaningful
Moll, & Amanti, 2006) and multilingual/modal       objects, stories, and language from home.
practices (Lau, 2012) should be used to enhance
the curriculum.                                    Provide a wide variety of texts in the classroom to
Students learn best when learning is authentic     represent children from many different
and connected to their lives.                      backgrounds.
                                                   Maps are based on selections of what to include
Texts are never neutral but reflect the author's   and exclude. Putting north at the top and Europe at
social perspective. On the flip side, the way we   the center implies that those regions are more
read texts is not neutral either.                  important.
Critical literacy work focuses on social issues,   O'Brien (2001) asked children to analyze a catalogue
including inequities of race, class, gender, and   promoting Mother's Day. They discovered that the
disability, and the ways in which we use           mothers in the photographs were all youthful (age),
language to form our understanding of these        White (race), well-dressed (class), and able-bodied
issues.                                            (disability).
Literacy practices should be transformative:       Students take photographs of trash in their local
Students should be empowered to investigate        park. They interview people in the neighborhood
issues that impact them and then to engage in      about the park conditions, and then they create a
civic actions to solve problems.                   slideshow to present at a city-council meeting.

An important component of critical literacy is the adoption of culturally responsive and
sustaining pedagogy. One definition comes from Dr. Django Paris (2012), who stated that
Culturally Responsive-Sustaining (CR-S) education recognizes that cultural differences
(including racial, ethnic, linguistic, gender, sexuality, and ability ones) should be treated as
assets for teaching and learning. Culturally sustaining pedagogy requires teachers to support
multilingualism and multiculturalism in their practice. That is, culturally sustaining pedagogy
seeks to perpetuate and foster--to sustain--linguistic, literary, and cultural pluralism as part of
the democratic project of schooling.

For more, see the Culturally Responsive and Sustaining Framework. The framework helps
educators to think about how to create student-centered learning environments that uphold
racial, linguistic, and cultural identities. It prepares students for rigorous independent learning,
15 | CHAPTER 1. WHAT IS LITERACY? MULTIPLE PERSPECTIVES ON LITERACY

develops their abilities to connect across lines of difference, elevates historically marginalized
voices, and empowers them as agents of social change. CR-S education explores the
relationships between historical and contemporary conditions of inequality and the ideas that
shape access, participation, and outcomes for learners.

  Reflection Questions

         1. What can you do to learn more about your students' cultures?
         2. How can you build and sustain relationships with your students?
         3. How do the instructional materials you use affirm your students' identities?

Community-based literacies

You may have noticed that communities are a big part of critical literacy - we understand that
our environment and culture impact what we read and how we understand the world. Now think
about the possible differences among three Iowa communities: a neighborhood in the middle of
Des Moines, the rural community of New Hartford, and Coralville, a suburb of Iowa City:

"4th Street Downtown Des Moines"  "New Hartford Iowa Library" photo
photo is by Dsmspence, CC BY SA   is by Jazzlisp, CC BY SA 4.0.
3.0.
                                                                     "City Center Squire" photo is by
                                                                     American007, CC BY SA 3.0.
                                                   CHAPTER 1. WHAT IS LITERACY? MULTIPLE PERSPECTIVES ON LITERACY | 16

  Reflection Questions

     What kind of signs might you see? How easy would it be to find and visit a library? Where can
     children access books? Is there a bookstore? Do the schools have large libraries?

You may not have thought about how living in a certain community might contribute to or
take away from a child's ability to learn to read. Dr. Susan Neuman (2001) did. She and her
team investigated the differences between two neighborhoods regarding how much access to
books and other reading materials children in those neighborhoods had. One middle-to-upper
class neighborhood in Philadelphia had large bookstores, toy stores with educational materials,
and well-resourced libraries. The other, a low-income neighborhood, had no bookstores or toy
stores. There was a library, but it had fewer resources and served a larger number of patrons.
In fact, the team found that even the signs on the businesses were harder to read, and there
was less environmental printed word. Their findings showed that each child in the middle-class
neighborhood had 13 books on average, while in the lower-class neighborhood there was one
book per 300 children.

Dr. Neuman and her team (2019) recently revisited this question. This time, they looked at low-
income neighborhoods - those where 60% or more of the people are living in poverty . They
compared these to borderline neighborhoods - those with 20-40% in poverty - in three cities,
Washington, D.C., Detroit, and Los Angeles. Again, they found significantly fewer books in
the very low-income areas. The chart represents the preschool books available for sale in each
neighborhood. Note that in the lower-income neighborhood of Washington D.C., there were no
books for young children to be found at all!

Now watch this video from Campaign for Grade Level Reading. Access to books is one way that
children can have new experiences, but it is not the only way!

                  One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online
                  here: https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=195#oembed-2
17 | CHAPTER 1. WHAT IS LITERACY? MULTIPLE PERSPECTIVES ON LITERACY

  Learning Activities

     What is the "summer slide," and how does it contribute to the differences in children's
     reading abilities?

                         An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
                         https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=195#h5p-33

The importance of being literate and how to get there

      "Literacy is a bridge from misery to hope" - Kofi Annan, former United Nations Secretary-
      General.

                Kofi Annan, Special Envoy from the Joint United Nations, and Arab League to
                Syria, speaks to the press about the mission in Syria (July 11, 2012, photo by
                Jean-Marc Ferré, CC BY NC ND 2.0).
                                                   CHAPTER 1. WHAT IS LITERACY? MULTIPLE PERSPECTIVES ON LITERACY | 18

Our economy is enhanced when citizens have higher literacy levels. Effective literacy skills open
the doors to more educational and employment opportunities so that people can lift themselves
out of poverty and chronic underemployment. In our increasingly complex and rapidly changing
technological world, it is essential that individuals continuously expand their knowledge and
learn new skills to keep up with the pace of change. The goal of our public school system in
the United States is to "ensure that all students graduate from high school with the skills and
knowledge necessary to succeed in college, career, and life, regardless of where they live." This
is the basis of the Common Core Standards, developed by the Council of Chief State School
Officers (CCSSO) and the National Governors Association Center for Best Practices (NGA
Center). These groups felt that education was too inconsistent across the different states, and
today's students are preparing to enter a world in which colleges and businesses are demanding
more than ever before. To ensure that all students are ready for success after high school, the
Common Core State Standards established clear universal guidelines for what every student
should know and be able to do in math and English language arts from kindergarten through
12th grade: "The Common Core State Standards do not tell teachers how to teach, but they do
help teachers figure out the knowledge and skills their students should have" (Common Core
State Standards Initiative, 2012).

Explore the Core!

Go to iowacore.gov and click on Literacy Standards. Spend some time looking at the K-3
standards. Notice how consistent they are across the grade levels. Each has specific
requirements within the categories:

  · Reading Standards for Literature
  · Reading Standards for Informational Text
  · Reading Standards for Foundational Skills
  · Writing Standards
  · Speaking and Listening Standards
  · Language Standards

      Some states follow the Common Core as written, and some states (like Iowa) have their own
      version. See more at www.corestandards.org
19 | CHAPTER 1. WHAT IS LITERACY? MULTIPLE PERSPECTIVES ON LITERACY

  Learning Activities

     Download the Iowa Core K-12 Literacy Manual. You will use it as a reference when you are
     creating lessons.
     Next, explore the Subject Area pages and resources. What tools does the state provide to teachers
     to support their use of the Core?
     Describe a resource you found on the website. How will you use this when you are a teacher?

  Video Examples

     Watch this video about the Iowa Literacy Core Standards:

                         One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online
                         here: https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=195#oembed-3
               CHAPTER 1. WHAT IS LITERACY? MULTIPLE PERSPECTIVES ON LITERACY | 20

Key Takeaways

· Literacy is typically defined as the ability to ingest, understand, and communicate
   information.

· Literacy has multiple definitions, each with a different point of focus.
· "New literacies," or multiliteracies, are a combination of multiple ways of communicating

   and making meaning, including visual, audio, spatial, behavioral, and gestural
   communication.
· As online communication has become more prevalent, digital literacy has become more
   important for learners to engage with the wealth of information available online.
· Critical literacy develops learners' critical thinking by asking them to use an analytic lens
   that detects power, privilege, and representation to understand different ways of looking at
   information.
· The Common Core State Standards were established to set clear, universal guidelines for
   what every student should know after completing high school.

    Resources for teacher educators

          · Culturally Responsive-Sustaining Education Framework [PDF]
          · Common Core State Standards
          · Iowa Core Instructional Resources in Literacy

References

Gonzalez, N., Moll, L. C., & Amanti, C. (Eds.). (2006). Funds of knowledge: Theorizing practices in
   households, communities, and classrooms. New York, NY: Routledge.

Lau, S. M. C. (2012). Reconceptualizing critical literacy teaching in ESL classrooms. The Reading
   Teacher, 65, 325-329.
21 | CHAPTER 1. WHAT IS LITERACY? MULTIPLE PERSPECTIVES ON LITERACY

Literacy. (2018, March 19). Retrieved March 2, 2020, from https://en.unesco.org/themes/literacy

Neuman, S. B., & Celano, D. (2001). Access to print in low-income and middle-income
   communities: An ecological study of four neighborhoods. Reading Research Quarterly, 36(1),
   8-26.

Neuman, S. B., & Moland, N. (2019). Book deserts: The consequences of income segregation on
   children's access to print. Urban education,54(1), 126-147.

New London Group (1996). A Pedagogy of multiliteracies: Designing social futures. Harvard
   Educational Review, 66(1), 60-92.

O'Brien, J. (2001). Children reading critically: A local history. In B. Comber & A. Simpson (Eds.),
   Negotiating critical literacies in classrooms (pp. 41-60). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Ordoñez-Jasis, R., & Ortiz, R. W. (2006). Reading their worlds: Working with diverse families to
   enhance children's early literacy development. YC Young Children, 61(1), 42.

Saha S. (2006). Improving literacy as a means to reducing health disparities. J Gen Intern Med.
   21(8):893-895. doi:10.1111/j.1525-1497.2006.00546.x

UNESCO. (2017). Literacy rates continue to rise from one generation to the next global literacy
   trends today. Retrieved from http://on.unesco.org/literacy-map.

Vasquez, V.M., Janks, H. & Comber, B. (2019). Critical Literacy as a Way of Being and Doing.
   Language Arts, 96(5), 300-311.

Vlieghe, J. (2015). Traditional and digital literacy. The literacy hypothesis, technologies of
   reading and writing, and the `grammatized' body. Ethics and Education, 10(2), 209-226.

Zimmerman, E. B., Woolf, S. H., Blackburn, S. M., Kimmel, A. D., Barnes, A. J., & Bono, R. S.
   (2018). The case for considering education and health. Urban Education, 53(6), 744-773.U.S.
   Department of Education. Institute of Education Sciences.

U.S. Department of Education. Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Education
   Statistics, National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP), 2022 Reading Assessment.
                                                                                        CHAPTER 2. FOUNDATIONS OF EARLY LITERACY | 22

Chapter 2. Foundations of Early Literacy

   Sohyun Meacham

      "No one is born a writer; literacy is a peculiar mode of being, but I was all about stories from a
      very early age, before reading." - Rebecca Solnit

                  One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online
                  here: https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=140#oembed-1

      Keywords: print concepts, phonological awareness, oral language development, phonemic
      awareness, phonics

Children need to know so much more than the ABCs in order to read books in English
(Schickedanz & Collins, 2013). Many caregivers and teachers tend to focus too much attention
on letter names and letter sounds when it comes to teaching their children to read. Even in
countries where they do not speak English as their first language, they often start with teaching
the ABCs to their young children if they want to teach them English as a second language.
However, knowing the names and sounds of the letters is just part of learning how to read in
English. Let's say children successfully decode the word don, a fairly easy word to decode. It
is entirely possible that they do not understand what it means, as it is not a frequently used
word among young children. The word don, which means "to put on," is known by fewer than 40
percent of American children by the end of grade six in the United States (Biemiller, 2010). The
bottom line of reading is comprehension (Shea, 2016), understanding what you read. The most
important foundation for reading is oral language development, because it can help children make
meaning out of reading in English.
23 | CHAPTER 2. FOUNDATIONS OF EARLY LITERACY

                                  The emergent literacy stage

Learning Objectives               You might observe children pretending to read, even

                                  before they start formal reading instruction. Perhaps

· Explain how alphabet            they might hold a favorite book like Hush Little Baby by
   knowledge, print concepts,     Sylvia Long upside down while making up their own
   phonological awareness,        story. Before children are able to say recognizable
   and oral language              words, they might hold a book just like you do while
   development are                cooing or babbling. These pretend behaviors with
   foundation for literacy        books are considered by educators to be part of
   development.                   emergent literacy. Sulzby and Teale, who first used the
                                  term emergent literacy, explained the concept:
· Define alphabet knowledge,

   print concepts,                "Emergent literacy is concerned with the earliest
   phonological awareness,        phases of literacy development, the period between
   and oral language              birth and the time when children read and write
   development.                   conventionally. The term emergent literacy signals a
· Define phonemic                 belief that, in a literate society, young children - even
   awareness, phonics,            1- and 2-year-olds - are in the process of becoming
   fluency, vocabulary, and       literate" (1996, p.728).
   comprehension.

· Distinguish phonological        Therefore, you can observe the process of children's
   awareness, phonemic            literacy emerging, including the aspects of oral-
   awareness, and phonics.        language development, phonological awareness, the
                                  print concept, and alphabet knowledge.
· Explain how phonemic
   awareness, phonics,

fluency, vocabulary, and          Before reading is taught formally, children have to
comprehension work for            know the language that they are trying to decipher.
reading.                          Oral language is not just knowing the meaning of

(All learning objectives in this  words. It involves the grammar that combines the

chapter are aligned with InTASC   words correctly. It means having appropriate language

standard #4: Content Knowledge)   for different social contexts, such as school or a party.

                                  Let alone understanding the meaning of a word, just

                                  being able to say its smallest part, like the phoneme

                                  /m/ in Mom, is something that takes a newborn baby a

long time, hearing it repeated by caregivers, siblings, and neighbors. It is a long journey to
                                                                                        CHAPTER 2. FOUNDATIONS OF EARLY LITERACY | 24

acquire the sounds used for the first language and learn to distinguish them from foreign-
language or animal sounds. Oral language is an important foundation for future reading
development.

  Important terms

         · Alphabet Knowledge: The knowledge of letter names and sounds. It involves recognizing,
             writing, and identifying the names and sounds of the letters in the English alphabet.

         · Print Concepts: The awareness of how print works to convey a message
         · Phonological Awareness: The awareness of how various sound structures of speech work

             in a language
         · Oral Language Development: The development of skills and knowledge used for listening

             and speaking. It is an important foundation for reading comprehension and writing.
         · Phonemic Awareness: A subcategory of phonological awareness which focuses on the

             individual phonemes
         · Phonics: An instructional approach that teaches the letter-sound relations
         · Fluency: The ability to read with accuracy, automaticity, natural prosody, and stamina
         · Vocabulary: The words that are understood and used
         · Comprehension: The understanding of what is read by decoding and meaning making

Phonological awareness

Phonological awareness is "the ability to pay attention to, identify, and reflect on various
sound structures of speech... Phonemic awareness is a subcategory of phonological awareness
and refers to the ability to identify and reflect on the individual phonemes" (Johnston et al.,
2015, p.58). A phoneme is the smallest audible unit of any language, not only English. Simply
explained, phonemes refer to individual sounds. For example, pen consists of three phonemes:
/p/, /e/, and /n/. Phonological awareness is an important foundation for future formal reading
instruction, in which children will decode all of the individual sounds in a word and blend them
together to make meaning out of the word.
25 | CHAPTER 2. FOUNDATIONS OF EARLY LITERACY

  Learning Activities

     Making compound words is a fun phonological-awareness activity that you can do with the
     children when you are driving in the car for a short distance.
     Say, "What word do you get if you put the words sun and flower together?" If the children answer,
     "Sunflower," you affirm them and ask another question: "That's right, the word sunflower consists
     of the words sun and flower.
     How about the words air and plane together?" There are many compound words such as
     basketball, cowboy, doughnut, and inchworm. Whenever you bump into compound words in a book
     that you are reading aloud with the children, you can use the opportunity as a teachable moment.
     Inch by Inch, written by Leo Lionni, would be a good context for you to talk about inchworm as a
     compound word.

Rhyming words

Attention to rhyming words also contributes to phonological awareness. When two different
words end with the same sound, as in school and cool, we call them rhyming words. Dr. Seuss's
classical children's book Hop on Pop presents a great number of pairs of rhyming words. Pairs
such as cup-pup and house-mouse with humorous illustrations give you and the children fun
moments to laugh together. Mouse and house are written in phrases: "Mouse on house," on the
verso page, is natural and not so surprising; however, "House on mouse," on the recto page,
is unnatural, impossible, and surprising. The illustration is humorous. The spelling patterns
of these word pairs (cup-pup, hop-pop, and mouse-house) have identical endings. There are other
rhyming words that end with different spellings. For instance, fox and socks are rhyming words
whose endings are spelled differently. Reading Dr. Seuss's book titled Fox in Socks would be a
good context for mentioning this fact.
                     CHAPTER 2. FOUNDATIONS OF EARLY LITERACY | 26

Learning Activities

Syllable counting by clapping and identifying words with the same beginning (or ending) sound
are other ways for you to assess and train children in phonological awareness.

Ask them, "Which word sounds longer, caterpillar or ant?" Then you can clap four times for
caterpillar, as there are four syllables. Ant needs only one clap because there is one syllable in the
word.

When you count syllables in words, do it only by listening and talking, not by looking at the
spellings.

Phonological awareness training should not be based on visual images or spelling but on sound.
You can use some clip-art images, though, when you do syllable counting or identifying words
with the same sound. For example, display images for mop, hop, and top; then show the children a
map. Ask the children which word in the first group (mop, hop, and top) has the same beginning
sound as map.

Print concepts

Oral language development and phonological awareness do not necessarily require written
texts. However, print concepts, alternatively called concepts about print or print awareness, do
involve them. They do not necessarily refer to sound and letter correspondences. Print concepts
refer to the awareness of how print works to convey a message. The directionality that the
written text flows is one of the print concepts for a language. English text is read from left
to right, whereas Arabic and Hebrew flow in the opposite direction. The concepts of spaces
between words and knowing the roles of authors and illustrators belong to print concepts. There
are many more print concepts, such as how to hold a book and turn a page correctly. Basically,
print concepts are acquired over time through all of the read-aloud experiences that children
have from the first day of their lives. While you might not need to explicitly teach them all of
these concepts, during a read-aloud you can say something like, "The author of this book is
Donald Crews. The author is the person who writes the words. Donald Crews actually drew the
pictures too, so he is also the illustrator."
27 | CHAPTER 2. FOUNDATIONS OF EARLY LITERACY

Alphabet knowledge

Alphabet knowledge includes both letter names and letter sounds. Knowing what sound each
letter makes is essential for decoding, as children will need to blend the component sounds
to say a word. However, knowing the letter names can help children communicate with their
caregivers and teachers who are giving them formal reading instruction. There are many
alphabet books of different types which can help you teach letter sounds and names. One type
just identifies words that start with each letter, accompanied by illustrations for them. Elizabeth
Doyle's (2015) A, B, See! and Suse MacDonald's (1986) Alphabatics are great examples of this type.
In Alphabatics, the letters do acrobatics on the verso pages. Then the letters turn into things
that start with those letters on the recto pages. For example, the lowercase n turns upside
down in four steps on the verso page. Then it becomes a nest on the opposing recto page. You
can simply say the name of the letter and explain the word that begins with the letter. Then
add what sound that letter makes. "The name of the letter is N (pronounced `en'). The word
nest starts with the letter N, which sounds like /n/." There are other types of alphabet books
that have more narrative, with themes or information, such as Miss Bindergarten Takes a Field
Trip with Kindergarten by Joseph Slate (2004), Tasha Tudor's (2012) A is for Annabelle, and David
McLimans's (2006) Gone Wild: An Endangered Animal Alphabet. You and the children can create
an original alphabet book as a project. As reading and writing are developed simultaneously,
you don't need to wait until the children master reading to make one.

This section has discussed the emergent literacy stage, which is the one before formal reading
instruction takes place. In the next section, the early literacy stage will be explained as the
one that follows the emergent stage. During formal reading instruction in the early literacy
stage, concepts such as phonemic awareness, phonics, and fluency become more important
than alphabet knowledge or print concepts. Vocabulary and comprehension are still important,
though, and are taught more explicitly.
               CHAPTER 2. FOUNDATIONS OF EARLY LITERACY | 28

Video Example

One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online
here: https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=140#oembed-2

Learning Activities

                      An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
                      https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=140#h5p-38

  Reflection Questions

         · What can you do to promote young children's emergent-literacy development?
         · How can your oral language support young children's literacy development?

The early literacy stage

                  One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online
                  here: https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=140#oembed-3
29 | CHAPTER 2. FOUNDATIONS OF EARLY LITERACY

                          Downlaod The Big 5 Overview Video Transcript [DOC]

Comprehension is the bottom line of reading

Once children start formal literacy instruction at school, they learn to pay attention to the
sounds in a word. They analyze the individual sounds, then they put the sounds together to make
the word. Once children understand this system, we try to help them automatize the process
so they can read fluently. Fluent reading with adequate speed can help children focus more on
the meaning of the text. Since the bottom line of reading is comprehension, all of the discrete
skills emphasized in formal literacy instruction (e.g., phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency,
and vocabulary) should have the child's meaning-making success as their aim. Therefore, this
chapter will show you how to focus on meaning-making and comprehension while you tutor
them in phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, and vocabulary.

Vocabulary

Let's start with vocabulary. There are three kinds: receptive, productive, and sight-word.
Receptive vocabulary is the words whose meanings are understood. When you read a sentence or
listen to someone speaking, you can make sense out of it because you have an adequate receptive
vocabulary. Productive vocabulary is the words that can be readily used to generate speaking and
writing. Even if you understand some difficult or fancy words when you see them, you may
never use them for your own speech or writing: so they are not in your productive vocabulary.
Receptive vocabulary develops earlier than productive vocabulary. Sight-word vocabulary is the
volume of printed words that are recognized without a decoding effort. A large sight-word
vocabulary would seem to be helpful for reading fluency, but it's useless if the reader doesn't
know what the words mean. Early literacy development is comprised of teaching children to
understand and use vocabulary words in reading and communicating.

Word selection for vocabulary teaching should be intentional. Sometimes there are words in
children's picturebooks that adults don't even know. Words like lackadaisical and languid in Eric
Carle's (2002) Slowly, Slowly, Slowly, Said the Sloth could be unfamiliar to caregivers, particularly to
non-native speakers. It might not be a good idea to focus on your own difficulties in selecting
the words to teach. Instead, focus on the words that are useful for the children you teach. When
you pre-read a book before introducing it to the children, choose just two or three vocabulary
words, because you don't want to spend the whole read-aloud time teaching vocabulary.
                                                                                        CHAPTER 2. FOUNDATIONS OF EARLY LITERACY | 30

While vocabulary teaching can be fun, there are many other fun conversations that you can have
with the children about other aspects of a book. When choosing the words to teach, then, think
about three points. First, consider the usefulness of the words in the children's everyday lives.
See if the children can use them easily in a conversation. See if you can also increase their
exposure to these words in other contexts. Driver would be a good vocabulary-word choice from
Mo Willems's (2003) Don't Let the Pigeon Drive the Bus. While it might not be a difficult word for
you, it might be new to the children whom you teach, and it is a useful word for the children's
everyday conversations. Second, consider the concreteness of the words.As a general rule, focus
on more concrete ones, which will be more useful to the children. Third, consider the amount of
repetition in the book of the target words. If they appear multiple times, the child will see them
in different contexts, which is helpful for learning nuances. You can also look for opportunities
to teach some important homonyms (e.g., the verb hide meaning "keep out of sight" and the
noun hide meaning "animal skin").

Reading aloud is a great context for children to learn vocabulary in. They can see the words and
hear them when you read them aloud and when you talk about the story. Then you can explicitly
teach child-friendly definitions for the target words, asking the children to repeat the words and
use them in sentences, or act out their meaning.

Fluency

Fluency is reading with accuracy, automaticity, natural prosody (e.g., intonation), and stamina.
More succinctly, fluency means reading like you talk. When you hear children reading "Brown
bear, brown bear, what do you see?" with good fluency, brown should have a higher tone than
bear; and the children will take a short breath before saying "...what do you see?" On the other
hand, reading with several awkward pauses and unnecessary repetitions like, "Brown...brown
bear, brown,...brown bear, what do...ya,...you see?" does not sound like how you talk in English.

Making connections between oral language and reading is significant for fluency development.
When you or another fluent reader reads a book to the children, it is an opportunity for them
to perceive connections between oral language and the text. They can hear you demonstrating
the intonation, rhythm, and flow of the sentences written in the book. Another important way
to develop children's fluency is to let them read easy books lots of times. For instance, if a
child's Guided Reading Level for instruction is H, books at levels C and D would be good fluency
builders.
31 | CHAPTER 2. FOUNDATIONS OF EARLY LITERACY

Again, reading aloud is a great context for building children's fluency. You can informally
assess their ability when they read aloud to you. They can hear their own reading, which is
immediate feedback to their ears. When a book is relatively easy according to the children's
reading ability, they can feel the rhythm and flow of the language better, which reinforces
the connection between oral and written English. So, if you see 7-year-old children grab The
Very Hungry Caterpillar once in a while, you don't need to discourage them just because their
instructional level is at the Junie B. Jones books. Encourage them to read the text aloud. You can
use some prompts for dialogic reading to talk about topics like healthy eating or the life cycles
of different insects and animals.

Phonics

Phonics relates sounds to letters. It relates phonemes, the smallest sound units of a language,
to graphemes, the letters or letter combinations that produce those sounds. For instance, f is
the grapheme (symbol) for the phoneme /f/ (sound), as in the word fat. While this letter-sound
connection is straightforward, many grapheme-phoneme relationships are more opaque. For
instance, the letter c (not k) is the grapheme for the phoneme /k/ in the word cat. Moreover,
there are multi-letter graphemes, such as the 2-letter grapheme "ph" for the phoneme /f/ in the
word phone, and the 3-letter grapheme "igh" for the phoneme /ai/ in the word night. As there are
many difficult letter combinations like this found in English phonics, it makes little sense to say
phonics instruction should be completed in a short period of time. Rather, it should take place
over a long time, so children can observe patterns in how sounds correspond to letters in simple/
short words as well as complex/multisyllabic ones.

The simple letter-sound correspondences in themselves are insufficient to enable children to
grasp the meanings of long words. Multisyllabic words usually consist of multiple meaningful
parts. In terms of understanding, it is less useful for a beginning reader to break a long word
like unrealistic down into phonemes than to break it into meaningful chunks like un-real-ist-ic.
Perhaps a child below 2nd grade might not need to deal with too many multisyllabic words in
their process of learning to read. However, observing patterns within words and sorting words
into different families, like the -um family (hum, chum, gum, and glum), and the -am family
(ham, jam, and clam), can help children process parts of words in bigger chunks and later deal
more easily with longer words with multiple meaningful parts.

Children gradually become aware of the smallest parts of their language having meaning, called
morphemes. There are two types of morphemes: free morphemes and bound morphemes.
                                                                                        CHAPTER 2. FOUNDATIONS OF EARLY LITERACY | 32

A stand-alone word such as apple is a free morpheme. When free morphemes appear with
other morphemes attached to them, they are the base or root word. Bound morphemes serve
grammatical morphemes or derivational morphemes. Grammatical morphemes signal
grammatical information such as number (e.g., cat vs. cats), tense (e.g., walk vs. walked), and
possession (e.g., Xavier vs. Xavier's). They are always suffixes in English. Derivational
morphemes make a new word by being attached to root morphemes, which change the meaning
(e.g., from happy to unhappy; from sing to singer) or can change the syntactic category (e.g.,
from beauty to beautiful). They can be prefixes or suffixes. Most grammatical morphemes are
mastered during early childhood, whereas derivational morphemes are studied in the later
school-age years (Pence Turnbull & Justice, 2016). Learning these morphemes during early and
later childhood substantially increases vocabulary size. How excited the children are to figure
out the meaning of a word they never saw before by deciphering the meaning units that they
already know!

Phonemic awareness

To explain phonics, I used the term phoneme several times. Again, a phoneme is the smallest
unit of sound in a word. It does not bear any meaning itself. However, it can make a huge
difference when you replace one phoneme in a word with another. When you replace /k/ in
the word cat with /b/, you make a totally different animal. Replacing c with b in the word cat
relates to phonemic awareness. Phonemic awareness was briefly explained under the umbrella
of phonological awareness. Phonological-awareness training on bigger word parts (at least
syllable-size) should take place earlier than phoneme-level training. For instance, door and knob
make the new word doorknob, which is an example of phonological awareness at the word level.
This is easier than putting the phonemes /p/, /e/, and /t/ together to make the word pet. Perhaps
children might even be able to skip phoneme-level instruction in learning to read long words if
they know how to analyze patterns within words. The focus of reading instruction should be on
meaning-making, which is the big picture of literacy development.
33 | CHAPTER 2. FOUNDATIONS OF EARLY LITERACY

  Learning Activities

                         An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
                         https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=140#h5p-16

                         An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
                         https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=140#h5p-17

                         An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
                         https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=140#h5p-39

  Key Takeaways

         · Alphabet knowledge, print concepts, phonological awareness, and oral language
             development are foundational skills to develop at the emergent literacy stage.

         · Oral language development at early ages is the most important foundation for later reading
             comprehension.

         · Vocabulary, fluency, phonemic awareness, phonics, and comprehension are five pillars for
             the early literacy stage.
                                                                                        CHAPTER 2. FOUNDATIONS OF EARLY LITERACY | 34

    Resources for teacher educators

          · Resources for Oral Language Instruction from the Massachusetts Department of
              Elementary and Secondary Education

          · Information about Phonics and Decoding
          · Phonics resources

References

Biemiller, A. (2010). Words worth teaching: Closing the vocabulary gap. SRA.
Carle, E. (2002). "Slowly, slowly, slowly," said the sloth (E. Carle, Illus.). Philomel Books.
Doyle, E. (2015). A, B, see (E. Doyle, Illus.). Little Simon.
Dr. Seuss. (1963). Hop on pop (Dr. Seuss, Illus.). Random House Books for Young Readers.
Dr. Seuss. (1965). Fox in socks (Dr. Seuss, Illus.). Random House Books for Young Readers.
Johnston, F., Invernizzi, M., Helman, L., Bear, D., & Templeton, S. (2015). Words their way for
PreK-K. Pearson.
Lionni, L. (1995). Inch by inch (L. Lionni, Illus.). HarperCollins.
MacDonald, S. (1986). Alphabatics (S. MacDonald, Illus.). Simon & Schuster Books for Young
Readers.
McLimans, D. (2006). Gone wild: An endangered animal alphabet (D. McLimans, Illus). Walker.
Pence Turbull, K. L., & Justice, L. M. (2016). Language development from theory to practice (3rd.
Ed.). Pearson.
Schickedanz, J. A., & Collins, M. F. (2013). So much more than the ABCs: The early phases of reading
and writing. National667 Association for the Education of Young Children.
35 | CHAPTER 2. FOUNDATIONS OF EARLY LITERACY

Shea, M. (2016). Where's the glitch? Heinemann.
Slate, J. (2004). Miss Bindergarten takes a field trip with kindergarten (A. Wolff, Illus.). Penguin.
Sulzby, E., & Teale, W. (1996). Emergent literacy. In R. Barr, M. L. Kamel, P. B. Mosenthal, & P.
D. Pearson (Eds.), Handbook of reading research, Vol. II (pp. 727-757). Lawrence Erlbaum.
Tudor, T. (2012). A is for Annabelle: A doll's alphabet (T. Tudor, Illus.). Simon & Schuster Books for
Young Readers.
Willems, M. (2003). Don't let the pigeon drive the bus! (M. Willems, Illus.). Hyperion Books.
                                                                                                  CHAPTER 3. PHONOLOGICAL AWARENESS | 36

Chapter 3. Phonological Awareness

   Nandita Gurjar

      "To learn to read is to light a fire; every syllable that is spelled out is a spark." - Victor Hugo

Figure 1: "Storytelling" by Tumisu is in the Public Domain
      Keywords: phonological awareness, phonemes, graphemes, syllables, onset, rimes, short vowel
      sounds, long vowel sounds, hearing and recording sounds assessment

Phonological awareness is a foundational skill for children as it is one of the core components of
reading, along with phonics, fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension. Consequently, preservice
teachers must be prepared with strategies for facilitating phonological skills development in
37 | CHAPTER 3. PHONOLOGICAL AWARENESS

K-3 children. State standards provide benchmark expectations and guidance for preservice
teachers to plan activities that facilitate specific literacy skills development.

Learning Objectives              Iowa Core State Standards (Please
                                 check your state standards)

· Describe the developmental     Phonological awareness falls under the foundational
   progression of phonological   standards of literacy.
   awareness (InTASC
   Standard #1).                 Iowa Core Standard for Phonological
                                 Awareness: Kindergarten Benchmark
· Define phonological            Expectations (RF.K.2)
   awareness, phonemic
   awareness, phonemes,          Demonstrate understanding of       spoken    words,
   graphemes, syllables, onset,  syllables, and sounds (phonemes).
   rime, short vowel, and long
   vowel sounds (InTASC          · Recognize and produce rhyming words.
   Standard #4).                 · Count, pronounce, blend, and segment syllables in

· Distinguish between               spoken words.
   phonological awareness        · Blend and segment onsets and rimes of single-syllable
   and phonemic awareness
   (InTASC Standard #5).            spoken words.
                                 · Isolate and pronounce the initial, medial vowel, and
· Describe effective
   phonological development         final sounds (phonemes) in three-phoneme
   strategies (InTASC               (consonant-vowel-consonant, or CVC) words.* (This
   Standard #8).                    does not include CVCs ending with /l/, /r/, or /x/)
                                 · Add or substitute individual sounds (phonemes) in
· Design a lesson to develop        simple, one-syllable words to make new words.
   phonological awareness in
   PreK-3 children (InTASC
   Standard #3 & #7).

                                 Iowa Core Standard for Phonological
                                 Awareness: 1st Grade Benchmark
                                 Expectations (RF.1.2)

Demonstrate understanding of spoken words, syllables, and sounds (phonemes).
                                                                                                  CHAPTER 3. PHONOLOGICAL AWARENESS | 38

  · Distinguish long from short vowel sounds in spoken single-syllable words.
  · Orally produce single-syllable words by blending sounds (phonemes), including consonant

      blends.
  · Isolate and pronounce initial, medial vowel and final sounds (phonemes) in spoken single-

      syllable words.
  · Segment spoken single-syllable words into their complete sequence of individual sounds

      (phonemes).

A hum and productive clamor can be heard as children excitedly work in small groups with
volunteers! Children are heard clapping the names of their favorite characters into syllables in
one group; another group is seen playing a limerick rime game, while the third group is using
their fingers to segment sounds of their favorite animals and then jumping over the number of
spaces equal to the number of sounds in a word. All these indicate different ways the class is
authentically engaged in building phonological awareness or awareness of sounds in the oral
language!

  Video Examples

     This video explains the difference between phonological awareness and phonemic awareness:

                         One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online
                         here: https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=333#oembed-1

                    Download Phonological and Phonemic Awareness Video Transcript [DOC]
     This video demonstrates the difference between phonemes and letters:

                         One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online
                         here: https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=333#oembed-2

                                 Download Letters vs Phonemes Video Transcript [DOC]
39 | CHAPTER 3. PHONOLOGICAL AWARENESS

Phonological awareness

Phonological awareness is a set of auditory skills related to hearing sounds in spoken language.
It is an umbrella term indicating an awareness of:

  · units of spoken sounds such as syllables, onsets, and rimes;
  · individual sounds (phonemes) of the spoken language.

Phonemic awareness

Phonemic awareness is the ability to distinguish and manipulate phonemes. It consists of:

  · identifying initial and ending sounds;
  · identifying medial vowel sounds;
  · substituting, adding, or deleting sounds to make new words;
  · segmenting sounds;
  · blending sounds.

What is the difference between phonological awareness and phonemic
awareness?

Phonological awareness is a broader term encompassing awareness of larger and smaller spoken
language units. It consists of manipulating both the larger units (syllables, onsets, and rimes)
and smaller units (phonemes). Children may work on identifying syllables, onsets, rimes, and
phonemes. For example, they may clap to syllables, say the rhyming word, or identify the
beginning, medial, or ending sound.

Phonemic awareness falls under the umbrella of phonological awareness. Phonemic awareness
consists of distinguishing and manipulating the smallest units of spoken language (phonemes).
In phonemic-awareness work, children can practice identifying and manipulating initial
consonants, medial vowels, and ending phonemes, and segmenting, blending, and counting
phonemes.
                                                                                                  CHAPTER 3. PHONOLOGICAL AWARENESS | 40

Why develop phonological awareness?

Phonological awareness is the most important predictor of early reading ability (Carroll et
al., 2003). Cartwright and Duke (2019) used the metaphor of "driving" to show what happens
during reading, and to "drive" home the importance of phonological awareness. They noted that
phonological awareness skills are the tire treads that help the vehicle move forward on the road.
Therefore, it is essential to focus on developing phonological awareness in preschool and early
elementary children through various means, as listed below.

Assessing phonological awareness

Phonological awareness is assessed through tasks like the following:

  · phoneme deletion: a phoneme is deleted from a spoken word, for example, /k/ from the
      cat.

  · phoneme addition: a phoneme is added to a spoken word; for example, /d/ is added to love.
  · phoneme substitution: a phoneme is substituted for another, for example, /m/ for /k/ in

      the cat.
  · phoneme counting: tap the number of phonemes in the spoken word: /k/-/a/-/t/ (3).
  · phoneme segmentation: break a word into its component phonemes: /k/-/a/-/t/.
  · syllabication or dividing multisyllabic words into syllables: base-ball, choc-o-late, rain.
  · onset and rime segmentation in spoken words: c is the onset and at is a rime.
  · rhyming words: cat and hat.

    What is the difference between a letter and a phoneme?

      A letter is a visual representation of the sound it makes. A phoneme is the smallest unit of sound
      in spoken language. For example, six has three letters but four phonemes (/s/-/i/-/k/-/s/). A letter
      or grapheme such as s may make different sounds (phonemes) depending on the word. For
      example, the letter s makes different sounds in snake and treasure.
41 | CHAPTER 3. PHONOLOGICAL AWARENESS

  Important terms

         · Phoneme: the smallest unit of sound in the spoken language. For example, "dog" has three
             phonemes: /d/, /o/, and /g/. Listening to phonemes in speech requires auditory
             discrimination. Phonemic awareness (awareness of individual sounds) requires the hearing
             ability to identify, distinguish, and manipulate individual sounds in speech. Listening to
             lullabies and nursery rhymes develops awareness of the sounds of a particular language in
             children.

         · Morpheme: the smallest unit of meaning in a language. For example, "cat" is one
             morpheme, a single unit of meaning. Adding an "s" (a bound morpheme) to "cat" changes
             the meaning from a singular (cat) to a plural (cats) with two morphemes. See the phonics
             PowerPoint in Chapter 4 for types of morphemes. The reference to a morpheme is made to
             distinguish it from a phoneme.

         · Graphemes: the letters representing the smallest unit of sound in the spoken language.
             The phoneme /d/ is written with a grapheme d. The phoneme /f/ can be represented with
             the graphemes- f or ph. Writing requires encoding phonemes into graphemes.

         · Syllable: a unit of pronunciation having one vowel sound, with or without surrounding
             consonants. For example, nan-di-ta (3 syllables) or dog (1 syllable). See Jack Hartman's video
             given in this chapter for syllable practice.

         · Onset: the letter(s) representing the initial consonant sound before the vowel in a syllable
             or one-syllable word. For example, "C" in "cat" is an onset, and "d" in "dog" is an onset.

         · Rime: the letters representing the medial vowel and final consonant(s) in a syllable or one-
             syllable word. For example, "at" in "cat" is a rime, and "og" in "dog" is a rime.

         · Short vowel sounds: the short vowel sounds are usually found in (C)VC, (consonant)-vowel-
             consonant, words where the medial vowel has the short vowel sound, for example, the /a/
             sound in cat or apple.

         · Long vowel sounds: the long vowel sounds consist of words where the a, e, i, o, or u say
             their name. These words often have vowel teams or the letter e at the end, as in CVVC or
             CVCe words, for example, rain and rake.
                                                                                                  CHAPTER 3. PHONOLOGICAL AWARENESS | 42

Theory of developmental progression of phonological
awareness

Children's developmental progression of phonological awareness occurs in 3 stages (Goswami &
Bryant, 1990):

 1. syllable awareness,
 2. onset and rime awareness,
 3. phoneme awareness.

Rhyme and alliteration are key in acquiring phonological awareness (Chard & Dickson, 1999).
However, children first become aware of syllables in speech (Liberman, 1973). This is followed
by the perception of onsets and rimes. Last comes their awareness of individual sounds. The
ability to divide words into syllables develops before their ability to segment words into
individual phonemes (Liberman et al., 1974).

Development among Dual Language Learners

Dual Language Learners' (DLL) performance in one language directly correlates with their
performance in the other, according to Cummins' (1979) linguistic interdependence
hypothesis. Therefore, strong first-language skills help children develop their second-language
ones. Specifically, leveraging their native-language literacy and prior knowledge helps DLLs
develop phonological awareness in the second language.

It should be noted that DLLs differ in their developmental progression by language and skill
due to various factors (Lopez, 2012):

  · similarities between the languages,
  · degrees of proficiency in the languages,
  · the quality of adult input,
  · cultural expectations,
  · verbal memory, and
  · personality.

The implications for the facilitation of children's developmental progression are as follows.
Read rhyming books and invite parents to share read-aloud picturebooks from their cultures.
43 | CHAPTER 3. PHONOLOGICAL AWARENESS

Also, leverage the children's native languages in playing rhyming games, clapping syllables, and
breaking up words into onsets and rimes. Lastly, practice breaking words up into individual
phonemes. Segmenting, blending, and counting phonemes usually come toward the end once
children can produce rhyming words and are already aware of syllables, onsets, and rimes in
spoken words.

Forty-four phonemes of the English language

The video below demonstrates 44 phonemes of the English language.

                  One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online
                  here: https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=333#oembed-3

Phonological development strategies

Our phonological development strategies are based on the Iowa Core benchmark expectations.
Please refer to your state standards. The Iowa Core foundational standards for kindergarten
focus on the following: demonstrate understanding of spoken words, syllables, and sounds
(phonemes). The following tasks show the understanding of spoken words, syllables, and
sounds.

Recognize and produce rhyming words

 1. Read books with rhyming words.
 2. Listen to lullabies and nursery rhymes.
 3. Play rhyming games.

       1. Finger rhymes and jump rope rhymes are some ways to have fun while building
            phonological awareness!

       2. Have fun with rhyming riddles!
 4. Use word families to create rhymes.
 5. Do picture sorts with rhyming words.
               CHAPTER 3. PHONOLOGICAL AWARENESS | 44

Video Example

                         One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online
                         here: https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=333#oembed-4

                                      Download Picture Sorts Video Transcript [DOC]

Count, pronounce, blend, and segment syllables in spoken words

  · Move your body to count syllables to make it fun and engaging! Let's Learn About Syllables |
      Jack Hartmann

  · Play syllable games: Syllable games | classroom strategies
  · Clap syllables in haiku poetry: Haiku poem interactive

Blend and segment onsets and rimes of single-syllable spoken words

 1. Play the Chunks game with onsets and rimes to make new words. Break the onset and rime
      apart, and then recombine them. For example, c is an onset, and at is a rime; d is an onset,
      and og is a rime.

 2. Have children hold up CVC letter cards to say the onset and the rime.
 3. Break the onset and rimes in digraph words apart, and put them together again,

      accompanied by movement and music.
 4. Working with blends to break them apart into onsets and rimes with music and movement

      is fun for the children!

Isolate and pronounce the initial, medial vowel, and final sounds
(phonemes) in three-phoneme (consonant-vowel-consonant, or CVC)
words.* (This does not include CVCs ending with /l/, /r/, or /x/)

 1. Identify some words to segment into individual sounds. Identify the initial sounds in
45 | CHAPTER 3. PHONOLOGICAL AWARENESS

      3-phoneme (CVC) words.
 2. Identify the medial vowel sound in 3-phoneme words.
 3. Identify the ending sound in 3-phoneme words.

Segmenting and blending sounds

Add or substitute individual sounds (phonemes) in simple, one-syllable
words to make new words

 1. Play verbal riddles by adding, deleting, or substituting sounds.
 2. Starting with letter titles, add and substitute phonemes to make new words.
 3. Pattern a board game on Chutes and Ladders to move up or down based on giving the

      correct response.

  Learning Activities

                         An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
                         https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=333#h5p-32

Adapting for diverse learners

  · Leverage children's native language to build phonological awareness. For example,
      children can segment words into phonemes using their native language.

  · Based on the Universal Design for Learning (UDL) principles, present information to
      students in multiple ways, with visuals, video, and audio. This is especially important for
      English Language Learners (ELLs).

  · Engage students in authentic learning experiences such as experiencing music, poetry
      reading, and dance from different cultural groups to hear the sounds and rhythms of
      different languages.
                                                                                                  CHAPTER 3. PHONOLOGICAL AWARENESS | 46

  · Provide students with options and multiple ways of expression to assess their achievement
      of the learning outcomes. They may showcase their learning through written, audio, or
      video formats.

Technology integration and professional development
resources

  · Explore online games related to phonological awareness.
  · Read literacy blog posts for ideas on technology integration.
  · Explore phonological development lesson plans and interactives.
  · Engage in literacy professionals' Twitter chats such as #ILAchat and #NCTEchat.
  · Listen to literacy podcasts (Book Deserts, Cult of Pedagogy, etc.).
  · Explore professional literacy educators' TikTok and Instagram pages to see how they

      leverage technology to make learning fun and engaging in small bites!
  · Listen to recorded stories and explore educational websites.
  · Explore pertinent digital games and apps focused on developing phonological awareness.

Integration across content (science, math, social studies)

  · Count syllables using spoken words related to science, math, and social studies.
  · Use spoken words related to science, math, and social studies to play rhyming games.
  · Use spoken words related to science, math, and social studies to count and segment

      phonemes.

Guardians as partners in literacy

  · Encourage guardians to sing family and cultural lullabies to their children at home.
  · Encourage oral storytelling at home. Relatives may pitch in as well. Have them think of

      folktales, fables, or other cultural stories.
  · Encourage siblings to play rhyming games or makeup jump rope rhymes.

As metacognition is an important skill to develop in preservice teachers, here are some
discussion-based reflection questions.
47 | CHAPTER 3. PHONOLOGICAL AWARENESS

  Discussion-based reflection questions

         · Think back to your memorable literacy experiences in early childhood. Make a T-chart in
             your notebook. On the left, list school, home, and community literacy practices. On the
             right, explain their role in your literacy development. Share and discuss your chart with
             your peers.

         · What do you recollect about your school literacy practices?
         · What were some memorable books that were read to you or that you read; traditional songs

             or lullabies that were sung to you or you listened to; and any other family or cultural
             literacy practices such as oral storytelling of folklore that you experienced?
         · What were some community literacy practices that you experienced growing up? How did
             these practices build your phonological awareness?
         · What role did these literacy practices play in your overall literacy development?
         · How does the progression of phonological development in children inform your lesson
             planning?
         · What are some of the ways you would develop phonological awareness in diverse children?
         · How would you differentiate and personalize phonological awareness strategies for
             children with hearing or speech disabilities?
               CHAPTER 3. PHONOLOGICAL AWARENESS | 48

Key Takeaways

· Phonological awareness is an auditory skill. It involves manipulating units of sound in the
   spoken language.

· Rhyme and alliteration are key in developing phonological awareness.
· Syllable awareness develops first.
· Onset and rime awareness develops next.
· Awareness of phonemes develops last.
· Read rhyming books.
· Sing lullabies and jump rope rhymes.
· Clap, count, and segment syllables, onsets, rimes, and phonemes.
· Build on students' first language and home literacies.
49 | CHAPTER 3. PHONOLOGICAL AWARENESS

    Resources for teacher educators

    Blending games:

          · Blending and segmenting games

    Phoneme segmentation games and activities:

          · Phoneme segmentation games and activities
          · Segmenting
          · Phoneme segmentation fluency
          · Reading Rockets resource on diagnosing phonological awareness difficulties from child's,

              parent's, and teacher's perspectives and how to help

    Teaching resources:

          · Phonological Awareness [Slide deck]
          · Effectiveness of Early Literacy Instruction: Summary of 20 Years of Research [PDF]
          · Early childhood literacy narrative (see details below)

This potential assignment is culturally relevant and considers varied literacy practices situated
in multiple cultural contexts while integrating technology. It honors cultural and community
literacy practices. For example, I grew up in the oral storytelling tradition. My phonological
awareness developed as a child when I heard my grandmother tell me Indian folktales, fables,
legends, and myths.
                                                                                                  CHAPTER 3. PHONOLOGICAL AWARENESS | 50

  Learning Activities: Early childhood literacy narrative

     Purpose of the assignment: Identify early literacy practices.

         1. Please identify your childhood school, home, and community literacy practices. Reflect on
             how they impacted your early literacy development. Prepare a multimodal media
             presentation to showcase your findings.

         2. Please reflect on early childhood literacy experiences to identify significant school literacy
             practices, home literacy practices, and community/cultural literacy practices.

         3. Investigate the contribution of literacy practices to early literacy development. Please
             reflect on how these literacy practices contributed to your early literacy development.

         4. Create a multimodal presentation with visuals, photographs, audio, and video.
     Why is it relevant for future educators?
     Metacognition is a reflective activity encouraged in teacher-education programs. By reflecting on
     one's prior literacy practices at home, at school, and in the community, we can take future
     actions to promote positive literacy practices while honoring cultural and home literacies.
     How to do it?
     Storyboard your ideas. Sketch a visual representation of how they flow. Make notes and write a
     script for the audio and video. Choose a technology platform to create your early-literacy
     narrative. Select pertinent supporting visuals, photographs, videos, and hyperlinks to develop
     your multimodal narrative. Multimodality involves using more than one medium to express
     yourself. You may explore Prezi, iMovie, or another technology platform.

This is the rubric to evaluate the assignment. Encourage students to self-evaluate using this
rubric.
51 | CHAPTER 3. PHONOLOGICAL AWARENESS

              The rubric of Early-Literacy Narrative

Criteria      Proficient                              Developing                   Novice
Ideas         Brimming with fresh and original        Somewhat addresses all       Does not address
              ideas focused on identifying the        parts with interesting and   all parts, with
Organization  school, home, and community             focused ideas covering       many details
              literacy practices and their            school, home, and            missing, and is
Voice         contribution to the literacy            community literacy           not focused.
Word choice   development of the author.              practices.
Sentence      The piece is well-organized, with       Somewhat organized with      No evidence of an
fluency       effective grabbers, transitions, and    effective grabbers,          organizational
Conventions   conclusions.                            transitions, and             structure.
Presentation  Addresses all parts of the prompt.      conclusions, with room       Incomplete areas.
                                                      for improvement.
              Authentically infused with the          Somewhat complete.           The presentation
              author's identity, personality, and     Somewhat infused with        is not infused
              creativity in its design and            the identity, personality,   with the author's
              composition.                            and creativity of the        identity,
              Concisely composed, with effective      author.                      personality, or
              word choices, strong verbs (that                                     creativity.
              show, not tell), and vivid vocabulary   Somewhat concisely           Not concisely
              to create memorable moments.            composed with effective      composed.
              Flows smoothly.                         word choices.                Exhibits
                                                      Reads/flows somewhat         redundancy.
              Polished and edited, with attention to  smoothly, with some room     Does not read/
              spelling, grammar, and punctuation.     for improvement.             flow smoothly.
                                                                                   Has choppy or
              Visually appealing, with supporting     Somewhat polished and        run-on sentences.
              visuals, videos, and hyperlinks.        edited.                      Not polished and
                                                      Somewhat visually            edited, with
                                                      appealing, with              several errors in
                                                      supporting visuals, videos,  conventions.
                                                      and hyperlinks.              Not at all visually
                                                                                   appealing and
                                                                                   lacks
                                                                                   multimodality.

References

Chard, D. J., & Dickson, S. V. (1999). Phonological awareness: Instructional and assessment
guidelines. Intervention in School and Clinic, 34, 261-270.
                                                                                                  CHAPTER 3. PHONOLOGICAL AWARENESS | 52

Carol, J. M., Snowling, M. J., Stevenson, J., & Hulme, C. (2003). The development of phonological
awareness in preschool children. Developmental Psychology, 39(5), 913-923.

Cartwright, K. B. & Duke, N. (2019). The DRIVE model of reading: Making the complexity of
reading accessible. The Reading Teacher, 73(1), 7-15.

Cummins, J. (1979). Linguistic interdependence and the educational development of bilingual
children. Review of Educational Research, 49, 222-251.

Goswami, U., & Bryant, P. (1990). Phonological skills and learning to read. Erlbaum.

Liberman, I. Y. (1973). Segmentation of the spoken word and reading acquisition. Bulletin of the
Orton Society, 23, 65-77.

Liberman, I. Y., Shankweiler, D., Fischer, F. W., & Carter, B. (1974). Explicit syllable and phoneme
segmentation in the young child. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 18, 201-212.

Lopez, Lisa M. (2012). Assessing the phonological skills of bilingual children From preschool
through kindergarten: Developmental progression and cross-language transfer. Journal of
Research in Childhood Education, 26, 4, 371-91.
53 | CHAPTER 4. PHONICS: BREAKING THE CODE TO WORDS

Chapter 4. Phonics: Breaking the Code to
Words

   Constance Beecher and Emily Hayden

      "There is more treasure in books than in all the pirate's loot on Treasure Island." - Walt Disney

         Chest of books photo is by Katrina_S from Pixabay
      Keywords: decoding, phonics, phonemes, graphemes, morphemes, consonants, vowels
                                                                             CHAPTER 4. PHONICS: BREAKING THE CODE TO WORDS | 54

Iowa Core State Standards (Please check your state standards)

Phonics falls under the foundational standards of literacy.

Iowa Core Standards for Literacy                          Learning Objectives

Phonics and word recognition. RF.K.3 Know and apply             · Define, understand, and
grade-level phonics and word analysis skills in decoding            apply phonics concepts and
words.                                                              terminology for K-3
                                                                    learners (InTasc Standard
  · Demonstrate basic knowledge of one-to-one letter-               #1)
      sound correspondences by producing the primary or
      many of the most frequent sounds for each                 · Identify effective phonics
      consonant.                                                    instructional strategies
                                                                    (InTasc Standard #3)
  · Associate the long and short sounds with common
      spellings (graphemes) for the five major vowels.          · Define, understand, and
                                                                    apply phonics strategies for
  · Read common high-frequency words by sight (e.g.,                decoding unfamiliar words
      the, of, to, you, she, my, is, are, do, does).                (InTasc Standard #4).

  · Distinguish between similarly spelled words by              · Become familiar with Iowa
      identifying the sounds of the letters that differ.            Core Foundation Skills
                                                                    Phonics and Word
RF.1.3 Know and apply grade-level phonics and word                  Recognition
analysis skills in decoding words.

· Know the spelling-sound correspondences for
   common consonant digraphs.

· Decode regularly spelled one-syllable words.
· Know final -e and common vowel team conventions for representing long vowel sounds.
· Use knowledge that every syllable must have a vowel sound to determine the number of syllables

   in a printed word.
· Decode two-syllable words following basic patterns by breaking the words into syllables.
· Read words with inflectional endings.
· Recognize and read grade-appropriate irregularly spelled words.

RF.2.3 Know and apply grade-level phonics and word analysis skills in decoding words.
55 | CHAPTER 4. PHONICS: BREAKING THE CODE TO WORDS

  · Distinguish long and short vowels when reading regularly spelled one-syllable words.
  · Know spelling-sound correspondences for additional common vowel teams.
  · Decode regularly spelled two-syllable words with long vowels.
  · Decode words with common prefixes and suffixes.
  · Identify words with inconsistent but common spelling-sound correspondences.
  · Recognize and read grade-appropriate irregularly spelled words.

RF.3.3 Know and apply grade-level phonics and word analysis skills in decoding words.

  · Identify and know the meaning of the most common prefixes and derivational suffixes.
  · Decode words with common Latin suffixes.
  · Decode multisyllable words.
  · Read grade-appropriate irregularly spelled words.

During word-study time in Ms. Hradecká's first-grade class, you can find three busy
homogenous groups. Children are grouped with others who are working on the same level
of phonics principles. She follows Bear et al.'s (2008) "circle-seat-center" routine (p. 70). While
Group 1 is doing a teacher-directed word-study lesson in a circle, Group 2 is working on literacy
activities in centers, and Group 3 is doing word games and activities independently at their seats.
After 10-15 minutes, the groups rotate. Group 2 joins the teacher, Group 3 moves to the centers,
and Group 1 returns to their seats.

For more on the word study lesson in this classroom, see the article, "Word Study: Learning
Word Patterns" by Diane Henry Leipzig on the Reading Rockets website.

What are decoding and phonics?

Decoding

A critical component in word recognition is the ability to decode them. For children to
accurately perform this skill, they must understand the alphabetic principle and know letter-
sound correspondences. When students make the connection that letters signify the sounds
that we say, they are said to understand the purpose of the alphabetic code, or the "alphabetic
principle." Letter-sound correspondences are known when students can provide the correct
sound for the letters and letter combinations. Students can then be taught to decode, which
                                                                             CHAPTER 4. PHONICS: BREAKING THE CODE TO WORDS | 56

means to blend the letter sounds together to read words. Decoding is a deliberate act in which
readers must "consciously and deliberately apply their knowledge of the mapping system to
produce a plausible pronunciation of a word they do not instantly recognize" (Beck & Juel,
1995, p. 9). Once a word has been accurately decoded a few times, it can be recognized without
conscious thinking, which is a more efficient kind of word recognition.

Phonics

The instructional practices teachers use to teach students how letters (e.g., i, r, x) and letter
clusters (e.g., sh, oa, igh) correspond to the sounds of speech in English is called phonics (not to
be confused with phonemic awareness). For example, a teacher may provide a phonics lesson on
how "p" and "h" combine to make /f/ in "phone," and "graph." After all, the alphabet is a code
that symbolizes speech sounds, and once students are taught which sound(s) each of the symbols
(letters) represents, they can successfully decode written words, or "crack the code."

  Important terms

     Phonological awareness (Chapter 3) is an umbrella term referring to basic knowledge and skills
     with the sounds of a language. Phonemic awareness is the phonological-awareness skill that
     focuses on the individual sounds in words. Phonological awareness skills include more than
     individual sounds. Some examples are:

         · Counting the words in a sentence as it is spoken aloud.
         · Identifying and creating rhymes.
         · Counting the number of syllables in a word.
         · Putting compound words together.
         · So, phonemic awareness is a phonological-awareness skill, but not the only one.

     For a longer summary of the aspects of phonemic awareness and phonological awareness go to
     this article "Phonics Terms That Every K-2 Teacher Should Know" At Learning at the Primary
     Pond.
57 | CHAPTER 4. PHONICS: BREAKING THE CODE TO WORDS

Why decoding and phonics?

In 1997, the U.S. Congress asked the Director of the National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development (NICHD), in collaboration with the Secretary of Education, to bring
together a national panel of reading experts, now known as the "National Reading Panel." Their
mission was to assess the existing research-based knowledge about the effectiveness of various
approaches for teaching children to read. The Panel's findings were presented in a report
entitled Teaching Children to Read: An evidence-based assessment of the scientific research literature
on reading and its implications for reading instruction. You can read the entire report of the National
Reading Panel for more details.
The Panel reviewed hundreds of research studies. One of the clear findings was that in order to
become strong readers children must develop:

  · phonemic awareness,
  · phonics skills,
  · the ability to read words in text in an accurate and fluent manner, and
  · the ability to apply comprehension strategies consciously and deliberately as they read.

The Panel found that many difficulties in learning to read were caused by poor phonemic
awareness, and that systematic and explicit instruction in phonemic awareness directly
improved children's reading and spelling skills (you learned about phonological and phonemic
awareness in Chapter 3).

  Learning Activities

                         An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
                         https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=216#h5p-1

The evidence for the importance of phonemic awareness is so strong that the Panel
recommended that systematic and explicit instruction in phonemic awareness should be taught to
                                                                             CHAPTER 4. PHONICS: BREAKING THE CODE TO WORDS | 58

all children starting in preschool. Importantly, the Panel found that preschool children could
easily learn phonemic awareness when the instruction was presented in an age-appropriate and
entertaining manner. It is important to note that the Panel found that children in preschool and
early elementary school who had difficulty understanding that the words in oral language are
composed of smaller speech sounds that are linked to the letters of the alphabet were highly
at risk for reading disabilities. These children often had trouble with tasks like counting the
number of syllables in words or finding rhyming words (Reading Rockets).

                   Download and keep this phonics cheat sheet [DOC] for reference.

Basic phonics terms

See the link in the call-out box for a comprehensive glossary of phonics terms. Here are some of
the big ideas:
Phonemic awareness is about the INDIVIDUAL SOUNDS of words.
A phoneme is the smallest unit of sound in spoken language. For example, the word "cat," can
be broken up into the sounds /k/ /a/ and /t/. Each of those 3 sounds is a phoneme, so phonemic
awareness = awareness of phonemes (the individual sounds). Some phonemic-awareness skill
examples are:

  · Hearing the word top and saying the beginning sound: /t/.
  · Hearing the word dog and breaking it up (segmenting) into these three sounds: /d/ /o/ /g/.
  · Hearing the word pan and substituting the /f/ sound for the /p/ sound to get fan.
  · This does not include linking these sounds to their written form, which is phonics.

Graphemes are written letters that represent one sound. The m in man is a grapheme. The ch in
beach are also a grapheme.
Morphemes are the smallest parts of a word that have meaning or influences the meaning of a
59 | CHAPTER 4. PHONICS: BREAKING THE CODE TO WORDS

word. The word beautiful has two morphemes (beauty) and (-ful). Adding the suffix -ful) to the
word (beauty) changes the meaning of the word, yet the new word is still related to the old one.

Consonants and Vowels

As you know, the English alphabet has 26 letters, which can be divided into two groups:
consonants and vowels. The letters are often represented by C or V for consonant or vowel.
In English there are 5 vowels: a, e, i, o, and u. Vowel sounds are considered LONG VOWELS
when the sound matches the name of the letter (e.g. the a in cake). SHORT VOWELS are harder
to define. For example, the short a's in hat and can could sound different, depending on the
speaker. These sounds are also pronounced differently in different parts of the country!
Any alphabet letter that is not a vowel is a CONSONANT.

          · Phonics definitions and glossary A-Z Phonics
          · Phonics Terms That Every K-2 Teacher Should Know from Learning at the Primary Pond

Each school district will most likely have selected curricula which will include phonics
instruction, or word-study methods. However, here are some basics on how to teach decoding
and phonics.

Teaching decoding and phonics

Explicit and systematic instruction

Research supports instruction that is explicit and systematic. Explicit means that letter-sound
relationships, or phonics skills, are taught directly to students (instead of being presented
indirectly through reading aloud). Systematic means that teachers follow a sequence of skills
from simple to more complex, including frequent reviews of those skills.
For more information, read the brief from the International Literacy Association: Meeting the
Challenges of Early Literacy Phonics Instruction [PDF].
                                                                             CHAPTER 4. PHONICS: BREAKING THE CODE TO WORDS | 60

Phonics strategies

Students need many opportunities to work with words, including letter and word sorts,
decoding games, read-alouds and shared reading, and their own reading. Success with phonics
is enhanced whenever children can attach meaning to the words they decode, such as during
supported comprehension activities like read-alouds and shared stories. The more opportunities
children have to encounter and manipulate letter sounds and words, attaching meaning to them,
the more pathways they can develop for knowing words.

Word-decoding skill begins with explicit phonics practice. As the video above explained, the 26
letters in the English alphabet make 44 sounds for words. Not all sounds are spelled in the same
way, as in the example of the /s/ sound, which can be spelled with one s as in sand, 2 s's as in class,
a c as the first sound in circle, or ce as in face. It gets even trickier when we start thinking about
combinations of consonants, such as ph, which makes the /f/ sound in phone; or combinations of
vowels and consonants, such as ough, which can be long o in though, short o in ought, or short
u plus /f/ in tough. If you are curious about why we have so many spellings for sounds, you can
check out this video: Why is English Spelling So Weird?

Beginning phonics

Reading standards at each grade level provide a specific sequence for teaching the letter
combinations that make up the sounds in words. This is called a "scope and sequence," and it is
the guideline you follow to make sure your instruction is based on the progressive development
of skills that addresses the children's gaps in knowledge.

Here are some examples of scopes and sequences for phonics instruction:

  · Keys to Literacy [PDF]
  · Reading Street [PDF] (Pearson)
  · New Jersey Department of Education [PDF]
  · University of Florida Literacy Institute [PDF]
  · Reading Universe [PDF] (Barksdale Reading Institute)

Phonics instruction in kindergarten starts with learning letter-sound correspondences for
consonants, and for the sounds of short vowels and the most common long vowels.

Lessons will typically include the most common digraphs (ch, sh, th, wh, and ck). Because
61 | CHAPTER 4. PHONICS: BREAKING THE CODE TO WORDS

kindergarteners may be losing teeth and still developing articulation, they may not be able to
produce these sounds perfectly - but they can still learn them.

Phonics activities can start with basic letter sorts - separating consonants from vowels, for
example. Magnetic letters are very useful for this, and are readily available in many schools, but
letter tiles or even paper cut-out letters can be used for all of these activities. The point is to
provide letters the children can move around, rather than relying on writing alone. Being able
to actually move the letters in a concrete way is an important way to establish early learning,
before proceeding to the more abstract act of writing (Clay, 2005).

To learn more about when  If purchasing sets of magnetic letters or letter tiles, be sure to
kids learn different      examine the ways the letters are formed. If they use stylized
consonant sounds, see     letter forms that are different from the fonts in most reading
this Speech-Sound         series, they may be confusing for young children. For
Development chart [PDF].  example, the letter g may be written as g, or the letter a may
                          be written as a.

                          Early sorts for young children

Provide an assortment of letters and a tabletop or surface to sort on. Baking sheets from home
can also work. Before teaching, pre-select groups of letters based on what sorts you will ask the
children to do. Re-mix the letters between sorts. The following sorts progress from easier to
more challenging:

· For children still working on letter recognition, ask them to separate letters with tails,
   such as y, g, p, from letters without tails, such as c, o, e, s. Ask them to separate tall letters
   such as k, l, t from short ones such as c, o, e, s.

· Separate capital letters from lower-case ones.
· Match capital letters with their lower-case forms.
· Separate consonants from vowels.

In kindergarten, children learn consonant sounds, short-vowel sounds, and the most common
long-vowel sounds. Once the children are familiar with these basic sounds, they can begin to
build words.
                                                                             CHAPTER 4. PHONICS: BREAKING THE CODE TO WORDS | 62

Building words with moveable letters:

Before teaching, pre-select letters based on the words you will ask children to build.

  · Guide the children to make the simple word at: (short /a/, consonant /t/).
  · Ask them to add a letter to the front of at and guide them to read the new word they have

      made.
          Example: "Find the s. Add it to the beginning of at to make a new word. What word
            did you make?"

  · Ask the children to take off the first letter and replace it with a new letter, making a new
      word.
          Example: "Now break off the s so you only have the word at again. Find the m. Add it
            to the beginning of at to make a new word. What word did you make?"

  · Continue removing the first letter and replacing it with new letters to make new words
      like cat and bat.

In 1st grade students learn the common consonant digraphs sh, ch, and th. The sh digraph makes
a consistent sound as found in the words she and shoe. The ch digraph can make different
sounds, such as in the words chair, character, and chef. The digraph th is a little tricky, because
in some words it is voiced (the vocal cords are vibrating) and in other words it is unvoiced
(like whispering). Try this: Place your first two fingers lightly on your adam's apple. Say "the."
Notice that your throat vibrates slightly as you make the th sound: it is voiced. Now try the same
experiment while saying "thumb." This time there should be less vibration, because the th in
thumb is unvoiced. Try other words containing th to see which ones use the voiced th and which
ones use the unvoiced th.

Students in 1st grade also learn common vowel combinations and the sounds they make, such as
ea as in team, ee as in seed, oa as in boat, and ay as in play; and they learn the silent-e pattern as
well as the common inflectional endings -ed, -ing, and the plural -s.

2nd and 3rd grade and beyond

When students are in 2nd grade and above, they should be learning to decode multisyllable
words. Phonics lessons on decoding longer words should emphasize common syllable-division
patterns and point out rules about syllables in English.
63 | CHAPTER 4. PHONICS: BREAKING THE CODE TO WORDS

To decode long words with multiple syllables, children need a strategy for dividing them into
manageable parts. They can then apply their knowledge of syllable types and letter-sound
associations, and blend the decoded syllables back into whole words. This is where fluency is
important - children need to be able to say these syllables quickly to understand what they are
reading.

  Learning Activities

                         An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
                         https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=216#h5p-2

  Learning Activities: Assessment

     The state of Iowa requires specific testing for literacy. Required Student Assessment.
     School districts can choose any approved universal screening instrument, and they will have a set
     schedule for testing.
     It's helpful to do some formative testing (remember that teachers use formative assessments as a
     quick aid to guide their instruction. Here is the Department of Education (DOE)'s guidance on
     Formative Assessment.
     You can use letter recognition and letter-sound knowledge inventories to document what sounds
     the children know, and to better place them into groups for instruction. This example from
     Macomb Intermediate School District is a quick way to assess children's early phonics
     knowledge.
               CHAPTER 4. PHONICS: BREAKING THE CODE TO WORDS | 64

Key Takeaways

· In order to become strong readers children must develop phonemic awareness,
   phonics skills, the ability to read words in text in an accurate and fluent manner, and
   the ability to apply comprehension strategies consciously and deliberately as they read.

· Research supports phonics instruction that is explicit and systematic. Explicit means that
   phonics skills are taught directly to students (instead of being presented indirectly through
   reading aloud). Systematic means that teachers follow a sequence of skills from simple to
   more complex, including frequent reviews of those skills.
65 | CHAPTER 4. PHONICS: BREAKING THE CODE TO WORDS

    Resources for teacher educators

    Games and Activities

          · Games are a great way for children to practice phonics. You can even create phonics
              games to send home. See this article from Scholastic to start, and you can find many more
              examples by searching on the internet.

          · The Florida Center for Reading Research. A team of researchers and teachers at FCRR
              collected ideas and created Student Center Activities for use in pre-kindergarten through
              fifth grade classrooms. The activities are designed for students to practice, demonstrate,
              and extend their learning of what has already been taught, sometimes with teacher
              assistance and sometimes independently. Students can complete the activities in small
              groups, pairs, or individually (description from website).

    Word Study Resources

          · Highline Public Schools Kindergarten Word Study Guide. OER Commons.
          · Highline Public Schools First Grade Word Study Guide. OER Commons.
          · Phonics progression chart from Reading Foundations Progressions. Phonics by Liberty

              Public Schools.
          · Words Their Way resources, presentations, and materials from Dr. Bear.
          · Parts of the chapter were adapted from Steps to Success: Crossing the Bridge Between

              Literacy Research and PracticebyMaria S. Murray licensed under a Creative Commons
              Attribution-NonCommercial-Share Alike 4.0 International License.

    Professional Resources

          · Dr. Bear's 2018 presentation on Word Study [PDF]
          · Common syllable division patterns (charts at Reading Rockets)
          · Sound-spelling pattern chart from Florida Center for Reading Research
          · Try this Quizlet on phonics concepts.

                    Password: LitEd3115
                                                                             CHAPTER 4. PHONICS: BREAKING THE CODE TO WORDS | 66

          · Dr. Gurjar's Slides on phonics.

References

Bear, D. R., Invernizzi, M., Johnston, F., & Templeton, S. (2008). Words their way: Word study for
   phonics, vocabulary, and spelling instruction. Pearson Higher Ed.

Beck, I. L., & Juel, C. (1995). The role of decoding in learning to read. American educator, 19(2), 8.
Blevins, W. (2019). Meeting the Challenges of Early Literacy Phonics Instruction. Literacy

   Leadership Brief.International Literacy Association.
Clay, M. M. (2005). Literacy lessons designed for individuals: Part two teaching procedures.

   Heinemann.
Williams, C., Phillips-Birdsong, C., Hufnagel, K., Hungler, D., & Lundstrom, R.P. (2009). Word

   Study Instruction in the K-2 Classroom. The Reading Teacher, 62(7), 570-578.
Phonics Terms That Every K-2 Teacher Should Know.
Findings of the National Reading Panel | Reading Rockets.
Phonics: In Practice | Reading Rockets
67 | CHAPTER 5. SUPPORTING LITERACY LEARNING IN THE EARLY CHILDHOOD CLASSROOM

Chapter 5. Supporting Literacy Learning in the
Early Childhood Classroom

   Sohyun Meacham

      "Reading should not be presented to children as a chore, a duty. It should be offered as a gift." -
      Kate DiCamillo

Photo by cottonbro studio on Pexels
CHAPTER 5. SUPPORTING LITERACY LEARNING IN THE EARLY CHILDHOOD CLASSROOM | 68

Keywords: dialogic reading, CROWD prompts, picturebooks, Whole Book Approach

This chapter discusses approaches for promoting

young children's literacy learning in classrooms.        Learning Objectives
Shared reading is one such practice. This chapter will

begin by presenting the dialogic and Whole Book

approaches as strategies for shared reading. The         · Describe Dialogic Reading.
dialogic reading approach, originally developed by          (InTASC Standard #4)
Lonigan & Whitehurst (1998), is a research-supported
strategy for shared reading in early childhood           · Create a read aloud lesson
classrooms. The Whole Book Approach of Lambert              plan for a picturebook
(2015), used at the Eric Carle Museum, enriches the         using CROWD prompts.
dialogic approach by encouraging investigation of the       InTASC Standard #7)
designs and para-text aspects of books as well as the
text and illustrations.                                  · Describe the Whole Book
                                                            Approach. (InTASC
                                                            Standard #4)

Selecting appropriate texts for developing readers and   · Analyze a picturebook
writers is an important part of instructional decision-     using the Whole Book
making. Hence, the second part of this chapter will         Approach. (InTASC
discuss quality picturebooks for supporting literacy        Standard #4)
learning in the early childhood classroom. Children's
interests as well as their reading levels should be      · Select quality picturebooks
important factors to consider in selecting                  for a child considering the
picturebooks for instruction, guided reading, and           child's interests and
independent reading in the classroom. Running               reading ability. (InTASC
Records (Clay, 2017) will be explained as an assessment     Standard #2)

                                                         · Identify educational
                                                            materials that can enrich

process for determining the appropriate text levels for  children's reading

individual children in the classroom.                    experiences. InTASC

The third part of this chapter will discuss other        Standard #8)

educational materials to be added in print-rich

learning environments in the classroom. While there

are so many methods and materials for early literacy classrooms, this chapter only discusses
69 | CHAPTER 5. SUPPORTING LITERACY LEARNING IN THE EARLY CHILDHOOD CLASSROOM

several of them. Knowledge and insights gained in this chapter can help readers find some other
creative methods and materials to enrich their children's literacy learning.

Dialogic reading

                  One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online
                  here: https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=281#oembed-1

                            Download Dialogic Reading Video Transcript [DOC]

There are good readers and poor readers. How do we know if our child is a good reader? When
our child says the words in the text accurately? When they can read fast (with automaticity)?
When they read like they speak in a regular conversation (with appropriate prosody)? While
these indicators might give us confidence that our child is a competent reader, some doubts may
still linger. Do we really know that our child is understanding the text when they say the words
correctly? Many times, we wait until our child finishes saying the last word of a portion of text;
then we ask about what they read. Then the child will briefly retell a couple of sentences as a
summary of the text. We ask some probing questions to prompt them to elaborate about some
details. This still might not convince us that our child made deep meaning out of the text.

Good readers check whether they understand what they read. They do it not only after reading
but also while reading. When a sentence makes little sense, or if they get distracted, they reread
it. When they are unsure of the meaning of a certain word, they look at the context to figure
it out. They go back and search for information that they need in order to make sense of the
current portion of text.

Good readers might do these comprehension checks silently in their brain, whether they are
reading silently or aloud. Perhaps none of it is articulated. While the accuracy and speed of your
child's oral reading can give you an idea if they are a struggling or advanced reader, it is hard to
determine their level of comprehension (Dougherty Stahl et al., 2019).
                           CHAPTER 5. SUPPORTING LITERACY LEARNING IN THE EARLY CHILDHOOD CLASSROOM | 70

CROWD

Teachers regularly think aloud when instructing students, not only for reading but also for
other subjects such as math and science. When they read aloud with the children, they do it
interactively. The CROWD prompts designed by Lonigan and Whitehurst (1998) are a useful
strategy that can guide you in thinking aloud during reading by having a conversation about a
book with your children, especially when they are young. C is for Completion, R for Recall, O
for Open-ended questions, W for Wh questions, and D for Distancing.

Completion prompts

A completion prompt is when you ask your child to complete the blank parts of sentences. You
read sentences aloud, leaving one or two words blank for your child to say. To be able to do it, an
emergent reader child needs to be able to decode the word(s) or take a guess from the context.
The illustrations are helpful when the child is just beginning to decode words. If the word to
complete is the name of something in an illustration, your child can examine the illustration for
a clue. In The Very Hungry Caterpillar, written and illustrated by Eric Carle (1969), an egg is lying
on a leaf, as seen in the pages below. The illustration portrays the description very clearly. You
can read the sentence "In the light of the moon a little egg lay on a ..." with rising pitch at the
end that exhibits your anticipation of hearing their reading of the final word "leaf."

This is a friendly and welcoming way for you to introduce your child to reading if your child
hasn't yet had formal instruction. Choose completion words intentionally. As mentioned before,
a word that can be guessed from the illustration is a good candidate. Words that appear in the
title or are repeated throughout the book are other good candidates. These words are mostly
ones that are keys for comprehending the story. Rather than choosing random words, choose
ones from the content that is essential for comprehension. "On Friday, he ate through five
oranges but he was still..." in The Very Hungry Caterpillar would be a good example for word
completion, because the blank is a key word that is important for comprehending the story. The
word hungry, which goes in the blank, appears in the title and is repeated throughout the book.
Although decoding the two-syllable word in an isolated context could be daunting to beginning
readers, when it is in the title and repeated on multiple pages of the book, your child will find
it fun and easy to come up with the word. Another candidate for a completion word is one
that rhymes with another before it. Also, sight words, simple CVC words, and target vocabulary
words that your child has already learned would be good completion words.
71 | CHAPTER 5. SUPPORTING LITERACY LEARNING IN THE EARLY CHILDHOOD CLASSROOM

Recall prompts

Recall prompts check if the children are comprehending and remembering the story. For
instance, in Laura Vaccaro Seeger's (2015) book titled I Used to be Afraid, the main character
talks about what she used to be afraid of. If you use the things she says as recall prompts, your
children will mention spiders, shadows, the dark, making a mistake, change, being alone, and
the like, which they will remember from the pages you have read together.

Completion words and recall prompts focus more on literal comprehension than inferential
comprehension. Literal prompts are concerned about the information that is explicitly available
in the text. Usually there is one right answer for a literal prompt. Many adults ask their children
about a name, size, color, or the shape of an object on a page, which are literal prompts. For
instance, on one of the pages of I Used to be Afraid, "What color is the shadow on this page?"
would be a good literal prompt focusing on the color of an object. While many adults use this
type of prompt, literal prompts are insufficient to assist your children in fully comprehending
what's going on in the story and developing higher-order thinking. Inferential prompts are
recommended for this purpose. These prompts ask the children to take a guess about what will
happen based on the information given in the text. A question like "Why do you think this girl is
not afraid of shadows anymore?" can help your child make a connection between the illustration
they see on the page and shadows. Making an inference, a child might say, "She thought that
shadows were monsters before. Now she thinks that she can play with the shadows making
hearts or something. A heart shape is not scary." Inferential prompts are more open-ended than
closed-ended, so they can elicit multiple reasonable answers.

Open-ended questions

Open-ended questions aim to help your child give an answer of more than one word, in contrast
to closed-ended questions, that call for a yes or no. A question like "Where do you think the
freight train went after this page?" at the end of the book Freight Train by Donald Crews (2003)
would be truly open-ended. There is no correct answer to this question. Therefore, your child
can come up with a creative answer. It is important to design open-ended questions that can
support your child's comprehension of the book. For instance, the wordless picturebook titled
Truck by Donald Crews (1997) does not tell a story but only shows one by its illustrations. The
main element of the story is a red truck that travels through cities and the countryside. On the
page where the back door of the truck is slightly open, you can spot several boxes of bikes.
You can ask an open-ended question like "Where do you think the cargo of this truck will
                           CHAPTER 5. SUPPORTING LITERACY LEARNING IN THE EARLY CHILDHOOD CLASSROOM | 72

be unloaded?" Your child has to study the illustration carefully and comprehend it to give a
relevant response such as a store that sells bikes.

Wh questions

"Wh" questions are used to help children focus on story details. These are questions beginning
with the word When, Where, Who, What, Why, or perhaps How. Conversations about what the
characters are thinking or the "where" of the story can be initiated with prompts that ask for
these details. Say for example, "What do you think Swimmy might be thinking on this page?"
when you read Swimmy by Leo Lionni (2017). Say "What do you think the train is passing by?"
when you read Freight Train by Donald Crews (2003). Then listen carefully to what your child
says so you can take the conversation deeper. When your child responds, ask why they think so.

Wh questions can also include inferential prompts that support your child's comprehension of
the story. When you read Inch by Inch by Leo Lionni (2018), the inchworm is threatened by a
nightingale. You can ask, "What do you think the inchworm will do to save his life?" Your child
needs to understand the concept of measuring, while still being creative, to respond to your
prompt.

Distancing questions

The purpose of distancing questions is to give your child an opportunity to make connections
between the story and their own life experiences, so they will grasp a message they can take
away from the book. For instance, when you read Dear Zoo by Rod Campbell (2019) aloud with
your child, you can ask, "What animals did we see when we visited the zoo?" Meanwhile, Eric
Carle's (1969) The Very Hungry Caterpillar provides a good context for a conversation about
a stomachache. When you are talking with your child about the book, you can refer to their
own stomachaches, thereby providing a personal point of reference for the vocabulary word.
This conversation will confirm whether your child understands the word. Other words used
for stomachache can be mentioned to build a semantic network for growing your child's future
vocabulary.

The CROWD prompts are useful facilitators for interactive read-alouds with your children. It is
possible you are concerned that the frequent interruptions from dialogic reading will interfere
with the children's comprehension of the story. While it is impossible to totally avoid some
73 | CHAPTER 5. SUPPORTING LITERACY LEARNING IN THE EARLY CHILDHOOD CLASSROOM

deviations from the story, using the CROWD prompts can make the dialogic reading experience
more effective and efficient.

  Learning Activities

                         An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
                         https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=281#h5p-23

Dialogic reading with the Whole Book Approach

Dialogic reading can be deepened with the Whole Book Approach (Lambert, 2015), as explained
in this section, as this approach helps us to dialogically explore the design of the book as well
as the text and the illustrations. The Eric Carle Museum proudly introduces their Whole Book
Approach for reading picturebooks with children. The museum curates and exhibits children's
picturebooks, emphasizing the quality of the illustrations. Thus, in their library the order of
the books is based on the illustrator's last name. This is different from the majority of other
children's libraries, which sort by the author's last name. Megan Dowd Lambert, who has
worked with the Eric Carle Museum for almost twenty years, published a book titled Reading
Picture Books with Children: How to Shake Up Storytime and Get Kids Talking about What They
See. This book clearly presents the Eric Carle Museum's Whole Book Approach, which is an
approach that helps us appreciate the illustrations and design quality of picturebooks as well as
their story.

The Whole Book Approach emphasizes interactive reading aloud during reading times. Instead
of reading aloud to children, Lambert (2015) explains that we should read aloud with them. In
this way you invite your child into an active conversation with you about the text, illustrations,
and design of the book. The Whole Book Approach guides you to pay attention to the jacket,
cover, trim size, endpapers, front matter, and typography of the picturebook that you read with
your child(ren). In addition, this approach says that it is worth mentioning even the barcode
location of a well-designed picturebook.
                           CHAPTER 5. SUPPORTING LITERACY LEARNING IN THE EARLY CHILDHOOD CLASSROOM | 74

Soh's two children grew up with Eric Carle books. She read The Very Hungry Caterpillar over and
over to both of her children from when they were born. One day her first-grade child Jimmy was
reading The Very Quiet Cricket (Carle, 2021). Soh and Jimmy had not yet talked about the author
or illustrator of the book, as it was a quick reading time after breakfast while he was waiting for
everyone else to get ready for school or work. Almost at the end of the book, he asked, "Wait a
minute, was the author of this book Eric Carle?" Soh asked him, "Oh, you think the author of
this book was Eric Carle?" Jimmy said, "Yes, the illustrations look similar to Eric Carle's (1969)
The Very Hungry Caterpillar. And the title sounds similar, too: The Very Something Something."

As a matter of fact, The Very Quiet Cricket was a leveled-book version, adapted from Eric Carle's
(1997) original one. To make it look similar to the other books in the series, the page orientation
had been changed from landscape to portrait. Also, the font sizes were much bigger than in the
original. Because of these changes, the written text grabs your child's attention more than the
illustrations or book design. These are things you can talk about with your child. Lambert writes
about the landscape orientation of The Very Hungry Caterpillar below:

       "Eric Carle's (1969) famed The Very Hungry Caterpillar adopts a landscape orientation
       because this shape best echoes the form of the caterpillar itself. Furthermore, the
       horizontal shape of the book bespeaks the page-to-page journey of the caterpillar as it
       makes its way through the foods lined up on the successive pages. It's a small leap for
       children to realize that most picture books about journeys adopt the landscape orientation
       because of the horizontal form's visual implication of movement through time and space
       in conjunction with the page turns." (Lambert, 2015, p.6)

The Very Quiet Cricket is similar to The Very Hungry Caterpillar in terms of Cricket's journey.
Cricket keeps moving forward (to the right in the book's design), encountering various insects.
He could not make any sound for a while. Finally, when he meets a female cricket at the end of
the story, he is able to chirp naturally. The portrait orientation of this leveled-book version loses
the effect of inviting readers to come along on Cricket's journey. Meanwhile, the leveled-book
version added some scientific information about crickets that the original version did not have,
targeting older children. Jimmy said he preferred the leveled book because he "figured out that
only male crickets can chirp" at the end of the book.

Jon Muth's (2002) The Three Questions contains a deep message. This book might be somewhat
difficult for preschoolers and kindergarteners to fully grasp the meaning of. On the Scholastic
Book Wizard page, the Guided Reading Level of this book is M, meaning it is at the 2nd-
grade instructional level for children in the United States. This book is based a Tolstoy's short
75 | CHAPTER 5. SUPPORTING LITERACY LEARNING IN THE EARLY CHILDHOOD CLASSROOM

story called "Three Questions." The original story is based on a certain king's three axiological
questions: 1) Who are the right people to listen to? 2) Who should be avoided? and 3) What is the
most important thing to do? Jon Muth tweaked this story, replacing the king with a boy called
Nikolai, who asks three similar questions: 1) What is the best time to do things? 2) Who is the
most important person? and 3) What is the right thing to do?

This book has a message that an adult can also appreciate, because it provides guidance that is
valuable for adults and children. Tolstoy explains the correct answers to his questions below:

       "Remember that there is only one important time and it is Now. The present moment
       is the only time over which we have dominion. The most important person is always
       the person with whom you are, who is right before you, for who knows if you will have
       dealings with any other person in the future? The most important pursuit is making that
       person, the one standing at your side, happy, for that alone is the pursuit of life."

The quality of the book is not just found in its message. The aesthetic quality of the illustrations
and design of the book are worthy of deep analysis. The peaceful watercolors used in these
illustrations create a contemplative atmosphere that leads us to ponder the three essential
questions of Nikolai and his friends.

Muth (2002) changes the sizes of characters on some pages. For instance, Pushkin the dog is
smaller than Gogol the monkey on one page; then Pushkin becomes bigger than Gogol on the
next page. This is when Pushkin points out that a coconut is about to fall on Gogol's head!
Talk about this with your child by sharing what you noticed: "Oh, I just noticed that Pushkin
became bigger than Gogol on this page. On the last page, Gogol was bigger. Why do you think
the illustrator drew them different sizes like this?"

Speaking about size, different sizes of words create special meanings. As Laura Vaccaro Seeger
(2015) said, "The great thing is that kids know that the bigger the word is the louder their voices
should be, and vice versa." When a character says "Sorry" with a small font size located in a
tiny word bubble, readers feel the apology is sincere (Lambert, 2015, pp. 44-45). Moreover, the
typography can create other effects such as a soundtrack and darkness:

       "Jerry Pinkney's nearly wordless Caldecott Medal winner, The Lion & the Mouse,
       incorporates various intraiconic, onomatopoeic sounds (owl hoots, the sounds of a jeep
       driving through the African savannah, and, of course, squeaking mice and a lion's roar).
       This creates a text that functions something like a soundtrack, which allows readers to
       immerse themselves in the setting he's created." (Lambert, 2015, p. 47)
                           CHAPTER 5. SUPPORTING LITERACY LEARNING IN THE EARLY CHILDHOOD CLASSROOM | 76

Play and the Whole Book Approach

Playfulness with books is another important aspect of the Whole Book Approach. There are
many books that invite your child to play, with cut-out holes, embossed objects, blinking lights,
or maybe real sound effects. These features encourage you to interact with your child while
reading. Research has found that children's language development is strongly associated with
their caregiver's or teacher's use of pretenses and engagement in play with them (Gest et al.,
2006; Kontos, 1999; Meacham et al., 2014). Books can be considered to be a type of toy (Roskos,
2021). Pretend that your finger is the very hungry caterpillar eating through the holes in the
food in Eric Carle's book. Make a heart with your child's hand and yours on the page where
the protagonist makes a big heart shadow with her hands in Laura Vaccaro Seeger's (2015) book
I Used to be Afraid. Encourage your child to feel the embossed cobweb and spider with their
fingers in The Very Busy Spider by Eric Carle. Count all the pigs you can find on a page of
Anthony Browne's Piggybook.

The Whole Book Approach involves your aesthetic appreciation of the book that you read
aloud with your child, as it emphasizes the illustrations and book-design features in addition to
the story. However, the bottom line is to engage your child in interactive and playful reading,
observing many features beyond the written text. By doing so, you are educating your child to
wholly comprehend the book created by the author, illustrator, and publisher.

Using quality picturebooks and readers

While the Whole Book Approach can be applied to any reading moments in classrooms,
choosing quality picturebooks can ensure many conversation topics for dialogic reading with
children. Consider choosing picturebooks with notable awards for children's books, as they
involve many experts in the fields as judges. The Randolph Caldecott Medal and Theodor Seuss
Geisel Award are arguably the most notable awards that parents of young children look for if
they are interested in enhancing their children's reading through quality picturebooks.

The Caldecott Medal

The Caldecott Medal is well-known as an indicator of quality picturebooks published in the
United States. The medal is given annually to the picturebook with the most distinguished
illustrations, and others may be selected for the Honor level. The illustration-focused selection
77 | CHAPTER 5. SUPPORTING LITERACY LEARNING IN THE EARLY CHILDHOOD CLASSROOM

criteria for the Caldecott Award include these: artistic technique; pictorial interpretation of the
story, theme, or concept; appropriateness of the illustration style to the story, theme, or concept;
delineation of plot, theme, characters, setting, mood, or information through the pictures; and
excellence of presentation for a child audience. It may be noted that this award does not focus
on the pedagogical intent (Association for Library Service to Children, 2020), although the high-
quality illustrations and illustration-text connection as recognized by the Caldecott Medal can
be useful for young children's learning. Neither is popularity a part of the selection criteria,
although the Caldecott-Medal books and Honor books tend to become popular.

Many illustrators have won the Caldecott Award multiple times. David Wiesner, who illustrated
Flotsam, The Three Pigs, and Art & Max, won the Medal three times and the Honor designation
three times as well. Jerry Pinkney, who illustrated The Lion & the Mouse and Noah's Ark, is also
a six-time Caldecott winner (one Medal and five Honor Awards). Jerry Pinkney's son Brian
Pinkney won two Honor Awards. Therefore, the Pinkneys together have won eight Caldecott
Awards, but Maurice Sendak, the legendary author-illustrator who created Where the Wild Things
Are, won eight Caldecott Awards by himself!

A notable illustrator with two recent Medals is Sophie Blackall. Her latest one was awarded in
2019 for Hello Lighthouse; in 2016 she won it for Finding Winnie: The True Story of the World's Most
Famous Bear. The quality of these two books, with detailed micro-illustrations, has something to
do with Blackall's arduous research work. They are aesthetically pleasing to adults and children.
Hello Lighthouse is classified as historical fiction, while Finding Winnie is nonfiction, based on
real history. To write Hello Lighthouse, Blackall "visited several (lighthouses), climbing spiral
staircases, poring over (lighthouse) keepers; logbooks, and gazing happily out lantern room
windows" (Blackall, 2018). It took her one year to complete the illustrations for Finding Winnie,
because she did extensive research about the period from the time a baby bear was named
"Winnie" by Captain Harry Colebourn to the time Winnie was donated to the London Zoo, and
grew to be the beloved Winnie the Pooh of children's books. Blackall spent a whole week just
drawing a precise map of the London Zoo for the pages of Finding Winnie (Rich, 2016). In terms
of style, Blackall chose Chinese watercolors in both books to depict the nostalgic stories with
delicate, warm, and luminous illustrations.

The Geisel Award

The Geisel Award uses Dr. Seuss's last name. Therefore, it honors Dr. Seuss's works, which have
long been enjoyed by beginning readers. The Geisel Award is "given annually to the author(s)
                           CHAPTER 5. SUPPORTING LITERACY LEARNING IN THE EARLY CHILDHOOD CLASSROOM | 78

and illustrator(s) of the most distinguished American book for beginning readers published in
English in the United States during the preceding year" (Association for Library Service to
Children, 2019). This award is not as widely known by parents as the Caldecott Award, perhaps
due to its shorter history. The first Geisel Award was announced in 2006. As it focuses on the
aspect of helping young children learn to decode, it could naturally make you think of the types
of children's books that appear as leveled books, basal readers, and simple readers.

Beginning readers with excellent plots, sensibility, and rhythm that can be helpful for young
children's reading experiences become candidates for the Geisel Award. While the target age
for the Caldecott Medal is up to fourteen, the Geisel Award focuses on pre-K through grade 2,
when the children usually begin formal reading instruction. Although the text quality is primary
among the selection criteria, quality illustrations that "function as keys or clues to the text"
(Association for Library Service to Children, 2020) are required. The detailed selection criteria
shown below reveal how the text quality is designed to motivate the children and advance their
reading ability:

       "Subject matter must be intriguing enough to motivate the child to read... New words
       should be added slowly enough to make learning them a positive experience. Words
       should be repeated to ensure knowledge retention. Sentences must be simple and
       straightforward... The illustrations must demonstrate the story being told. The book
       creates a successful reading experience, from start to finish. The plot advances from one
       page to the next and creates a `page-turning' dynamic." (Association for Library Service to
       Children, 2020)

Mo Willems's (2013) A Big Guy Took My Ball, which received a 2014 Geisel Honor Award, exhibits
all of these criteria. The book starts with a small number of words per page (fewer than 5 on
most). There are only 5 pages with more than 10 words among the total of 57 pages. Some
of the lengthier pages are followed by ones with fewer or no words, encouraging a "page-
turning" dynamic. The word "big," which appears in the title, appears 20 times among the
total of 205 running words in the book. If some variants of the word, such as "bigger" and
"biggy" are included, there are 23 appearances of this word, 10% of the total running words. This
repetition helps children remember how to read it. If your students are in the very beginning
stage of learning to read, they can be invited to sound out only this word during your read-aloud
with them. In addition, the repetition of this word in different font sizes can be considered
a rhythmic component of the story, which can stimulate your children to change their voices
when they read it. The author-illustrator Mo Willems has three Caldecott Honor and seven
79 | CHAPTER 5. SUPPORTING LITERACY LEARNING IN THE EARLY CHILDHOOD CLASSROOM

Geisel Honor Awards. Although A Big Guy Took My Ball was not recognized by Caldecott, it still
conveys quality illustrations that can delight your children.

Again, beginning readers are still considered picturebooks. Not too different from the Caldecott
selection criteria, the Geisel Award emphasizes connections between the text and illustrations.
Therefore, as you can imagine, there are picturebooks that are recognized by both awards. Laura
Vaccaro Seeger's (2007) First the Egg won the Honor designation by both Caldecott and Geisel
in 2008. This concept book artistically delineates the concept of transformation in nature by
joining story and pictures together in the examples of the chicken, frog, flower, butterfly, and
human. Vivid primary colors are textured meticulously and skillfully in Seeger's oil-on-canvas
illustrations. On every other page is a die-cut to make you and your children curious about what
comes between the seed and flower or the caterpillar and butterfly. When you read the book,
you will gradually learn that when you see a new thing, it will become something else once
you turn the page, like from an egg to a chicken. From the caterpillar page, you anticipate that
it will become a butterfly; but you still have curiosity regarding what will be in between. The
small caterpillar-shaped die-cut will be part of something that is on the verso page when you
turn it over. It is still exciting to guess, although you know you will see a butterfly on the recto
page. The in-between stages of transformation, such as a sprout or a chick, are not narrated but
only illustrated, which invites your and your children's input. In fact, the text and pictures are
equally necessary for the readers to understand the transformational process. The Whole Book
Approach introduced earlier informs you about how to fully appreciate picturebooks by looking
at both the text and illustrations.

A further comment about the text of First the Egg - it reads like a poem with a somewhat
structured format. In terms of how the words flow, "first the XXX, then the XXXX" is repeated
seven times throughout the book, which makes seven interesting sound clusters, most of which
have seven syllables. A syllable count of the entire book yields the pattern 7-7-7-11-7-7-7. This
does not follow any traditional poetic format, such as limerick, haiku, or sonnet. However, the
rhythm in this book will really sound like a song to you and your children. You might want to
add a melody and make it a real song with them.

There are more illustrators who have achieved both the Caldecott and Geisel Awards. In
addition to the aforementioned ones, a Caldecott Medal awardee named Jon Classen won a
Geisel Honor with his I Want My Hat Back; and Grace Lin, a Caldecott Honor awardee, also won
a Geisel Honor with her Ling & Ting: Not Exactly the Same! If your children have started their
formal instruction, you might want to pay attention to these author-illustrators for a while.
                           CHAPTER 5. SUPPORTING LITERACY LEARNING IN THE EARLY CHILDHOOD CLASSROOM | 80

Considering children's interests and reading ability when
selecting picturebooks

The previous section talked about quality picturebooks by looking at the Caldecott, Geisel,
and Pura Belpré children's literature awards. The selection criteria for these awards are similar
to what many children's literature scholars advise for choosing picturebooks. They suggest
picturebooks that use precise vocabulary, figurative vocabulary, dialogues, and rhythmic
language. If the text explains in too much detail or sounds preachy, it should raise a red flag. The
illustrations should be able to establish the setting, define and develop the characters, establish
moods, reinforce the written text, provide differing viewpoints, extend and develop the plot,
and provide interesting subplots and details aside from the main storyline. Unique styles and
creative use of visual elements such as lines, shapes, colors, textures, and composition are also
important things to consider in recognizing a well-illustrated book (Young et al., 2019).

Now you know what makes a quality picturebook. The next question could be whether your
child will be able to read the book independently or need some adult guidance. Is the book
too difficult or too easy? For this question, a conversation about children's reading levels and
leveled books will be useful to us. Because of caregivers' questions regarding their children's
reading ability, publishers curate or develop leveled-book series, organizing picturebooks by
text difficulty. These series are convenient for instructing children to read. However, packaged
readers are insufficient in themselves to fully prepare your children to read because they limit
the readers' choices and access to complex texts. In addition, collections of readers do not
necessarily emphasize quality illustrations. Luckily, these days there are online resources that
provide the reading levels of high-quality picturebooks. If you are curious about the level of a
certain book, websites such as Scholastic Book Wizard and Lexile will be useful to you.

Reading level guidelines

While there are several different leveling systems, the Guided Reading Level System from A
to Z (or Z2) is one of the most frequently used ones in the United States. Levels A to D are
for kindergarteners, E to J for 1st graders, and K to L for 2nd graders, although there are
some variations in these ranges based on children's individual differences, or the opinions of
publishers or scholars.

The Lexile system is another well-known book-leveling system. By using Lexile's Quick Book
Search, you can find the Lexile measure of the text difficulty of a book you are interested in. For
81 | CHAPTER 5. SUPPORTING LITERACY LEARNING IN THE EARLY CHILDHOOD CLASSROOM

instance, if you look up a book titled Dishy-Washy by Joy Cowley (1997), you will see 220L for the
Lexile rating. Joy Cowley is a New Zealand author who has written an abundance of books for
children. She has her own beginning reader series. As she is a beloved children's book author, it
is possible that your home library already has many books by her. Lexile measures between 160L
and 310L are similar to Levels D and E of the Guided Reading Level System in terms of difficulty.
These are suitable for late kindergarten to early 1st grade, although your actual decision should
depend on the child's reading ability.

There are many book-level-correlation charts that you can find by online searches. The Guided
Reading Level and Lexile almost always appear in them. Here is an abbreviated chart for
children from pre-K to 2nd grade:

Grade  Guided Reading  Lexile
K      A               BR70L-10L
K      B-C             BR404-160L
K-1st  D-E             160L-310L
1st    F-G             300L-450L
1st    J               430L-530L
2nd    K               510L-620L
2nd    L               530L-810L
2nd    M               530L-850L

In the above table, "BR" in a code denotes "Beginning Reader." In addition, "AD" is another
code attached to some Lexile measures that you may want to know about. It denotes "Adult
Directed." This code is affixed to a book if it is best shared as an adult-led read-aloud. An
example of this is Eric Carle's (2021) The Very Quiet Cricket, whose Lexile code is AD490L.
Finding the number 490L in the above table, you can determine that your children can
independently read and understand this book at around 1st grade. However, "the content may
be geared towards younger children," and the Lexile website says this book is appropriate for
ages 3-5 (MetaMetrics, 2020). According to the Scholastic Book Wizard, the Guided Reading
Level of this book is J, and the appropriate grade levels are indicated to be PreK-K and 1st-2nd
(Scholastic Inc., 2020). In reality, this book is read to younger children in many U.S. families.
The small board-book format of this book is considered to be especially suited for babies' hands
in the U.S. culture. It does not mean that your children should not read this book during first
                           CHAPTER 5. SUPPORTING LITERACY LEARNING IN THE EARLY CHILDHOOD CLASSROOM | 82

grade. As a matter of fact, the font size of The Very Quiet Cricket is much bigger in the reader's
version than the original version because the text is the primary focus when your children are
learning to read.

You might want to have some conversations with your classroom children regarding the
differences between the original version and the reader's version. For one thing, the reader's
version is in portrait orientation, whereas the original is in landscape. The reader's version
does not have the chirping sounds that your children can actually hear with the board-book
version. However, the reader's version contains more information regarding crickets, which can
help your children make connections between this fiction story and factual information about
crickets' sounds. For instance, Soh's son Jimmy was glad to learn something new when he read
the reader's version in first grade: female crickets are unable to chirp; only male crickets chirp.

Knowing a picturebook's Guided Reading Level or Lexile level is not the end of the matter, as
you have to match the picturebook with your child's reading ability. If your child is making more
than one error in every ten words when they read a book orally, it may be too hard. That is a
reading accuracy of roughly 90% or below. On the other hand, if they are missing one or fewer in
twenty words, it is a text they can read independently. This means an accuracy of roughly 95% or
above. As they progress, choosing text levels they can read with between 90 and 95% accuracy,
and providing your guidance, is a good rule of thumb. Running Records (Clay, 2017), a reading-
assessment guide, can assist this process.
83 | CHAPTER 5. SUPPORTING LITERACY LEARNING IN THE EARLY CHILDHOOD CLASSROOM

    Administration and use of running records

      Running Records is a method for analyzing children's reading performance during their oral
      reading, systematically documenting their reading accuracy, miscues, self-corrections, and
      reading strategies. You can select any text consisting of 100 running words or so (100-200 words)
      to administer Running Records. Usually authentic texts with cohesive stories or informational
      texts are recommended. Ask the child to read orally, then start coding how the child reads each
      word. While there is an official Running Records form provided in Clay's (2017) book for you to
      fill out, you can just quickly grab an empty sheet of paper to start coding during the child's oral
      reading. Make a coding mark for each word as the child reads it and make a return swift after
      each line of text. If a word is read correctly, simply write it with a check mark (). Miscues such
      as substitutions and omissions are marked over the word with a horizontal line between. For
      instance, if the child says horse for house (substitution), write horse over the line and house
      below it:
      horse
      house
      If the child does not say anything for house (omission), mark a dash over the line and house
      below it:

         -
      house
      If the child inserts a word that is not there (insertion), write it over the line and a dash below:
      house
      -
      Self-correction is not considered an error. Whether you initially marked a word for substitution,
      omission, or insertion, simply add /SC after the marking for it. For instance, if the child says
      chicken for hen, but then corrects it, , write /SC after the error code:
      chicken/SC
      hen
      Repetition is not considered an error either. Just draw a line above the repeated segment and put
      an R. For multiple repetitions, a numerical superscript can be used. If you end up telling the
                           CHAPTER 5. SUPPORTING LITERACY LEARNING IN THE EARLY CHILDHOOD CLASSROOM | 84

      word to the child for an omitted or substituted word, mark a T for Told on the bottom next to
      the word. The example below means that the child said again for across and you corrected the
      child's miscue:

         Again
      Across/T

      For each miscue, you determine what type of cues that the child used from among semantic
      (meaning-related), syntactic (grammatical), and graphic (graphophonic, not illustration) cues.
      This will be valuable information that can assist you in making instructional decisions for the
      child. After the child's oral reading and your marking are complete, you calculate the accuracy
      rate, error rate, and self-correction rate using the numbers of total running words (RW) and
      errors (E). The formula for calculating the accuracy rate is 100 - (E/RW X 100). If the total
      running words were 152 and there were 18 errors, the accuracy rate is 88.16%. This means that
      the child is making more than one error in every ten words. The text that the child read is
      frustrating. You might want to suggest an easier text. In addition, the self-correction rate is the
      ratio of self-corrections to the total number of errors and self-corrections [SC/(E+SC)]. This
      indicates the degree to which the child is monitoring his/her reading. All the information you
      gain from Running Records can be used for text choices as well as monitoring progress because
      you can administer Running Records with each child as often as time permits.

Reading levels are a guide, not a rule

You should not be too strict about book levels. Your children's interests should be an important
factor in choosing book topics as well. Your children's interests can often override their reading
level, because they will be motivated to read more when they want to know what they are
reading about. To tell a story from Soh's husband's childhood, his interest in sports helped him
develop his reading ability. Although he is currently a literacy professor who reads and writes
about children's reading and writing all the time, during his primary grades he struggled with
reading. However, he and his father enjoyed watching football games together, he recollects. In
his hometown of Canton, Ohio, the Pro Football Hall of Fame town, even high-school football
games were a big deal. He started reading sports magazines to learn all about his favorite players
and games. Those magazines were not published for beginning readers. He was eventually able
to read them easily, while still in primary school, which helped make him an advanced reader.
An implication from this story is that we do not need to discourage our children when they
85 | CHAPTER 5. SUPPORTING LITERACY LEARNING IN THE EARLY CHILDHOOD CLASSROOM

choose to read picturebooks or other texts about topics they are interested in, even though the
text difficulty is above their reading ability at the moment.
Make regular trips to a bookstore or a library with your children and have book-choice
conversations. In doing so, you can get to know their interests. Not only topics, but genres,
authors, illustrators, and even particular illustration styles can be things you ponder together in
choosing the books they like to read.

  Learning Activities

                         An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
                         https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=281#h5p-20

                         An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
                         https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=281#h5p-40

Enriching reading with other educational materials

Choosing a theme for a unit is popular in many classrooms and families as a means of making
the children's reading experiences more integrated and educational. This approach selects
related picturebooks to read for a week or a month. Transportation is a frequently adopted topic.
Taking this approach, you might curate picturebooks about transportation so your children
can learn and think more deeply about this topic for a while. Popular nursery rhymes and
folk songs such as "Down by the Station" and "The Wheels on the Bus" can be sung, of
which picturebook versions can be acquired. You might do an author-illustrator study on
Donald Crews or Byron Barton, whose works include many different forms of transportation. In
addition, many transportation toys such as replica cars, trucks, airplanes, riding toys, and trains
with tracks can be provided side by side with the picturebooks.
                           CHAPTER 5. SUPPORTING LITERACY LEARNING IN THE EARLY CHILDHOOD CLASSROOM | 86

Providing real objects relevant to picturebooks creates ostensive learning environments, which
are optimal contexts for learning vocabulary. Ostensive learning environments allow you to
point to real objects that your children can experience with their senses (Pence Turbull &
Justice, 2017). While picturebooks provide visual information about vocabulary words that you
are trying to teach, if you juxtapose real objects with the illustrations, there is a much higher
chance that your children will retain the words.

A reading experience with Hooray for Birds! by Lucy Cousins (2018) could be enriched by going
bird watching with your children. If there is a tree that you can see through your classroom
window where many different birds visit, you can point to those birds and have some fun
conversations with your children, making connections between the book and the birds you see.

       "What is the yellow and gray bird with black on its head? Do you hear it sing fee-bee?
       That's my favorite bird."

       "Oh, I know. A black-capped chickadee! We saw black-capped chickadees in Hooray for
       Birds! Do female black-capped chickadees make that sound too? Female crickets don't
       make chirping sounds. Only male crickets do."

This comment was prompted by our previous reading of an information page added to the
reader version of The Very Quiet Cricket by Eric Carle. After this conversation, Soh's son Jimmy
and Soh did some research about the songs that male and female black-capped chickadees sing.
They found that both genders sing the fee-bee song, although females rarely sing louder than
males (Goodwin & Podos, 2013). "Males ... sing the fee-bee song, primarily during the breeding
season, when they use it to protect territory and to attract females" (Weisman & Ratcliffe, 2004,
p. 536). This story of self-motivated research on black-capped chickadees shows an inquiry-
based approach that many science educators endorse (Ansberry & Morgan, 2010).

Questions that your children bring up can be an effective medium for integrating and enriching
the reading experience. When your children read a book, they might murmur something out
loud. It might be a sign that they are pondering or inquiring about something that they read. Be
a good listener and support your children's inquiry-based learning. You might be able to remind
them of some books that you read with them before. It is possible that you can find some other
books or online resources that your children can get their answers from. Children's questions
often indicate their interests, suggesting future choices for books.
87 | CHAPTER 5. SUPPORTING LITERACY LEARNING IN THE EARLY CHILDHOOD CLASSROOM

Puzzles and board games

There are many other types of educational materials related to the topic chosen for a thematic
unit, such as puzzles and board games. Children see puzzles and board games as play and
fun. This doesn't necessarily mean that reading picturebooks is not playful. I mean that even
reluctant beginning readers can see reading-related puzzles and board games as play, and
incorporating them will enrich the children's reading experiences.

Many puzzles use illustrations from popular picturebooks. Among them, puzzles using
illustrations from Leo Lionni's (2017) Swimmy, Maurice Sendak's Where the Wild Things Are, and
Eric Carle's The Very Hungry Caterpillar were our family's favorites. Floor puzzles easily engage
all of a classroom's children.

Some puzzles are made from just one word. These puzzle pieces can be broken into phonemes
and graphemes to teach phonics. Many industrious teachers create their own puzzles using
illustrations from the picturebooks that they read with their children. These teacher-created
materials can be useful for particular purposes such as vocabulary instruction, phonics
instruction, and play that enriches the overall integrated learning about the chosen topic.

Board games are another type of educational materials frequently used with young children.
There are many board games that use the themes, characters, and/or illustrations of popular
picturebooks. A board game named Let's Feed the Very Hungry Caterpillar is an example. Eric
Carle's (1969) popular The Very Hungry Caterpillar supplied its motif. Incorporating the familiar
illustrations, the game is designed to teach basic concepts such as counting, days of the week,
and the butterfly's life cycle, as put forward in the picturebook. The playing pieces, in the shape
of the Very Hungry Caterpillar, go around the board from fruit to fruit. When a piece "stops to
eat," it collects a butterfly puzzle piece. Each player has a butterfly puzzle like the illustration in
Eric Carle's book. The first player to collect all five pieces wins the game.

Your children can be encouraged to develop their own original toys and educational materials
inspired by the picturebooks that they read. Comprehension of the picturebooks goes deeper
during this process. You can actually purchase books, puzzles, and board games that are blank
(Barebooks.com). While children can make them from scratch using construction paper or
miscellaneous materials found at home or purchased, the commercially sold blank books,
puzzles, and board games make final products that are more professional looking and durable.
No matter what materials you use, the design process is equally significant in engaging you and
your children in multiple rich conversations about the story of the picturebook.
                           CHAPTER 5. SUPPORTING LITERACY LEARNING IN THE EARLY CHILDHOOD CLASSROOM | 88

Puppets, figurines, and other toys

Last but not least, puppets, figurines, stuffed animals, and dolls for your children's imaginative
play can enrich their language and literacy learning. If they are characters from the children's
favorite picturebooks, they can retell parts of the stories they read while they are pretending.
Merchandized puppets, figurines, stuffed animals, and dolls from many picturebooks are
available for purchase, although you can also create them with your classroom children. Using
them is an effective way to help children retain sophisticated vocabulary words and sentences
from the picturebooks, which supports their language and literacy development.

In early childhood classrooms, teachers often invite the children to participate in teacher-
guided role plays, using stories from picturebooks. Children can certainly play without adult
guidance, and their play can be very complex and sophisticated, providing a significant context
for learning. However, adult-guided play ensures the use of advanced words and sentences, as
well as literary elements such as plot, setting, and characters. The adult can assume different
roles, such as play leader, co-player, stage manager, director, and onlooker (Enz & Christie, 1993;
Roskos & Neuman, 1993). Costumes of characters from picturebooks are another prop that adds
a new dimension of richness to your classroom library. By wearing costumes, your children can
more deeply understand and empathize with the characters.

Music as an educational resource

Music can be another effective way to support young children's literacy learning.

Give it your all.
Give it your all.
At Christmas we give,
So give it your all.

Every now and then, Soh finds herself singing the refrain from Pete the Cat Saves Christmas (story
and song by Eric Litwin, illustrations by James Dean), especially around Christmas time. The
melody and words that were meant for young children stuck with her too. Soh realizes that she
is humming the song while driving without any music in the car. It is associated with a pleasant
feeling as she hears her son Jimmy's somewhat husky singing voice in her mind. This song has
warmed Soh's heart for many years since she first heard it.

Jimmy was not much into reading when he first started kindergarten. His reading level was far
89 | CHAPTER 5. SUPPORTING LITERACY LEARNING IN THE EARLY CHILDHOOD CLASSROOM

below his older sister Sabina's at that age. He was not able to read the beginner-level books
independently, which was not surprising, because neither Soh nor her husband had given him
any formal reading instruction. (They hadn't taught Sabina either, but she was still able to read
the beginner-level books independently when she first started kindergarten.) Jimmy was the
youngest child in his kindergarten classroom, which worried Soh even more. She recalls that the
question of whether Jimmy would be successful in his first year of school never left her mind
during his first semester in kindergarten. As reading is one of the primary accomplishments
that kindergarteners are supposed to achieve in U.S. schools, Soh strove to increase Jimmy's
interest in it. Around Christmas time, she purchased the Pete the Cat Saves Christmas book with
a song CD from the Scholastic Book Fair. She started playing the CD in her minivan, where she
usually played songs and stories for the kids. Soh had many CDs for Jimmy and Sabina, because
she felt that playing the music and stories while they were driving made them feel her love.
While both children loved the song, Jimmy's excitement about all the Pete the Cat books knew
no bounds. When other people asked about his favorite books, he answered without hesitation,
"I love Pete the Cat books!"

Another catchy refrain from Pete the Cat was "I'm rocking in my school shoes," from Pete the
Cat: Rocking in My School Shoes (story and song by Eric Litwin, illustrations by James Dean). The
story depicts all the fun things that Pete the Cat does in his school: reading, eating, playing,
singing, painting, adding, and writing. Jimmy collected all the Pete the Cat books and adored
them. Pete the Cat and His Four Groovy Buttons triggered Jimmy's curiosity about the meaning
of the word groovy. After learning the word, Jimmy and Soh had fun moments giggling about
his groovy "outie" belly button. Pete the Cat and His Four Groovy Buttons is a Geisel Honor Book,
which means that it is recognized as being a high-quality reader that can help children develop
their decoding ability. Jimmy loved repeating "My buttons, my buttons, my four groovy buttons.
My buttons, my buttons, my four groovy buttons" from the song. When he was reading the
book independently, he still sang those lines just like on the CD. This relates to what research
suggests regarding fluency development (Rasinski, 2014).

Thanks in large part to the Pete the Cat series, Jimmy has developed a very positive feeling about
school in general. Last night, during our bed-time conversation, Jimmy told me that he loves
school. He added that he loves reading, math, and playing football with his buddies. Pete the
Cat: Rocking in My School Shoes is relatable to Jimmy's school life. It's not necessarily Jimmy's
shoes, but his everyday accomplishments that have helped him feel good about school; but the
contribution of the Pete the Cat songs to Jimmy's positive attitude about school is undeniable.
                           CHAPTER 5. SUPPORTING LITERACY LEARNING IN THE EARLY CHILDHOOD CLASSROOM | 90

Research on the use of music when teaching literacy

There are many research studies that favor the use of songs in literacy education. Montgomery
& Smith (2014) found that song-based picturebooks can provide children with increased
opportunities for repetition with authentic episodes of rhyming, alliteration, and onomatopoeia.
Many researchers (e.g., Peynrcolu et al., 2008; Rainey & Larsen, 2002; Wolfe & Hom, 1993)
encourage the use of familiar melodies as aids in recalling text. Phonological awareness, which
is an important foundation for later reading development, is defined as sensitivity to the
phonological structure of words (Torgesen et al., 1994). One activity performed to increase
phonological awareness is to sing a song. Because of the many reasons written above, songs are
frequently used in foreign-language teaching (Batdi & Semerci, 2012; evik, 2012; evik, 2011).

Meanwhile, there is some controversy in the professional literature over the use of music as a
part of reading instruction. For example, one seminal study on reading instruction warned about
the use of music tapes as follows:

       "In tape-assisted reading, students read along in their books as they hear a fluent reader
       read the book on an audiotape. For tape-assisted reading, you need a book at a student's
       independent reading level and a tape recording of the book read by a fluent reader at about
       80-100 words per minute. The tape should not have effects or music." (Armbruster et al.,
       2003, p.24)

However, this warning is for a very particular context designed for fluency building. Therefore,
it should not discourage the use of songs and music for other contexts of reading instruction.
Again, using songs is beneficial for helping children learn to decode, particularly through
developing the following skills: rhyming (Bolduc, 2009; Dege & Schwarzer, 2011; Herrera et
al., 2011), syllable segmentation (Bolduc, 2009; Dege & Schwarzer, 2011; Gromko, 2005; Overy
et al., 2003), onset/rime practice (Herrera et al., 2011), blending (Dege & Schwarzer, 2011), and
phonemic awareness (Bolduc, 2009; Gromko, 2005; Overy et al., 2003).

There is a reason in this section for citing all of these research studies to support the use of
songs in reading development. As music is often taken for granted by laymen, a discussion
about music may not sound convincing or may just sound preachy. I wanted to emphasize
that using songs to develop reading ability is research based. Getting back now to this article
being an everyday conversation with parents, let me say that songs really help us build positive
relationships with our children because reading and singing together enhances our engagement
with them (Montgomery, 2012). Music has the ability to communicate social and affective
91 | CHAPTER 5. SUPPORTING LITERACY LEARNING IN THE EARLY CHILDHOOD CLASSROOM

information as it creates a feeling of "being together in time" (Overy & Molnar-Szakacs, 2009,
p. 499). Certainly for me, music creates a feeling of being together with my children in time,
which motivates me to communicate more with them. This also promotes more communication
among us in general, which supports our children's language development.

  Reflection Questions

         · What can you do to facilitate interactive read-alouds with young children?
         · How will you select books for a child who is reluctant to read?
         · Which method of teaching early literacy was most memorable to you when you were

             observing other teachers?

  Key Takeaways

         · CROWD prompts are useful facilitators for interactive read-alouds with children.
         · The Whole Book Approach asks that you engage with children in interactive and playful

             reading, observing many features beyond the written text.
         · Picturebooks can be selected based on awards and recognition received, or thematic ties to

             learning goals.
         · Questions that children verbalize can be used to guide inquiry-based learning. Prompt

             children to connect information from one book to another you have read together.
                           CHAPTER 5. SUPPORTING LITERACY LEARNING IN THE EARLY CHILDHOOD CLASSROOM | 92

    Resources for teacher educators

          · Dialogic Reading: An Effective Way to Read Aloud with Young Children
          · Dialogic Reading: Having a Conversation About Books
          · Running Record Assessment Tips (Reading A-Z)
          · 25 Activities for Reading and Writing Fun
          · Make it Meaningful: Emergent Literacy in the Kindergarten Years [PDF]

References

Ansberry, K., & Morgan, E. (2010). Picture-perfect science lessons. National Science Teachers
   Association-NSTA Press.

Armbruster, B. B., Lehr, F., Osborn, J., & Adler, C. R. (2003). Put reading first: the research building
   blocks of reading instruction : kindergarten through grade 3 (2nd ed.). National Institute for
   Literacy.

Association for Library Service to Children (2020, Mar). Welcome to the Caldecott Medal home
   page! Retrieved from http://www.ala.org/alsc/awardsgrants/bookmedia/caldecottmedal/
   caldecottmedal

Association for Library Service to Children (2020, Mar). Welcome to the (Theodor Seuss) Geisel
   Award home page! Retrieved from http://www.ala.org/alsc/awardsgrants/bookmedia/
   geiselaward

Batdi, V., & Semerci, Ç. (2012). Students' views towards effectiveness of songs in developing
   foreign language skills. Journal of Research in Education and Teaching, 1(4), 126-133.

Blackall, S. (2018). Hello lighthouse (S. Blackall, Illus.). Little, Brown Books for Young Readers.
Bolduc, J. (2009). Effects of a music programme on kindergarteners' phonological awareness

   skills. International Journal of Music Education, 27(1), 37-47. https://doi.org/10.1177/
   0255761408099063
93 | CHAPTER 5. SUPPORTING LITERACY LEARNING IN THE EARLY CHILDHOOD CLASSROOM

Campbell, R. (2019). Dear zoo: A lift-the-flap picturebook (R. Campbell, Illus.). Pan Macmillan.

Carle, E. (1969). The very hungry caterpillar (E. Carle, Illus.). World Publishing Company.

Carle, E. (1997). The very quiet cricket (E. Carle, Illus.). World of Eric Carle.

Carle, E. (2021). Step into reading: The very quiet cricket (E. Carle, Illus.). Random House Books for
   Young Readers.

Clay, M. (2017). Running records for classroom teachers (2nd ed.). Heinemann.

Cousins, L. (2018). Hooray for birds! (L. Cousins, Illus.). Candlewick.

Cowley, J. (1997). Dishy-washy (E. Fuller, Illus.). Wright Group.

Crews. D. (1997). Truck (D. Crews, Illus.). Greenwillow Books.

Crews, D. (2003). Freight train (D. Crews, Illus.). Greenwillow Books.

Degé, F., & Schwarzer, G. (2011). The effect of a music program on phonological awareness in
   preschoolers. Frontiers in Psychology, 2(Article 124), 1-7.

Dougherty Stahl, K. A., Flanigan, K., & McKenna, M. C. (2020). Assessment for reading instruction
   (4th ed.). Guilford.

Enz, B., & Christie, J. F. (1993). Teacher's play interaction styles and their impact on children's oral
   language and literacy play. In Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Reading
   Conference Charleston, SC, December.

Goodwin, S. E., & Podos, J. (2013). Shift of song frequencies in response to masking tones. Animal
   Behaviour, 85(2), 435-440.

Gest, S. D., Holland-Coviello, R., Welsh, J. A., Eicher-Catt, D. L., & Gill, S. (2006). Language
   development subcontexts in head start classrooms: Distinctive patterns of teacher talk during
   free play, mealtime, and book reading. Early Education and Development, 17(2), 293-315.
   http://dx.doi.org/10.1207/s15566935eed17025

Gromko, J. E. (2005). The effect of music instruction on phonemic awareness in beginning
   readers. Journal of Research in Music Education, 53(3), 199-209.

Herrera, L., Lorenzo, O., Defior, S., Fernandez-Smith, G., & Costa-Giomi, E. (2011). Effects of
                           CHAPTER 5. SUPPORTING LITERACY LEARNING IN THE EARLY CHILDHOOD CLASSROOM | 94

   phonological and musical training on the reading readiness of native- and foreign-Spanish-
   speaking children. Psychology of Music, 39(1), 68-81.

Kontos, S. (1999). Preschool teachers' talk, roles, and activity settings during free play. Early
   Childhood Research Quarterly, 14(3), 363-382.

Lambert, M. D. (2015). Reading picture books with children: How to shake up storytime and get kids
   talking about what they see. Charlesbridge.

Lin, G. (2011). Ling & Ting: Not exactly the same! (G. Lin, Illus.). LB Kids.

Lionni, L. (2017). Swimmy (L. Lionni, Illus.). Dragonfly Books.

Lionni, L. (2018). Inch by inch (L. Lionni, Illus.). Dragonfly Books.

Lonigan, C. J., & Whitehurst, G. J. (1998). Relative efficacy of parent and teacher involvement in
   a shared-reading interven- tion for preschool children from low-income backgrounds. Early
   Childhood Research Quarterly, 13(2), 263-290.

Mattick, L., & Blackall, S. (2015). Finding Winnie: The true story of the world's most famous bear.
   Little Brown Books for Young Readers.

Meacham, S., Vukelich, C., Han, M., & Buell, M. (2014). Preschool teachers' questioning in
   sociodramatic play. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 29(4), 562-573. http://doi.org/10.1016/
   j.ecresq.2014.07.001

Montgomery, A. P. (2012). `Over in the meadow' and beyond: Singing for joy with song-based
   picture books. Canadian Music Educator, 53(4), 29-32.

Montgomery, A. P., & Smith, K. M. (2014). Together in song: Building literacy relationships with
   song-based picture books. Language and Literacy, 16(3), 27-53.

Muth, J. (2002). The three questions: Based on a story by Leo Tolstoy (J. Muth, Illus.). Scholastic Press.

Overy, K., & Molnar-Szakacs, I. (2009). Being together in time: Musical experience and the
   mirror neuron system. Music Perception, 26(5), 489-504. https://doi.org/10.1525/
   mp.2009.26.5.489

Overy, K., Nicolson, R. I., Fawcett, A. J., & Clarke, E. F. (2003). Dyslexia and music: Measuring
   musical timing skills. Dyslexia, 9(1), 18-36.
95 | CHAPTER 5. SUPPORTING LITERACY LEARNING IN THE EARLY CHILDHOOD CLASSROOM

Pence Turnbull, K. L., & Justice, L. (2017). Language development from theory to practice. Pearson.

Peynirciolu, Z. F., Rabinovitz, B. E., & Thompson, J. L. W. (2008). Memory and metamemory
   for songs: The relative effectiveness of titles, lyrics, and melodies as cues for each other.
   Psychology of Music, 36(1), 47-61. https://doi.org/10.1177/0305735607079722

Pinkney, J. (2002). Noah's ark (J. Pinkney, Illus.). Chronicle Books.

Pinkney, J. (2009). The lion & the mouse (J. Pinkney, Illus.). Little Brown Books for Young Readers.

Rainey, D. W., & Larsen, J. D. (2002). The effects of familiar melodies on initial learning and long-
   term memory for unconnected text. Music Perception, 20(2), 173-186. https://doi.org/10.1525/
   mp.2002.20.2.173

Rasinski, T. (2014). Delivering supportive fluency instruction-Especially for students who
   struggle. Reading Today, April/May. https://www.timrasinski.com/presentations/
   delivering_supportive_fluency_instruction_article.pdf

Rich, S. (2016). The audacious choice of Sophie Blackall. Horn Book Magazine, 92(4), 51-55.

Roskos, K. (2021). This book is magic ... Exploring the book as toy. In D. Bergen (Ed.), The
   handbook of developmentally appropriate toys (pp. 227-238). Rowman & Littlefield.

Roskos, K., & Neuman, S. B. (1993). Descriptive observations of adults' facilitation of literacy in
   young children's play. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 8(1), 77-97. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
   S0885-2006(05)80099-7

Seeger, L. V. (2007). First the egg (L. V. Seeger, Illus.). Roaring Brook Press.

Seeger, L. V. (2015). I used to be afraid (L. V. Seeger, Illus.). Roaring Brook Press.

Sendak, M. (1984). Where the wild things are. HarperCollins.

Sevik, M. (2011). Teacher views about using songs in teaching English to young learners.
   Educational Research and Review, 6(21), 1027-1035.

Sevik, M. (2012). Teaching listening skills to young learners through "listen and do" songs.
   English Teaching Forum. 50(3), 10-17.

Torgesen, J. K., Wagner, R. K., & Rashotte, C. A. (1994). Longitudinal studies of phonological
                           CHAPTER 5. SUPPORTING LITERACY LEARNING IN THE EARLY CHILDHOOD CLASSROOM | 96

   processing and reading. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 27(5), 276-286. https://doi.org/10.1177/
   002221949402700503

Weisman, R., & Ratcliffe, L. (2004). Relative pitch and the song of black-capped chickadees.
   American Scientist, 92, 532-539.

Wiesner, D. (2001). The three pigs (D. Wiesner, Illus.). Clarion Books.

Wiesner, D. (2006). Flotsam (D. Wiesner, Illus.). Clarion Books.

Wiesner, D. (2010). Art and Max (D. Wiesner, Illus.). Clarion Books.

Willems, M. (2013). A big guy took my ball! (M. Willems, Illus.). Hyperion Books for Children.

Wolfe, D. E., & Hom, C. (1993). Use of melodies as structural prompts for learning and retention
   of sequential verbal information by preschool students. Journal of Music Therapy, 30(2),
   100-118. https://doi.org/10.1093/jmt/30.2.100

Young, T. A., Bryan, G., Jacobs, J. S., & Tunnel, M. O. (2020). Children's literature, briefly (7th ed.).
   New York, NY: Pearson.
97 | CHAPTER 6. VOCABULARY

Chapter 6. Vocabulary

   Constance Beecher

      "Words are, in my not-so-humble opinion, our most inexhaustible source of magic." - Albus
      Dumbledore in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hollows

       "Words have power" from Rawpixel is licensed CC0.
      Keywords: oral and written language, indirect vocabulary, direct vocabulary, structured word
      analysis
                                                         CHAPTER 6. VOCABULARY | 98

Iowa Core Standards

Iowa Core Standards include vocabulary across

reading, writing, speaking, and listening. The Iowa      Learning Objectives
Core states: "The vocabulary standards focus on

understanding words and phrases, their relationships,

and their nuances and on acquiring new vocabulary,       · Describe the role of
particularly general academic and domain-specific           vocabulary in reading,
words and phrases." (Iowa Core English Language             writing, listening and
Arts, 2022, p.8)                                            speaking (InTasc Standard

The K-5 standards define what students should know       #4).

and be able to do. These are backwards mapped from       · Describe the role of
the College and Career Readiness Anchor Standards.          vocabulary in language
Therefore, if students meet the grade-level standards       development (InTasc
at each grade, they will be ready for college or career     Standard #1).
training. The Anchor Standards for vocabulary are as
follows:                                                 · Assess vocabulary
                                                            knowledge to personalize
                                                            instruction (InTasc

Vocabulary acquisition and use                              Standard #6).
                                                         · Describe effective

· Determine or clarify the meaning of unknown               vocabulary instruction
   and multiple-meaning words and phrases by                strategies and apply them
   using context clues, analyzing meaningful word           to Iowa Core Standards
   parts, and consulting general and specialized            (InTasc Standard #8).
   reference materials, as appropriate.                  · Differentiate and
                                                            personalize instruction to
· Demonstrate understanding of figurative                   Dual Language Learners
   language, word relationships, and nuances in             and students with special

word meanings.                                           needs (InTasc Standard #2

· Acquire and use accurately a range of general          & 3).

academic and domain-specific words and phrases

sufficient for reading, writing, speaking, and

listening at the college and career-readiness level;

demonstrate independence in gathering vocabulary knowledge when encountering an

unknown term important to comprehension or expression.
99 | CHAPTER 6. VOCABULARY

    Language standards K-5

      Download the Iowa Core Literacy standards. In the table of contents, you will find Language
      Standards for grades K-5. As stated, "the language standards offer a focus for instruction each
      year to help ensure that students gain adequate mastery of a range of skills and applications."(
      (Iowa Core English Language Arts, 2022, p.35) Vocabulary standards are found in both the
      Writing and the Language standards for K-5 (and 6-12).
      For example, "d. Use precise language and domain-specific vocabulary to inform about or
      explain the topic." (Writing.4.2) (DOK 3,4) is a writing standard.
      And "4. Determine or clarify the meaning of unknown and multiple-meaning words and phrases
      based on grade 1 reading and content, choosing flexibly from an array of strategies.
      (Language.1.4) (DOK 2) is a language standard.

  Video Example

     Watch this video of a teacher teaching vocabulary through a read-aloud: what strategies does Dr.
     Wright say she will use to teach the vocabulary words?

                         One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online
                         here: https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=273#oembed-1

     Did you see them all?
                      CHAPTER 6. VOCABULARY | 100

Reflection Questions

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=273#h5p-41

Why focus on vocabulary?

Extensive research on literacy development is clear - vocabulary knowledge is a major player in
the game of reading (National Early Literacy Panel, 2008).

Vocabulary knowledge predicts kindergarten readiness, and third-grade reading. Children who
know a lot of words easily learn new words, while children who come to school knowing fewer
words may struggle to catch up (Dickinson & Porche, 2011). When children already know a
word, it is easier for them to decode it using their phonological skills. Researchers Hart and
Risley (1995) found that the number of words that children heard in the home before attending
kindergarten predicted how many words they knew and how fast they could learn new words.

Vocabulary knowledge affects reading skills in several ways:

  · supports comprehension of words that children are decoding;
  · helps children recognize words more quickly while they are decoding;
  · supports phonological awareness, and
  · increases child's understanding of content instruction.

Learning new words is a part of a child's language development, and it is important for both oral
language and written language. Children need to be able to understand (receptive language) and
communicate to others (expressive language).

This is illustrated in the table below:
101 | CHAPTER 6. VOCABULARY

Oral Language     Receptive Language   Expressive Language
Written Language  Listening            Speaking
                  Reading (decoding +  Writing (handwriting, spelling,
                  comprehension)       composition)

These abilities do not develop at the same pace. Children usually understand words before
they can use them correctly. This is especially true for children who are developing English or
children at risk for developmental delay.

Researchers suggest there are three levels of vocabulary understanding. It is not as simple as
knowing a word or not knowing a word. Children can either 1) have no knowledge of a word;
2) be acquainted with it (have been exposed to it); or 3) have an established knowledge of it,
whereby they can give a definition.

Reflection Activity

In the chapter on Phonics, you learned about morphemes, which are the smallest units of
meaning in words. The ability to identify prefixes and suffixes, and to understand how they
change word meanings, also impacts vocabulary development. In English, our letters do not
perfectly represent the sounds of words, but meaning across words is often represented by
morphemes:

                  Sign                 Signal

                  Nature               Natural

                  Bomb                 Bombardment

                  Deport               Deportment

Early readers may learn simple morphemes like s for plural and ed for past-tense words. It is not
until second or third grade that children begin to master the more complex ones. It is important
to teach students about word parts so they can work out the meanings of unfamiliar words and
grow their academic vocabulary.

It was previously thought that younger children should not be introduced to morphology, but
                                                                                                                        CHAPTER 6. VOCABULARY | 102

current research suggests it benefits phonological awareness, spelling ability, and vocabulary
(Bowers, 2020).

How to teach vocabulary

Vocabulary is one of the five essential components of literacy instruction.

Recall The 5 essential components:

 1. phonemic awareness,
 2. phonics,
 3. fluency,
 4. vocabulary,
 5. comprehension.

Vocabulary is the study of word meaning

  · Students are not required to know how to spell or even read a word accurately to
      study vocabulary, as the focus is on word meanings.

  · Vocabulary "sets the ceiling" on student comprehension.
  · Vocabulary is taught in the context of stories or non-fiction texts and explicitly within word-

      study lessons.
  · Children learn implicitly from purposeful conversations and read-alouds.

Indirect vocabulary learning

Children learn most words indirectly, through everyday interactions in discussions and
exposure to books. This happens in three ways:

  · They engage daily in oral language - primarily discussion with adults.
  · They listen to adults reading to them.
  · They read on their own and pick up meaning from the text.
103 | CHAPTER 6. VOCABULARY

Direct vocabulary learning

Although a lot of vocabulary is learned indirectly, some vocabulary should be taught directly.
Direct instruction helps students learn difficult or unfamiliar words that are not part of their
everyday experiences. This is done in interactive read-alouds and word-study lessons.

                             The direct instruction of vocabulary includes:

See this example from        · Teaching the specific words that are important to the
Read, Write, Think: "Word       students' content learning or understanding of a particular
Study with Henry and            text (fiction or non-fiction).
Mudge"
                             · Teaching students general word-learning strategies that they
                                can apply to a variety of words, such as analyzing parts of
                                words (e.g., root words).

Choosing words to teach

In the book Bringing Words to Life: Robust Vocabulary Instruction, by Beck, McKeown and Kucan,
(2013, 2nd ed) the authors suggest a three-tier framework for considering which words to teach:
                                                                                                                        CHAPTER 6. VOCABULARY | 104

Teachers should spend the majority of vocabulary-instruction time on tiers two and three.
However, students who are learning English (English Language Learners or Emergent
Bilinguals) may need instruction in tier-one words.

Text talk

Beck et al. (2013) propose a teaching sequence they call "text talk." Researchers Manyak et al.
(2014) adapted that sequence for their multifaceted vocabulary-instruction project and suggest
the VP Model for introducing target-word meanings:

 1. Present the word in the context in which it appears in a text (whenever possible): "The
      attendants insisted..."

 2. Provide a kid-friendly definition: "Insist or, in the past tense insisted, means someone tells
      you strongly that you have to do something, like,
      `My mother insisted that I do my homework before watching TV.' "

 3. Provide multiple examples of use: "I might say, `Our coach insisted we run the play until we
      got it right.' Or, `I was hot, but my sister insisted I close the window.' Or, `His
      mother insisted that he clean up his room before his friend came over.' "

 4. Prompt student use: "Think of all the things that your parents insist that you do. Who can
      share one? Make sure that you use the word insist, like, `My mom insists that I...' "

 5. Show and briefly discuss a visual image: "Look at this picture. Who can explain why I am
      showing you this picture for the word insist?"

 6. Conclude with a thought question and/or a quick interactive activity:

          Thought Question: "Do you think it is better for your reading when a teacher insists that
            you read challenging books or when you can choose any books you want? Try to
            use insist in your answer."

          Interactive Activity: "OK, ready for a little quiz? I am going to say a sentence. If
            someone in the sentence insisted on something, say insist. If not, don't say anything.
            My dad's boss told him he had to work late, even though my dad didn't want to. My
            teacher let us choose what we wanted to do for P.E. (Manyak et al., 2014, p.16)."
105 | CHAPTER 6. VOCABULARY

  Learning Activities

     Researchers Manyak et al. (2014) suggest using a weekly formative assessment such as a cloze
     activity. Cloze informal assessments are created by either selecting a passage and deleting the
     target word, leaving a blank for the student to fill in, or by creating a word bank and example
     sentences with blanks to fill in.

                         An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
                         https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=273#h5p-9

Structured word analysis

Because the English language is so extensive, we can never hope to teach all the words our
students should know. Another approach is to teach word learning strategies, or structured
word inquiry (sometimes shortened to SWI). This is similar to how we teach phonics in word
study, but instead of focusing on the sounds of words only, we focus on the meanings of
root words and morphemes. Importantly, we can teach children a strategy to find out word
meanings by using this analysis.
Primary-grade students can begin by adding common prefixes and suffixes to short words.

  · jump, jumps, jumped, jumping, jumper
  · read, reread, reader, nonreader, reading
They can also learn about compound words.
  · bathtub, airplane, baseball
Next, students can learn word parts, and word families.
                                             CHAPTER 6. VOCABULARY | 106

Video Example

Hear from the experts! Sue Hegland talks about morphology from the beginning.

                  One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online
                  here: https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=273#oembed-2

Just like other types of inquiry, students can research words they encounter or are curious about.
It is fun to explore root words and find all the related words.

Here's an example with the English word "act." Find more examples on the English hints
website page about word families:

               in trans         or actor     action
               in pro                 tion   inaction, transaction
               re                            active
                         act                 inactive
                                      ive    proactive

                                      react

Once you see these words together, you realize how many words you already know!

Multiple meanings, connotative and denotative meanings

Another aspect to teaching vocabulary is understanding that words can express more than their
technical meaning, and sometimes have multiple meanings.
107 | CHAPTER 6. VOCABULARY

Words have a denotation meaning that we think about as the "dictionary" meaning. For
example, "gray" is a color that is a mix of black and white.
The connotation on the other hand, is all the meanings that can be ascribed to the words -
these come from cultural references. What other meanings come to mind when we think about
"gray"? "Gloomy" and "cloudy," but also "ambiguous," right? "It's a gray area."

  Video Example

     Here is a video with a brief explanation by Bloom Edu:

                         An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
                         https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=273#h5p-12

Some words have more than one meaning, and we usually know which one is correct by the
context of the text we are reading. We understand that if we use the word "yard" in a sentence
about measuring ("I bought three yards of fabric"), it is different than if the sentence mentions
the outdoors ("We played in the yard"). Students must be taught that if a word doesn't make
sense in the context, there might be a different meaning they should investigate. Multiple-
meaning words can also be referred to as homonyms - words that have the same spelling and
pronunciation, but different meanings. For example, someone might talk about how a person is
very bright, and a student might be thinking about how a person could be bright like the sun.
A good resource for examples of homonyms is yourdictionary.com. Other word categories like
homophones (that sound the same but have different meanings, like ant and aunt) can also be
tricky. Download this infographic from yourdictionary.com [PDF] for a quick visual guide.
                     CHAPTER 6. VOCABULARY | 108

Learning Activities

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=273#h5p-10

Using technology

The National Council of Teachers of English encourages teachers to work with students to
explore and engage across a wide variety of tools and modalities. Technology can be used to
actively learn and explore vocabulary - and students often find it motivating.

Dalton (2008) and colleagues completed a large study of the role of vocabulary in
comprehension, especially for struggling readers, and they outline 10 strategies for using
technology to teach vocabulary, including:

  · Use technology to create visual displays that show the relationships of words in texts. For
      example, use a Wordle to create a word cloud from a text. Then discuss the theme and
      frequently occurring words.

  · Go on a digital field trip! Create a digital version of a vocabulary field trip using the free
      online program called TrackStar (trackstar.4teachers.org). The field trip involves selecting a
      topic (such as weather) or location (like Alaska) and having students observe and record
      important words as they read books and other materials.

  · Play online games and visit fun websites like Vocabulary.com and Flocabulary.
  · Read digital texts which have hyperlinks with definitions of words.

We can't teach students all the words they will need to know, but knowing how to use online
tools and resources is part of being a strategic learner.
109 | CHAPTER 6. VOCABULARY

Including diverse learners

For English-language learners and emergent bilinguals, being able to use their first-language
knowledge to develop their English vocabulary is key (Adesope et al., 2010). Online dictionaries,
like Wordsmyth Comprehensive Dictionary Suite, can support multiple languages.
Another resource is the language translator available in the web browser. The value of a
translator is that it supports learning words as they occur naturally in authentic text and
allows students to view bilingual versions of a text side by side so that they can use their first-
language knowledge to develop their English vocabulary. You can paste text into the translator
field, select the input and output languages, and view the translation (see Babelfish, Google
Translator, and Bing Translator). You may also download a toolbar extension that translates any
webpage automatically. Although these tools are not always correct or sensitive to dialects, they
are a good place to start.
               CHAPTER 6. VOCABULARY | 110

Key Takeaways

· Children who know a lot of words easily learn new words, while children who come to
   school knowing fewer words may be at a disadvantage in learning to read independently.
   When children already know the meaning of a word, it is easier for them to decode it.

· Teaching specific words is important to the students' content learning or understanding of
   a particular text (fiction or non-fiction). This should be done with teaching students
   general word-learning strategies that they can apply to a variety of words, such as
   analyzing parts of words (e.g., root words).

    Resources for teacher educators

          · How to use morphology to teach vocabulary
          · See this article at Reading Rockets for Manyak et al.'s complete recommendations: Four

              Practical Principles for Enhancing Vocabulary Instruction
          · Chapter 6: Meaning Vocabulary Presentation
          · Developing Vocabulary through Poetry Presentation

References

Beck, I. L., McKeown, M. G., & Kucan, L. (2013). Bringing words to life: Robust vocabulary
   instruction. Guilford Press, New York; NY.

Bowers, P. (2022). Structured Word Inquiry (SWI): Literacy instruction that makes sense of English
   spelling for students of all ages and abilities. https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/aktzw

Dalton, B., Proctor, C.P., Snow, C.E., Uccelli, P., & Mo, E. (2008). Improving reading comprehension
   for struggling readers: Understanding the role of vocabulary development, guided strategy use, and
111 | CHAPTER 6. VOCABULARY

   Spanish language supports in a digital reading environment. Final report to the U.S. Department
   of Education, Institute of Education Sciences.

Dickinson, D. K., & Porche, M. V. (2011). Relation between language experiences in preschool
   classrooms and children's kindergarten and fourth-grade language and reading abilities. Child
   development, 82(3), 870-886.

Lonigan, C. J., & Shanahan, T. (2009). Developing Early Literacy: Report of the National Early Literacy
   Panel. Executive Summary. A Scientific Synthesis of Early Literacy Development and Implications for
   Intervention. National Institute for Literacy.

Manyak, P. C., Von Gunten, H., Autenrieth, D., Gillis, C., Mastre-O'Farrell, J.,
   Irvine-McDermott, E., ... & Blachowicz, C. L. (2014). Four practical principles for enhancing
   vocabulary instruction. The Reading Teacher, 68(1), 13-23.

Wasik, B. A., Hindman, A. H., & Snell, E. K. (2016). Book reading and vocabulary development:
   A systematic review. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 37, 39-57.
                                                                                           CHAPTER 7. FLUENCY AND COMPREHENSION | 112

Chapter 7. Fluency and Comprehension

   Nandita Gurjar

      "Some books are so familiar that reading them is like being home again" - Louisa May Alcott in Little
      Women

       Figure 1: Reading as a comforting experience. (Source: "This image " by Elf-Moondance is in
       the Public Domain)
      Keywords: word recognition, re-reading, predicting, summarizing, self-monitoring, think-aloud,
      echo reading, choral reading, shared reading, guided reading, read-aloud, partner reading,
      recorded reading, word walls, readers' theater
113 | CHAPTER 7. FLUENCY AND COMPREHENSION

Learning Objectives             Comprehension: Kindergarten
                                standards

· Explain the Simple View of      Key details
   Reading (InTASC
   Standards #4 & #7).          · With prompting and support, ask and answer
                                   questions about the key details in a text.
· Identify text structures and
   features (InTASC Standards   · With prompting and support, retell familiar stories,
   #4 & #7).                       including key details.

· Identify and apply effective  · With prompting and support, identify characters,
   comprehension strategies        settings, and major events in a story.
   in Prek-3 instruction
   (InTASC Standards #5 &         Craft and structure
   #8).
                                · Ask and answer questions about unknown words in a
· Define and explain fluency       text.
   (InTASC Standards #4 &
   #7).                         · Recognize common types of texts (e.g., storybooks,
                                   poems).
· Identify and apply
   strategies to build Prek-3   · With prompting and support, name the author and
   students' fluency (InTASC       illustrator of a story and define the role of each in
   Standards #5 & #8).             telling the story.

                                  Integration of knowledge and ideas

· With prompting and support, describe the relationship between illustrations and the story
   in which they appear (e.g., what moment in a story an illustration depicts).

· With prompting and support, compare and contrast the adventures and experiences of
   characters in familiar stories.

Range of reading and text complexity

  · Actively engage in group reading activities with purpose and understanding.
  · For other grade-level comprehension standards, see Iowa's standards here.
                                                                                           CHAPTER 7. FLUENCY AND COMPREHENSION | 114

Fluency

Kindergarten

  · Read emergent-reader texts with purpose and understanding.

1st, 2nd, and 3rd grade

  · Read with sufficient accuracy and fluency to support comprehension.
  · Read on-level text with purpose and understanding.
  · Read on-level text orally with accuracy, appropriate rate, and expression on successive

      readings.
  · Use context to confirm or self-correct word recognition and understanding, rereading as

      necessary.

A student can be seen reading laboriously, trying to sound out every letter while reading. For
the word "he," the student sounds /h/ and /e/, getting confused about what word that might be. It
happens with "laugh," "night," "here," "her," and "she" as well. The student's inability to recognize
high-frequency words automatically by sight and their lack of pattern recognition leads to a
frustrating experience in reading. When the teacher asks comprehension questions about the
story, the student does not remember much of what they just read. This demonstrates how a lack
of fluency impacts reading comprehension in children. This chapter presents research-based
strategies for building fluency and comprehension in children.

Comprehension, fluency, vocabulary, phonics, and phonological awareness form the five
components of reading. They work together to support proficient reading, whereby children
read with purpose and understanding.
115 | CHAPTER 7. FLUENCY AND COMPREHENSION

  Example Video

     Comprehension is understanding. Understanding the elements of a story helps children to
     comprehend the story. The following video demonstrates the elements of a story.

                         One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online
                         here: https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=291#oembed-1

                                   Download Parts of the Story Video Transcript [DOC]

The role of motivation in reading

Motivation and engagement are also crucial for skilled reading (Kamil et al., 2011; Wigfield &
Asher, 1984). You can motivate readers and engage them through the following steps:

 1. Have goals and a purpose for reading (Guthrie & Hummenick, 2004).
 2. Engage children in applying their knowledge of reading strategies (Guthrie & Wigfield,

      2000).
 3. Have children self-regulate their reading processes (Clay, 1991).
 4. Leverage children's interest in a topic (Wigfield & Asher, 1984).
 5. Provide them choices about what to read (Guthrie & Wigfield, 2000).
 6. Engage them in dialogic conversations, peer discussions, and so on.
 7. Have various authentic classroom reading experiences to cultivate joy: shared reading,

      read-aloud, guided reading, and independent reading experiences. Invite guardians and
      role models to read aloud. Connect with authors through a video-conferencing platform.
 8. Model and explicitly teach the required skills systematically to scaffold and support
      developing readers.
 9. Have one-on-one reading conferences with children (Cunningham & Allington, 2016).
10. Provide a print-rich environment with various genres of books and materials in digital and
      print-based formats. Send home books to read to siblings and parents.
                                                                                           CHAPTER 7. FLUENCY AND COMPREHENSION | 116

The science of reading

The science of reading is based on interdisciplinary research from linguistics, education,
psychology, and neuroscience. The science of reading emphasizes empowering children with
problem-solving decoding strategies rather than having them use clues to guess words. Reading
involves orthographic mapping, which is a process of connecting sounds (phonemes) in the oral
language to letters (graphemes) or letter sequences (patterns) to permanently store words in our
long-term memory. For example, /c/a/t/ -- C a t

Orthographic mapping

         Figure 2: The process involved in orthographic mapping

Orthographic mapping applies phoneme-grapheme association, pattern recognition, and
automaticity in word recognition to decode words. Practicing sight-word (high-frequency
words) recognition, reinforcing the alphabet letters and sounds, and working with word families
through word sorts and word work (making words) all scaffold orthographic mapping.
Systematic, explicit phonics instruction with continual "review and repeat" cycles helps
children develop fluency. Follow the structured literacy guidelines to support learners having
reading difficulties.
Our brains can attend to only a few things at a time. If most of the children's attention is focused
on decoding words, it is hard for them to simultaneously apply their background knowledge to
make connections while reading (linguistic comprehension). According to the National Reading
117 | CHAPTER 7. FLUENCY AND COMPREHENSION

Panel (2000) study, if a text is read laboriously, it will be difficult for children to remember what
has been read and relate the ideas to their background knowledge.

Therefore, children must become fluent in decoding words and making text-to-self, text-to-
text, and text-to-world connections, applying their background knowledge, vocabulary, native-
language-literacy knowledge, knowledge of the target language's linguistic structure, and verbal
reasoning to develop reading comprehension.

The Simple View of Reading

Gough and Turner (1986) proposed that reading comprehension (RC) is the product of decoding
(D) and language comprehension (LC).

Building upon Gough and Turner's work, Scarborough (2001) conceptualized skilled reading as
a braid of fluent word recognition and simultaneous language comprehension.

The strands of word recognition consist of phonological awareness, decoding (knowledge of
alphabetic principle, phoneme-grapheme correspondence), and sight word recognition. The
word recognition strand is increasingly automatic.

On the other hand, the language comprehension strand is increasingly strategic and consists
of background knowledge, vocabulary, language structures, verbal reasoning, and literacy
knowledge.

According to the Simple View of Reading, children need both word recognition (decoding) and
language comprehension to read proficiently, as shown in the example below.
               CHAPTER 7. FLUENCY AND COMPREHENSION | 118

Video Example

This video explains the simple view of reading and what it means for meaning-making in
students:

                  One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online
                  here: https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=291#oembed-2

                         Download Simple View of Reading Video Transcript [DOC]

Fluent word recognition

Fluent word recognition depends on phonological awareness, decoding skills, and sight-word
recognition. Fluent word recognition requires developing automaticity. Phonological
awareness is an auditory skill and is developed by manipulating sounds. Students' decoding
skills develop from explicit and systematic phonics instruction. Sight-word recognition occurs
when high-frequency words are recognized automatically and effortlessly. Sight words may not
lend themselves to being easily decoded and are learned after abundant exposure, for example,
"does," "she," "he," "here," and so on.

Language comprehension

Language comprehension depends on background knowledge, vocabulary, language structure,
verbal reasoning, and literacy knowledge. Language comprehension is strategic and requires
knowing the background information about the topic, having the vocabulary and syntax, and
applying verbal reasoning.

What is fluency?

"Fluency is the ability to read most words in context quickly and accurately with proper
expression" (Cunningham & Allington, 2016, p. 46). The expectation is for students to read on-
119 | CHAPTER 7. FLUENCY AND COMPREHENSION

grade-level text with purpose and understanding. Also, fluent reading aims for students to
read on-level text accurately with proper expression at a comfortable, appropriate rate upon
successive readings.

What is fluent reading?

Fluent reading (Rasinski, 2003) is being able to:

  · quickly and automatically identify the words;
  · read in prosody (in phrases and not word by word), and
  · read expressively as if speaking.

There is a misconception that fluency means being able to read fast. This view is reinforced by
standardized fluency assessments of student progress (such as Dibels), where students are timed
on how many words they can read within a minute. The focus on speed reading detracts from
the importance of making connections, resulting in a lack of reading comprehension. Therefore,
it becomes essential to have students practice expressive reading at a comfortable pace with
purpose and understanding. Readers' theater and oral poetry reading leverage authentic,
meaningful engagement that taps students' creativity while developing their reading fluency.

What is comprehension?

Comprehension is synonymous with understanding. It is the ability to derive meaning from
the text. Meaning-making requires understanding the pertinent vocabulary and background
knowledge of the topic. Comprehending the text also requires knowing the text structure
(organization of the text) and text features.

The text features include the table of contents, headings, subheadings, captions, glossary, index,
diagrams, maps, labels, charts, graphs, and tables. Informational or nonfiction text has features
depending on the discipline or content. For example, a social studies text will have maps,
whereas a science text will have diagrams.

Some text features are common across content areas, such as a glossary, index, table of contents,
headings and subheadings, tables, charts, and graphs. Comprehending informational text
requires close attention to these features, understanding the content-area vocabulary, and
background knowledge of the discipline.
CHAPTER 7. FLUENCY AND COMPREHENSION | 120

A narrative text is often organized in a descriptive or         Narrative and
problem-solution structure with a beginning, middle, and        informational texts can
end. The narrative text is categorized into personal narrative  have one or more of the
or fictional narrative.                                         following text structures
                                                                (text organization) :
Personal narratives
                                                                    · problem-solution
Personal narratives can be autobiographies, journals                · description
(dialogue journals, diaries, simulated journals), memoirs,          · chronological/
biographies, and poetry (bio-poems, where am I from, 6-word
memoirs, etc.). Children in PreK-2 can be guided in writing             sequential/process
diamantes (diamond-shaped opposite poems), limericks                · comparison/
(rhyming poems), and cinquains (five-line poems). Bio-poems
can be modified for PreK-2 grades.                                      contrast
                                                                    · cause and effect
Fictional narratives

Fictional narratives or stories have literary elements such as setting, characters, plot (problem,
events, solution), and theme or main idea. Fictional narratives come in the following genres:
realistic fiction (contemporary), science fiction, historical fiction, fantasy, and traditional
literature (myths, fables, and folktales). Understanding fictional narratives necessitate paying
particular attention to literary elements. This instruction can be approached through think-
aloud and dialogic reading. Retelling stories with their beginning, middle, and ending parts
reinforce their structures in children's minds.

Dialogic reading

Dialogic reading is especially pertinent for oral-language development and comprehension.
Dialogic reading is done by conversing about a book with children using the CROWD+HS
questions and PEER+PA dialogue. You may explore Iowa Reading Research Center's
interactive-reading guide and the CROWD and PEER bookmarks.
121 | CHAPTER 7. FLUENCY AND COMPREHENSION

             Figure 3: Rosenblatt's theory of text transaction with reader, text, and the context

Rosenblatt (1994) believed active reading is a transactional process between the reader and the
text. Reading requires active engagement with the text. The task (reader's purpose) also plays a
role in constructing meaning from the text. As a child reads, they make text-to-self, text-to-text,
and text-to-world connections. Making connections and associations facilitates comprehension.
The child's language, culture, life experiences, and prior knowledge influence the process.
The socio-cultural context (Vygotsky, 1978) plays a role in meaning-making. Children may read
the same book yet derive different meanings from it based on their life experiences. Children's
meaning-making is influenced by their socio-cultural context, life situation, knowledge of
the topic and vocabulary, language, culture, and the unique progression of their literacy
development.
One implication for the classroom instruction of younger readers is that some of them may
come with limited background knowledge due to their life experiences and limited access to
books at home. It is, therefore, essential to fill those gaps in knowledge through various means
to facilitate their reading comprehension. Having various reading and writing experiences
across content areas supports the building of this background knowledge.
The reader may read for either an efferent or an aesthetic reading purpose. Efferent reading
is for gaining information. Most nonfiction text is read with an efferent purpose in mind.
Narrative text may also be read to gain information to be able to retell.
                                                                                           CHAPTER 7. FLUENCY AND COMPREHENSION | 122

Aesthetic reading is mainly for the enjoyment of the text. Independent reading time should be
for aesthetic purposes, where children are reading to enjoy books. They should not be required
to do a book report/related book activity during independent reading time.

Learning environments promote fluency and comprehension

A print-rich learning environment is essential for promoting literacy in children. Young
children see print and understand that it communicates meaning. A classroom can be made into
a print-rich learning environment by creating a word wall containing high-frequency words.

Other ways to add to a print-rich learning environment are to display relevant anchor charts and
student work samples in the classroom. Displaying student work samples allows them to take
pride in their work and builds their self-confidence and self-esteem to see adults acknowledge
it.

Stock classroom libraries with digital and print-based children's literature in various genres that
represent student identities and provide windows into other worldviews. Wordless picturebooks
are excellent tools to ignite imagination and creativity. Every classroom should have some to
address the needs of English-language learners (dual-language learners). Wordless picturebooks
leverage the background knowledge and home literacies of the students.

Inviting parents to come to class to read multicultural or traditional literature of their choice
builds the home-school connection. It creates a welcoming learning environment where
children's cultural and linguistic identities and cultural heritage are celebrated. Sending books
home to read to parents and siblings builds community and home literacies.

Celebrating learning through literacy events creates a joyful, affirming, positive environment of
collaboration and mentoring through a school-community partnership. The community comes
together to share and celebrate their cultural heritage, language, and culture through reading
and writing activities.

Print-rich and inclusive learning environments

Creating a word wall

Start by selecting a few high-frequency words based on student needs. Gradually add words to
the wall.
123 | CHAPTER 7. FLUENCY AND COMPREHENSION

High-frequency word recognition and vocabulary words that sound alike but have different
meanings (such as "hear" and "here") can be written on the word wall.

Utilize the word wall in your instruction. You may make a riddle, or a game and bring attention
to a word during reading and writing time.

Selecting children's literature

Select a variety of high-quality print-based and digital texts in various genres based on student
interests. Take an interest inventory at the beginning of the year. Have books on various topics,
such as pets, farm animals, sports, princesses, etc. Also, have poetry, science fiction, historical
fiction, science fiction, fantasy, traditional literature from different cultures, and nonfiction
texts in digital and print-based formats. Ensure access to easy, just right, or challenging books
to address the needs of all students in your class.

Choose texts that provide mirrors and windows (Sims Bishop, 1990) to create a print-rich
environment for the students to interact with. Mirrors reflect the realities of students' lives,
while windows offer an opportunity to consider other perspectives and broaden their horizons
by learning about other contexts.

Reading and writing experiences across content areas

Provide a variety of consistent reading and writing experiences throughout the day, such as
shared reading, read-aloud, guided reading, independent reading, and writer's workshops.
Incorporate literacy activities across the curriculum in science, social studies, and math so
children can see the literacy connections while reading, writing, listening, speaking, viewing,
and visually representing.

Fostering inclusivity to build fluency and comprehension

Fostering inclusivity directly correlates with lowering anxiety (the affective filter) in dual-
language learners. If learners are anxious, it interferes with fluent reading and comprehension.
Providing the option of reading silently or with a peer lowers anxiety, especially for second-
language learners.

Providing comprehensible input suited to the developmental and linguistic abilities of dual
language learners and using visuals and other multimodal sources promote comprehension
                                                                                           CHAPTER 7. FLUENCY AND COMPREHENSION | 124

in English Language Learners (ELLs). Respecting the silent phase of the second language
(Krashen, 1982), acquiring dual-language learners, and providing comprehensible input promote
oral-language development in children. Modeling provides examples for dual-language learners
to follow.

Provide a safe, nurturing environment with a low affective filter (lower children's anxiety due to
new cultural and linguistic contexts) where mistakes are necessary for learning. Errors are seen
as opportunities for growth and learning. Exploration, experimentation, and iterations cultivate
critical thinking, creativity, imagination, and innovation.

Creating a sense of belonging and celebrating diverse identities by welcoming everyone to bring
their whole selves and diverse perspectives to the learning process will build self-esteem in
children and foster inclusivity, upon which fluency and comprehension can be built.

Strategies to promote fluency

Readers' theater

Reader's theater is a play with dialogue where the actors orally read their parts written in a
script. Readers' theater is a powerful, authentic way to build fluency in children while engaging
them in meaningful activities. It capitalizes on oral reading with expression by allowing the
children to play the roles of characters in the story. It first requires comprehending the story and
the characters' traits to be able to role-play them. Using the voice and tone of the characters,
the children read with intonation, pauses, and expression as needed. It is a fun, engaging way to
build fluency!

Watch this reader's theater as an example on YouTube: Reader's Theater: Building Fluency and
Expression.

To implement this fluency-building strategy, look for books with lots of dialogue. You may
introduce children to the readers' theater by choosing simple books with numerous dialogues to
build their reading confidence. For example, Little Red Hen has several characters with multiple
dialogues. Therefore, it makes for a great readers'-theater experience for young children.
125 | CHAPTER 7. FLUENCY AND COMPREHENSION

Spoken-word poetry

Spoken-word poetry is performed poetry. The performer uses their voice and gestures to convey
strong emotions through the verse. Amanda Gorman's poem The Hill We Climb can be utilized
for spoken-word poetry. To implement this activity in your class, generate a list of topics with
the students, or provide them with a choice of topics they may feel passionate about. Plan
writing workshop times for the students to write, revise, and polish their writing. When they
are ready, they may practice reading their poem with a peer. Volunteers may share their spoken-
word poems with the whole class.

Echo reading

Echo reading is when the teacher models reading a line expressively, and the students repeat
it after the teacher. The teacher reads a line, and the students repeat it, echoing the teacher.
Therefore, this reading approach is called "echo reading." Echo reading develops fluency as the
teacher models reading with expression for the students.

It is the most scaffolded approach for guiding the cadence (musicality of the language) of the
language and developing reading fluency. Every language has a different rhythm and cadence,
with unique intonation and stress patterns. Echo reading is beneficial for English Language
Learners to familiarize them with the pronunciation of words and the intonation/stress patterns
of the language.

To implement echo reading, the teacher generally reads the text, pointing to each word in the
line to reinforce the one-to-one correspondence between the written and spoken words, and has
the children repeat. Shared reading experiences such as echo reading also reinforce the concepts
of print and sight-word recognition for young learners.

Sometimes, the teacher claps and sways to the rhythm while reading a sentence, and the
children repeat each sentence while copying her movements. Having the children repeat just by
listening without the print has the benefit of developing phonological awareness and listening
skills. Each teacher needs to consider their own contextual needs and make their own judgment
calls about how to implement a particular strategy.
                                                                                           CHAPTER 7. FLUENCY AND COMPREHENSION | 126

Choral reading

Choral reading is when the teacher and student read together in chorus. To do that, the teacher
must first model reading and then have the printed text available at each student's desk.

You can use poems in reading practice sessions to develop fluency. Have the students pair up
with one another to practice choral reading together, thereby scaffolding each other's reading
attempts, then bring the whole group together for a class choral reading.

Another technique is to have the students join at repeated refrains in a book. For example, in
the book 5 Little Monkeys Jumping on the Bed, the children can read in unison: "No More monkeys
jumping on the bed!" Choral reading makes for an enjoyable reading experience.

Repeated reading

Repeated reading builds fluency. Children's favorite books make the best texts for repeated
reading experiences. Each time the child reads it, they may notice something they didn't
see before, enhancing their comprehension. Repeated reading also improves sight-word
recognition and oral reading skills. Ensure that your students have access to easy books during
independent reading time. They need consistent independent-reading time, as it allows
exploring books based on their interests while re-reading their favorite books for enjoyment
develops their fluency.

Repeated reading enhances children's confidence in reading. The children may record reading
their favorite book on Flipgrid after a few repeated reading sessions with peers or family.
Encourage them to read to their teddy bear (or plush toy), siblings, peers, guardians, and
relatives.

Lack of access to books can be addressed by various initiatives such as book deserts through
various statewide programs in which you may get involved. The disparity in book access can be
addressed by neighborhood little-library initiatives. Bring a book, take home a book, and spread
community and home literacies!

Recorded reading

Recorded reading materials can be listened to anytime and anywhere as long as children can
access a device. There are several celebrity read-aloud programs available. Storyline online is
127 | CHAPTER 7. FLUENCY AND COMPREHENSION

a platform that offers virtual read-aloud by celebrities. They update their collection of books
periodically to attract kids. There are recorded reading videos by characters from children's TV
shows on the Internet.

Read-aloud (reading to students)

Read-aloud provides modeling for fluent, expressive reading while instilling joy and comfort
in the reading experience. Children develop listening comprehension while listening to read
aloud. Read-aloud has innumerable socio-emotional and cognitive benefits. This NPR article
and podcast provide parents with guidance about making reading aloud to their kids a warm,
bonding experience while making them better readers.

Reading aloud enhances phonemic awareness, one of the literacy building blocks in young
children. Teachers and guardians model expressive reading while reading aloud and facilitate
building children's vocabulary. Additionally, reading aloud provides access to a text that
children might not be able to read on their own and helps them process life and difficult issues
through dialogic conversations. With the help of adults, children negotiate meaning. Further,
reading aloud builds children's background knowledge. Through think-aloud and pertinent
thought-provoking questions, read-aloud scaffold meaning-making. This PBS article provides
the beneficial effects of reading aloud.

Reading aloud involves planning and preparation. First, consider how you would like to
introduce the book, author, and illustrator: how would you connect the children's prior
knowledge to the topic? At what points would you ask strategic think-aloud questions without
interrupting the story? What are some relevant questions focused on predicting, visualizing,
monitoring comprehension, summarizing, and/or evaluating? What story elements (characters,
setting, plot, and theme) would you discuss and how? How would you make text-to-self, text-to-
text, and text-to-world connections? You may choose to discuss certain aspects of the book in
depth depending on the cognitive and affective development of the children.

Shared reading (reading with students)

As the name suggests, shared reading involves a reader sharing a text with an audience. A
teacher, for example, reads from a "big book." In PreK-2, the children sit on a rug while
the teacher reads and points at words with a pointer. Pointing demonstrates the one-to-one
correspondence of written and spoken words. Shared reading also improves students' sight-
                                                                                           CHAPTER 7. FLUENCY AND COMPREHENSION | 128

word recognition and concepts about print, such as reading moves from left to right and return
sweep to the left to continue reading.

Shared reading builds fluency by modeling expressive reading with voice changes for different
characters. It cultivates joy from reading by making it a pleasurable experience where children
participate by chiming in at certain spots.

It also supports story comprehension by building a schema for the story structure, with
beginning, middle, and end, highlighting the story elements of character, setting, plot, and
theme through strategic, thought-provoking questions.

Independent reading (reading by students)

Independent reading by students supports fluency. Motivation plays a huge role in creating
independent readers. The students can be motivated by bringing in a variety of texts based on
their interests and providing them with choices in reading and writing. There is no follow-up
activity or book report to be written on books the children read. Children engage in independent
reading for fun and enjoyment. Research (Cunningham & Allington, 2016) shows that the
significant motivators of students for reading are teachers' read-aloud and the students having
an independent reading time with books of their own choice.

The purpose of independent reading is the enjoyment of the text. Students should get a
consistent independent reading time of at least 20 minutes each day. Teachers must consider
how to implement independent reading in their classrooms, including logistics such as when
students would select their books for the independent-reading time. What procedures are there
already in place to make independent-reading time efficient?

Guided reading (reading by students)

Guided reading is reading by the students under the supervision and guidance of the teacher.
Texts are provided at the student's instructional level. (At the correct instructional level, the
word accuracy rate is 90-94% - that is, in a passage of 100 words, the reader makes no more
than 10 errors, and the comprehension is 60% or better.) The teacher selects developmentally
appropriate book sets. The students read while the teacher listens and makes pertinent
observational notes to put in each student's file.

Fountess and Pinell (2012, 2018) note that guided reading supports differentiated instruction
129 | CHAPTER 7. FLUENCY AND COMPREHENSION

and leads to independent reading. Teachers can provide the children with individualized
support through guided reading in small groups.

To implement guided reading, teachers form flexible, homogenous groups based on the
instructional needs of the students to guide and model the skills that the students need help
with. It involves assessing the needs of the children through various literacy assessments.
Students practice the particular skill they need under the teacher's guidance while the rest of the
class works at centers or their desks on their literacy skills. It involves building procedures into
the daily schedule. Guided reading builds literacy skills, including fluency and comprehension.

Rasinski (2003) and (Rasinski & Padak, 2013) recommend developing fluency through fluency-
development lessons with the following instructional routine. This routine can be completed
within 15-20 minutes:

 1. Read aloud a short poem or interesting passage several times. Help the children
      comprehend difficult words during the discussion.

 2. Do a choral reading of the poem or passage as a class several times, assigning different
      parts for the children to take. The children should have copies of the text.

 3. Do at least three partner readings of the poem or passage, taking turns reading.
 4. Ask for volunteers to read the poem or passage to the whole class.
 5. Have the children choose 2-3 words from the poem/passage to add to their personal

      dictionary.
 6. The children take home the text. They are encouraged to share their reading with a

      parent or guardian.

Strategies to promote comprehension

Early print awareness reflects children's understanding that print conveys meaning as they
explore it in their environment with parents and guardians. Toddlers and preschoolers depend
on social clues and physical context to read print (Goodman, 1986). Gradually, they learn
directionality, letter names, and the correspondence between letters and sounds to make
meaning of the written symbols and words.
               CHAPTER 7. FLUENCY AND COMPREHENSION | 130

Video Example

One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online
here: https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=291#oembed-3

Adults play a considerable role in promoting understanding of the text by reading aloud and
having children interact with the print in their daily lives. Children develop a story schema
through read-aloud with a beginning, middle, and end. They also get exposed to different text
structures and features through consistent, shared reading experiences. Furthermore, read-
aloud develops vocabulary and prior knowledge to enhance linguistic comprehension.

Guardians and teachers can promote reading comprehension by:

  · Reading a variety of narrative and expository texts aloud.
  · Choosing books that introduce children to unfamiliar topics, complex syntax, and

      sophisticated words (Paratore et al., 2011).
  · Encouraging children to elaborate, clarify, and reason as they discuss stories (dialogic

      reading).
  · Engaging children in various reading experiences, such as independent reading, shared

      reading, guided reading, and read-aloud.
  · Making consistent time for a daily read-aloud or shared reading and independent reading.
  · Building children's vocabulary by exploring word meanings: Have children illustrate the

      vocabulary (sketch to stretch), write synonyms, antonyms, and a sentence, or draw a
      graphic organizer like the Frayer model [PDF]. The Frayer model can be modified to have
      a combination of words and pictures. Children can also explore vocabulary in their
      surroundings. Understanding vocabulary supports children's comprehension.
131 | CHAPTER 7. FLUENCY AND COMPREHENSION

Understanding narrative text elements

Narrative texts have a story structure with a beginning, middle, and end. Narrative texts have
the following story elements:

Setting

Setting indicates when and where a story takes place. To develop an understanding of the
setting, explore how the illustrations and word choices in the story contribute to the feeling of
the place and time.

Characters

There are major and minor characters in a story. Students can analyze and describe the traits or
qualities of the characters through their appearance, words, and actions; they can compare the
characters using a Venn diagram or examine how the characters evolved from the beginning to
end in longer texts such as chapter books.

Plot

The plot involves the problem, sequence of events, and solution of the story. A plot diagram
looks like a horizontal line where the story is introduced. Then the problem is introduced,
followed by an escalation of conflict, also known as the sequence of events, until the climax of
the action. Finally, the graph looks like a downhill line, representing the release of tension as
the problem is resolved. There may be person-to-person conflict, person-to-society conflict,
person-to-self conflict, or person-to-nature conflict. Story mapping helps in developing an
understanding of the plot.

Theme

Theme indicates the main idea. Themes are generally written as sentences. For example, "slow
and steady wins the race." Have your students identify the story's main idea while guiding them
with questions.
                                                                                           CHAPTER 7. FLUENCY AND COMPREHENSION | 132

Comprehension strategies for narrative texts

Strategies for helping students comprehend texts include reviewing, predicting, activating prior
knowledge, setting a purpose, think-aloud, visualizing, inferring, summarizing, and evaluating.

Before reading

Before reading the story, the book is introduced through the 4 Ps: Preview, Prior knowledge,
Prediction, and Purpose.

  · Preview: Previewing consists of examining the title, author, and illustrator and taking a
      picture walk through the book. It can be done with chapter books as well as picturebooks.

  · Prior knowledge: Students are encouraged to think about the book's topic through think-
      aloud or a question.

  · Prediction: To promote active reading, the students are asked to predict something
      related to the book based on their preview.

  · Purpose: Set the purpose of their reading the text. Generally, it is to find information
      based on the reader's prediction.

While reading

While reading, the students are encouraged to think about the 5 W's and H's: What, Where,
When, Why, Who, and How? The placing of strategic questions at points throughout the book
will help the children to comprehend the story. The Iowa Reading Research Center recommends
using the CROWD+HS questions and PEER+PA dialogue to encourage dialogic reading to
promote reading comprehension and oral language development.

Throughout the story, active readers make predictions, they think aloud ("I wonder..., I think..., I
feel..."), visualize ("I can vividly see the action happening through the use of descriptive language
by the author"), self-monitor ("I don't understand why..."), summarize ("So far in the story..."),
and evaluate ("My favorite part is..."). The ability to infer develops over time as children gain
experience with reading and learn to make connections using their background knowledge and
information from the text to draw conclusions.
133 | CHAPTER 7. FLUENCY AND COMPREHENSION

After reading

We make text-to-self, text-to-text, and text-to-world connections during and after reading.
Students can summarize stories by story mapping to showcase their understanding.

Story mapping

Story mapping is a visual representation of the various elements of a story. Different graphic
organizers can be explored online, such as concept maps, story maps, and others. The elements
to consider when mapping the story are setting, characters, problem, sequence of events,
solution, and theme (main idea).

Compare and contrast

Students may use Venn diagrams to compare and contrast characters from the same book
or different books. This allows them to examine the similarities and differences between the
characters.

Writing a bilingual story.

Dual-language learners can write with Rebus (a combination of words and pictures) or a
bilingual story using two languages.

Retelling using Bob Prost and Kylene Beers' BHH Framework (2017)

Developing the skill to retell stories after hearing them in read-aloud, shared-reading
experiences, or guided-reading times reinforces the students' grasp of the beginning-middle-
end structure of stories. Retelling skills can be improved over time and made more specific.
BHH stands for:

  · What is in the book?
  · What is in your head?
  · What did you take to heart? (The personal connections you made with the story.)
                                                                                           CHAPTER 7. FLUENCY AND COMPREHENSION | 134

Comprehension strategies for informational texts

Informational text is text that is nonfiction. Newspapers, encyclopedias, and nonfiction books
are examples of informational text. The comprehension strategies for informational text are
similar to those for narrative text in terms of visualizing, summarizing, and evaluating
information. The text features of informational text and content-specific vocabulary
require close reading, figuring out or looking up vocabulary words, and paying attention to
tables, captions, and headings.

Sketch noting and various graphic organizers can be used to help visualize the information.
T-charts and double-entry journals are also great ways to organize the information, with
significant points on the left and associated connections on the right. Tree diagrams
(Cunningham & Allington, 2016) can summarize the text, with the trunk, branches, and twigs
representing the main topic, subtopics, and examples/details.

Scavenger hunts and other gamified learning activities with incentives are excellent methods
for comprehending informational text.

The Second Life uses a simulation platform to teach content areas, and Wondropolis uses
children's natural curiosity to teach informational text in a multimodal manner. Newsela
provides articles on various informational texts, and you may modify the text difficulty by
adjusting for the grade level.

Cunningham and Allington (2016) suggest a "Guess Yes or No," or "confirm or correct"
framework where students first predict and then read to check their predictions. False
predictions are corrected with the correct information. For this activity, students can be given
anywhere from 10-15 informational statements to make predictions about, read, confirm, or
correct.
135 | CHAPTER 7. FLUENCY AND COMPREHENSION

  Reflection Questions

         1. How would you support a student who struggles with comprehension but can read words
             quickly and accurately?

         2. What are some graphic organizers, sketch noting tools, and virtual simulations that
             support English Language Learners' comprehension, and how would you use them in your
             classroom?

  Learning Activities

                         An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
                         https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=291#h5p-27

  Key Takeaways

         · Fluency and comprehension are correlated.
         · Create a print-rich, inclusive learning environment.
         · Lower the affective filter by creating a sense of belonging.
         · Engage the students in authentic, fun learning experiences that reinforce comprehension

             and fluency, such as readers' theater and spoken-word poetry.
         · Provide various reading experiences, including buddy/partner reading, shared reading,

             guided reading, read-aloud, and independent reading.
                                                                                   CHAPTER 7. FLUENCY AND COMPREHENSION | 136

Resources for teacher educators

    · The Go-To Literacy Resources for Literacy Teachers
    · Teaching Reading Resources
    · Early Learning Resources
    · Wonderopolis- A Questioning Resource
    · Nonfiction Reading Resource
    · Library of Congress Resource
    · Science Resource for K-12 Educators
    · Smithsonian Learning Lab
    · Time for Kids
    · 2022 Notable Books: 21 Best Poetry and Verse Novels for Kids | School Library Journal
    · 2022 Notable Poetry Books and Verse Novels - NCTE
    · Notable Children's Books - 2022 | Association for Library Service to Children (ALSC)
    · Effectiveness of Early Literacy Instruction: Summary of 20 Years of Research
    · International Literacy Association's Resource on the Science of Reading

Professional materials

    · Slide deck on fluency: OER Fluency Powerpoint
    · Slide decks on comprehension:

              OER Comprehension (Think-Alouds)
              OER Comprehending Narrative Text
              OER Reading Informational Texts
137 | CHAPTER 7. FLUENCY AND COMPREHENSION

  Learning Activities

     Potential assignments
         1. Consider how you would use wordless picturebooks to support comprehension and fluency
             in children. Explore some wordless picturebooks and decide on one for children to use as a
             basis for creating something in small groups that they can perform for an audience. Their
             performance can fall into any one of the following categories: spoken-word poetry, play,
             readers' theater, news report, talk show, infomercial, or any other type you approve that
             relates to your wordless picturebook.
         2. Explore online resources for fluency and comprehension to create an early literacy
             instructional resource center for PreK-3rd grade. Choose from the categories listed below:
                   File-folder literacy game ideas
                   Online lesson plans for literacy development
                   Blogs and podcasts related to literacy instruction
                   Performance-poetry resources

References

Beers, K. & Probst, B. (2017). Disrupting thinking: Why how we read matters. Scholastic.

Clay, M. M. (1991). Becoming literate: The construction of inner control. Heinemann.

Cunningham, P. and Allington, R. (2016). Classrooms that work: They can all read and write.
   Pearson.

Fountas, I. C., & Pinnell, G. S. (2018). Every child, every classroom, every day: From vision to
   action in literacy learning. The Reading Teacher, 72(1), 7-19.

Fountess, I. C. and Pinell, G. S. (2012). Guided reading: The romance and the reality. Reading
   Teacher, 66(4), 268-284.

Gough, P. B., & Tunmer, W. E. (1986). "Decoding, reading, and reading disability." Remedial and
   Special Education: RASE, 7(1), 6-10. https://doi.org/10.1177/074193258600700104
                                                                                           CHAPTER 7. FLUENCY AND COMPREHENSION | 138

Goodman, Y. (1986). Children coming to know literacy. In W. Teale & E. Sulzby (Eds.). Emergent
   Literacy: Writing and Reading (pp. 1-14). Ablex.

Guthrie, J. T., & Humenick, N. M. (2004). Motivating students to read: Evidence for classroom
   practices that increase motivation and achievement. In P. McCardle & V. Chhabra (Eds.), The
   Voice of Evidence in Reading Research (pp. 329-354). Paul Brookes Publishing.

Guthrie, J. T. & Wigfield, A. (2000). Engagement and motivation in reading. In M. I., Kamil, P.B.
   Mosenthal, P.D. Pearson, & R. Barr (Eds.). Handbook of Reading Research (Vol III, pp. 403-424).
   Erlbaum.

Krashen, S. (1982). Acquiring a second language. World Englishes, 1(3), 97-101.

National Reading Panel (2000). Teaching children to read: An evidence-based assessment of scientific
   research literature on reading and its implications for reading instruction: Reports of the subgroups
   (National Institute of Health Pub. No 00-4754). Washington, DC: National Institute of Child
   Health and Human Development.

Paratore, J. R., Cassano, C. M., & Schickedanz, J. A. (2011). Supporting early (and later) literacy
   development at home and at school: The long view. In M.L. Kamil, P.D. Pearson, E. B. Moje &
   P.P. Afflerbach (Eds.), Handbook of Reading Research (Vol. IV, pp. 107-135). Routledge.

Rasinski, T. V. (2003). The fluent reader. Scholastic.

Rasinski, T. V., & Padak, N. D. (2013). From phonics to fluency (3rd edition). Allyn & Bacon.

Rosenblatt, L.M. (1994). The transactional theory of reading and writing. In R.B. Ruddell, M.R.
   Ruddell, & H. Singer (Eds.), Theoretical models and processes of reading (4th ed., pp. 1057-1092).
   Newark, DE: International Reading Association. doi:10.1598/0872075028.48

Sims Bishop, R. (1990). Mirrors, windows, and sliding glass doors. Perspectives, 1(3), ix-xi.

Scarborough, H. S. (2001). Connecting early language and literacy to later reading (dis) abilities:
   Evidence, theory, and practice. Handbook of Early Literacy Research, 1, 97-110.

Vygotsky, L.S. (1978). Mind and society: The development of higher psychological processes.
   Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
139 | CHAPTER 8. WRITING

Chapter 8. Writing

   Nandita Gurjar and Sohyun Meacham

      "I can shake off everything as I write, my sorrows disappear, my courage is reborn." - Anne Frank

        Writing systems in different languages. ("Historical writing systems" by
        ThisIsNotEditorXVorziblixMason, William Albert (1855-1923) is licensed under CC BY-SA
        4.0)
      Keywords: writing development, writing process, writing workshop, prewriting, drafting,
      revising, editing, mentor text, mini lessons, writing strategies, conferring
                                                          CHAPTER 8. WRITING | 140

Iowa Core Standards for Writing                           Learning Objectives

Kindergarten

1. Use a combination of drawing, dictating, and           After reading this chapter, you
    writing to compose opinion pieces in which they       should be able to:
    tell a reader the topic or the name of the book

they are writing about and state an opinion or            · Identify effective strategies

preference about the topic or book (e.g., My              to promote writing

favorite book is...).                                     development in children

2. Use a combination of drawing, dictating, and           (InTASC Standards #1, #2,

    writing to compose informative/explanatory texts         #4, #8).
    in which they name what they are writing about        · Identify elements of the
    and supply some information about the topic.
3. Use a combination of drawing, dictating, and              writing workshop (InTASC
    writing to narrate a single event or several loosely     Standard #3 & #7).
    linked events, tell about the events in the order in  · Describe the process of
    which they occurred, and provide a reaction to           conferring and its
    what happened.                                           associated benefits
4. With guidance and support from adults, respond            (InTASC Standard #5, #7 &
    to questions and suggestions from peers and add          #8).
    details to strengthen writing as needed.              · Assess writing using the
5. With guidance and support from adults, explore a          6+1 traits to personalize
    variety of digital tools to produce and publish          writing instruction
    writing, including in collaboration with peers.          (InTASC Standard #4).
6. Participate in shared research and writing             · Model and support
    projects (e.g., explore a number of books by a           children's penmanship and
    favorite author and express opinions about them).        handwriting development
                                                             (InTASC Standard #4).

7. With guidance and support from adults, recall

information from experiences or gather

information from provided sources to answer a question.

First Grade

 1. Write opinion pieces in which they introduce the topic or name the book they are writing
141 | CHAPTER 8. WRITING

      about, state an opinion, supply a reason for the opinion, and provide some sense of
      closure. (W.1.1)
 2. Write informative/explanatory texts in which they name a topic, supply some facts about
      the topic, and provide some sense of closure. (W.1.2)
 3. Write narratives in which they recount two or more appropriately sequenced events,
      include some details regarding what happened, use temporal words to signal event order,
      and provide some sense of closure. (W.1.3)
 4. With guidance and support from adults, focus on a topic, respond to questions and
      suggestions from peers, and add details to strengthen writing as needed. (W.1.5)
 5. With guidance and support from adults, use a variety of digital tools to produce and
      publish writing, including in collaboration with peers. (W.1.6)
 6. Participate in shared research and writing projects (e.g., explore a number of "how-to"
      books on a given topic and use them to write a sequence of instructions). (W.1.7)
 7. With guidance and support from adults, recall information from experiences or gather
      information from provided sources to answer a question. (W.1.8)

Second Grade

 1. Write opinion pieces in which they introduce the topic or book they are writing about,
      state an opinion, supply reasons that support the opinion, use linking words (e.g., because,
      and, also) to connect opinion and reasons, and provide a concluding statement or section.

 2. Write informative/explanatory texts in which they introduce a topic, use facts and
      definitions to develop points, and provide a concluding statement or section.

 3. Write narratives in which they recount a well-elaborated event or short sequence of
      events, include details to describe actions, thoughts, and feelings, use temporal words to
      signal event order, and provide a sense of closure.

 4. With guidance and support from adults and peers, focus on a topic and strengthen writing
      as needed by revising and editing.

 5. With guidance and support from adults, use a variety of digital tools to produce and
      publish writing, including in collaboration with peers.

 6. Participate in shared research and writing projects (e.g., read a number of books on a
      single topic to produce a report; record science observations).

 7. Recall information from experiences or gather information from provided sources to
      answer a question.
                                                                                                                                CHAPTER 8. WRITING | 142

Imagine you are in a kindergarten classroom, and the children are in a writing workshop. You
look around the room. Some kids are drawing a concrete or shape poem on a whiteboard;
others can be seen telling a story to a volunteer; some are writing down their ideas in a
graphic organizer, while others are working on grabbers or creating a lead to capture audience
attention. The teacher moves from student to student, conferring with them and teaching
specific skills they need, differentiating their instruction. This demonstrates the beauty of the
writing workshop, where everyone works productively at their own pace while the teacher
scaffolds and supports the students as they write, revise, edit, and work on formatting and
publishing their work.

  Video Example

                         One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online
                         here: https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=303#oembed-1

Children's writing development

Reading and writing develop simultaneously. Marie Clay, a "guru" of young children's literacy
development, suggests that writing can be encouraged if your child can just hold a pencil or
a crayon. They do not need to master reading first for you to teach them writing. In the early
stages of children's writing development, they just draw and scribble. Research has found that
very young children who can't write yet can distinguish between drawing and "writing." When
they say they are drawing, they make large figures with round edges. When they say they are
writing, though, they use strokes and dots. They lift their pencil off the page and interrupt their
movements more when they are "writing." Just be patient when you see your child scribbling
indiscernible letters. When they scribble and call it writing, just affirm them and encourage
them to do more "writing."

Your child will go through several different stages in the process of writing development. Their
scribbles will turn into letter-like forms arranged linearly. Then when there are real noticeable
143 | CHAPTER 8. WRITING

letters in your child's writing, it still might be pretend writing with randomly ordered letters.
Some letter combinations could represent correct sound blends. Many times, these are letters
from your child's name or are used at the beginning of words. It is a long journey for your
children to master the conventional English writing system. In the meantime, allow them to use
their own inventive spelling. "It is far too soon to aim for correctness. Accept and enjoy the
child's many attempts and accomplishments" (Clay, 2010, p. 12).

Gentry's (2005) writing-development scale can track children's writing progress and personalize
instruction to scaffold their writing development. It describes 5 stages that children go through.
Van Ness et al. (2013, p. 578) provide Gentry's writing-development stages as listed below:

 1. Non-alphabetic: Children use markings, scribbles, and pictures, but no letters.
 2. Pre-alphabetic: Children write letters, but the letters do not represent sounds. Random

      letters cannot be read, for example, "RzxTQO" for "bottle."
 3. Partial alphabetic: Children write letters that represent sounds. There is directionality

      such as from left to right. There is some correct spelling, for example, "bt" for "bottle."
 4. Full alphabetic: Children provide a letter for each sound. Some medial short vowels are

      written, for example, "botl" for "bottle."
 5. Consolidated alphabetic: Most (two thirds) of the words are written correctly. There is

      one-to-one spelling correspondence, for example, "bottle" for "bottle."

Spelling as a window into child's reading and writing
development

Spelling is a window through which you can assess your child's reading development (Bear,
Invernizzi, Templeton, & Johnston, 2019). When your child is only able to pretend to read, their
writing looks like scribbles. When they start using letter-sound knowledge and blending letters,
they might get the beginning and ending consonants, while omitting the intervening vowels,
for instance, spelling cat as ct. Once vowels are used correctly in simple words like cat and dog,
your child will start learning to spell more complicated words. At this stage, bottle might be
spelled botl. English is one of the most opaque languages in terms of spelling. That is why you
can see many English monolingual adults who still struggle with it. Much reading experience
is necessary for your children to learn to spell correctly, in addition to their receiving explicit
teaching of spelling patterns in words. We suggest graciously accepting developmental spelling,
                                                                                                                                CHAPTER 8. WRITING | 144

also known as invented spelling, in children's writing to encourage them to focus on the content
of their writing as they go through Gentry's developmental stages of writing.

Developing an author identity in children

There are wordless and nearly wordless picturebooks that can provide a context for your
child to write something meaningful and useful. Since the illustrations in the book is open to
each child's unique interpretation, you can suggest that your child become the author for the
picturebook by creating their own story. You can have a conversation with your child as you
examine the illustrations together. Then you can encourage your child to write their story based
on your conversation.

Louie and Sierschynski (2015, p. 110) provided neatly structured steps to follow when it comes
to teaching writing to children with wordless picturebooks.

  · First, preview the peritextual features: the cover, title page, end pages, dedication and
      author's note.

  · Second, use repeated viewings to help them identify the elements in layers, such as
      setting, text structure, and characters.

  · Third, analyze the author's purpose together by asking your children why the author/
      illustrator uses certain images.

  · Fourth, help the children put your discussion in writing, by choosing a text structure
      such as description, comparing & contrasting, cause & effect, problem & solution,
      sequence, or a story map as a retelling guide.

Louie and Sierschynski's steps were originally developed as a writing-instruction strategy for
learners of English as a second language in the classroom. However, they work well for any
family with English as a first or second language. If your children can still only write a few
words, and not sentences or paragraphs, you can still encourage them to write some words for
a wordless picturebook. Making a road sign or writing a few words in a bubble for a character
is a good start. Crews' Truck is a wordless picturebook. Wherever the red truck goes, Crews
illustrates details of the vehicles, roads, and landscapes surrounding it, including some signs as
environmental prints (common logos that the children will be familiar with). Adding more road
signs in Truck would be a fun writing project for your children.

Many adults only think about the grammar, spelling, and mechanics of writing. However, as you
145 | CHAPTER 8. WRITING

see from Louie and Sierschynski's strategy above, text structure is an important starting point
for writing that your child must learn to be a good writer. In addition, other perspectives from
which you can analyze your child's writing are ideas, organization, voice, word choice, sentence
fluency, conventions, and presentation. This list is the "6 + 1 traits of writing" framework. It was
originally 6 traits, and the last trait (presentation) was added to evaluate how the sentences and
paragraphs are presented on a page or online screen. As you can see here, writing is so much
more than grammar and mechanics. Especially when your child is just starting to write, rather
than focusing on grammar and mechanics, listen to your child tell the story that they are trying
to write. This can support their process of developing the content of the story. If your child
covers a piece of paper with drawings and a couple of letters, try to decipher it with your child.

Let's say your child shows you a small card with squiggly lines and "MOM" on the back. Your
face shows much excitement. You ask your child, "Wow, is this card for me? Did you write a
card for me?" Then your child will explain what they wrote for you. Oral language and written
language work together for you here to understand what your child is trying to communicate.
Apparently, the main idea of that writing is love for Mom.
                                                                                                                                CHAPTER 8. WRITING | 146

                                 Figure 2: Example of a child's writing to provoke
                                 dialogic conversation. (Source: Soh's daughter's
                                 handwriting.)

It is important for your child to be able to identify themselves as an author in everyday life. At
some point, they might feel that writing is something required only for schoolwork. However,
writing is not just for book authors and journalists. Writing can be fun and useful in everyday
life. There are many authentic purposes, like writing letters to loved ones and special occasion
cards to friends. Your child needs to perceive purposes of writing like these and develop an
author identity. The earlier they see the big picture, the less they will struggle with writing at
school.
Soh's daughter has loved writing in Bare Books since she was able to write some words on
her own, although her spelling was predominantly inventive. Bare Books are blank books with
hard white covers and white pages. They usually contain 32 pages that your child can write on,
following the average traditional picturebook page count. She has written several of her own
147 | CHAPTER 8. WRITING

books. One titled Fireman had a problem for the main character, a fireman, to solve: putting out
a fire. She recalls writing this book below:

         "When I was on a trip to Arizona, I was working on a book called Fireman. It's a realistic
         fiction book about a few firemen that saw fire in New York City, at the Empire State
         Building. It took quite a while for me to get done with the problems. So they had to spray
         water out of the hose a lot. Multiple times! A lot of kids like firemen. I think they will
         enjoy my Fireman book. The reason I got inspired to write the book is because I went to
         a firehouse."

She is a third grader now, but she calls herself an author. She always engages in writing at home
for her own authentic purposes, not only for homework. She wants to be a veterinarian when
she grows up. She says she can still be an author while she takes care of ill animals for her job.

There are children who are reluctant writers. If your child likes watching videos, you can use
them as a springboard for your child's writing. Strassman and O'Connell (2007) suggested this
strategy:

         "Authoring with Video (AWV) enables students to get started writing in a medium they
         know and love: video. It is similar to writing text for a wordless picturebook. The videos,
         like the pictures in a wordless book, serve as the trigger for an organized text. Finding
         their voices as writers is less of a challenge for students because they are comfortable
         with messages and visual images working together to communicate meaning. AWV
         encourages students to formally recognize this ability as a skill that has its roots in
         writing. It capitalizes on the sophisticated video-viewing and comprehension abilities of
         children and casts them as writers, publishers, and producers of content." (Strassman &
         O'Connell, 2007, p.330)

The important thing is to promote your child's writing habit and support their development of
an author identity. All the fun pieces written by your author-child for you to enjoy reading are
just the entertaining by products!

Schickedanz and Collins (2013, pp. 124-125) recommend the following effective practices for
supporting children in their writing:

 1. Read to children even in infancy and engage them in conversation. It not only develops
      language, vocabulary, and their background knowledge, but also makes them familiar with
      written discourse.
                                                                                                                                CHAPTER 8. WRITING | 148

 2. Expose them to a range of purposes for writing in daily life such as creating a menu,
      compiling a grocery list, writing a note to their mom, making a wish list for Santa, etc.

 3. Provide mark-making experiences (scribbles, mock letters, and pictures) early, as it gives
      an opportunity for them to talk about the meaning.

 4. Talk to children about their writing and drawing.
 5. Keep the focus on meaning and communicating.

Using wordless picturebooks to promote writing for
dual-language learners

I (Nandita) enjoy using wordless picturebooks in my undergraduate and graduate classes.
Writing with wordless picturebooks not only ignites imagination and creativity (among the top-
ten skills based on a WEF report) but also supports collaboration, which makes writing fun and
engaging! Laughter fills my room as the students joyfully share their whimsical stories.

Every semester, I hunt local public libraries and the university library to find unique, new
wordless picturebooks. My college students get a kick out of collaborating to create fresh,
original stories inspired by the ideas and imaginations of each individual in the group. It is
fun for them to share their creative stories with their peers! The purpose of this exercise is for
the preservice teachers to pass this joyful learning experience with wordless picturebooks on to
their elementary students, who may come from various backgrounds and cultural contexts.

Wordless picturebooks build a schema for the story with the narrative elements of setting,
characters, plot, and theme. They can be used to promote language development as the adult
asks critical thinking questions to encourage the children to "view" the text closely and
construct meaning. The pictures provide visual scaffolding for building vocabulary and
language skills, providing comprehensible input for dual-language learners.

Dual-language learners bring their own cultural experiences as they interpret the visuals and
create an authentic, personally meaningful story. These stories can be published and shared
in a celebration of learning with music, games, and food, where the parents are invited to
the school, and the children get to showcase and proudly share their work. This learning
celebration honors children's cultural heritage (Leija & Peralta, 2020) and positively impacts
children's emerging identities. A positive self-concept builds positive self-esteem and a sense
of belonging, fostering a safe learning environment. Validating, embracing, and welcoming
149 | CHAPTER 8. WRITING

children's whole selves with their linguistic and cultural identities creates a nurturing
environment conducive to their literacy development.

Our goals as writing teachers

  · Have a consistent writing time every day.
  · Provide choice, which develops voice in writing.
  · Incorporate writing throughout the day.
  · Create a safe learning environment to write and share.
  · Support and honor children's writing.
  · Model writing, sharing, and celebrating writing.
  · Provide authentic opportunities to write.

Authentic writing

Authentic writing aims to communicate to an authentic audience in children's lives. An example
of authentic writing is writing a letter to a grandmother, aunt, or other relative or friend. After
reading the book Flat Stanley, my daughter's classroom teacher had her write a letter to her aunt.
In that letter, Flat Stanley was sent to Boston. The daughter requested the aunt to take him
to museums and collect postcards from every place he visited. The aunt sent Flat Stanley back
with a letter and postcards. This activity provided authentic reading and writing opportunities
to strengthen the child's literacy skills.

Working on project-based learning and global collaboration also facilitates authentic writing
opportunities. For example, children may participate in global read-aloud and do related writing
activities, or they may collaborate on global goals and read, write, create, and invent with peers
to solve global problems for sustainable global goals.

Writing across content areas

Integrate writing in math, science, and social studies. Write research reports, create posters and
advertisements, and compose using tools of technology to be creative communicators.
                                                                                                                                CHAPTER 8. WRITING | 150

Daily journaling

One of the ways to incorporate daily writing is through daily journaling and "quick writes."
Brainstorm and generate a list of topics with children for journaling to give them a managed
choice. Journaling is discussed more under personal narratives. Quick writes can be
meaningfully integrated throughout the day to increase the volume of writing children do daily.
It also develops a writing habit in children and gradually increases their focus and stamina in
writing.

Some examples of quick writes are provided below.

Think-writes

"Think-Writes are short, quick bits of writing that help students focus and clarify their
thinking" (Cunningham & Allington, 2016, p. 182). The audience for think-writes is only the
writer. This writing is done in 2-5 minutes for the purpose of jotting down one's thoughts or
ideas.

Think-write-pair-share

Writing is thinking. Writing provides quiet time to gather thoughts and jot them down before
talking. We may ask children to write or draw to represent their thinking and then talk to their
"shoulder buddy" about their drawing or writing.

Exit tickets

Exit tickets may be done in a variety of ways. Children may illustrate a vocabulary word that they
learned that day. They may complete the sentence: Today I learned _______________. Children
may complete a graphic organizer in pairs under the guidance of an adult.

While some writing is quick writing for jotting down thoughts, other writing follows a process
to create a product for sharing with an audience. The audience could be parents, peers, teachers,
or others. The genre and format (letter, short story, opinion essay, poem, etc.) depend on the
author's purpose.
151 | CHAPTER 8. WRITING

The writing process

Writing is not a linear process, but iterative and recursive in fashion. It consists of five stages:

Prewriting

According to Donald Murray (1985), 70% of the time should be spent prewriting. During
prewriting, the focus is on identifying the topic, purpose, audience, and genre. The focus at
this stage is on the content. It is better to allow a self-selected topic on which the child has
background information. Donald Graves (1983) and Lucy Calkins (1994) have affirmed that
choice brings out the voice in children's writing, showing the author's personality. Reading
Rockets recommends the RAFT strategy of writing, which helps kids explore their role as a
writer.

  · Topic: The topic needs to be manageable and focused. It should not be too broad. The
      choice of the topic depends on the student, but it should be something they are interested
      in and have background knowledge on.

  · Purpose: The children need to be made cognizant of why they are writing. What is the
      purpose of their writing? Is it to entertain, inform, or persuade?

  · Audience: The choice of words and how a piece is written depends on the audience. A
      letter meant for a friend is different from one written to Mom. Consideration of the
      audience is very important for achieving appropriate and effective writing.

  · Genre: The genre is carefully chosen to best attain the writer's goal or purpose. For
      example, suppose the purpose of writing is to persuade - what genre of writing would best
      accomplish that purpose? Possible writing genres include a letter, essay, poem, song,
      infomercial, commercial, poster, tweet, video, short story, newspaper article, cartoon strip,
      play, blog, research report, and so on.
                     CHAPTER 8. WRITING | 152

Learning Activities

Generating and Synthesizing Ideas on a Graphic Organizer

Once the topic, purpose, audience, and genre are identified, focus on generating ideas. Mind-
mapping tools and graphic organizers organize and synthesize ideas visually. This makes them
great for ELLs due to their visual element. Kidspiration is a child-friendly mind-mapping app to
display ideas. Children generate ideas by talking to peers, reading books, doing online research,
and gathering pictures, audio, and video files for multimodal composing.

Drafting

The second stage of writing is drafting. The focus of drafting is on content creation and
developing the ideas with elaboration and examples. The author works on developing a hook at
the beginning of the piece. A hook or a grabber is something that will grab a reader's attention
and motivate them to read on. A mystery, humor, and a narrative can all act as grabbers that
capture a reader's attention. Craft a lead using mystery or humor, or inspire wonder, sympathy,
anger, or fear in such a way that your audience will want to read your work (Forney, 2001).

Revising

Revising is different from editing. In revision, children re-read what they have written. They
make their words and sentences clearer. They replace weak verbs with strong ones and include
more vivid vocabulary, add details to their drawings and prose, move sentences and words, and
delete anything that does not belong. The acronym ARMS accurately describes the revision
process: children Add information, Remove information, Move words, phrases, and sentences,
and Substitute words for more precise and interesting vocabulary. Then they re-read, question,
ponder, share, and receive peer feedback. The goal of revision is clear and concise writing.
Teachers may confer with students at this time.
153 | CHAPTER 8. WRITING

Editing

Editing ensures that the spelling, punctuation, and grammar are correct. During editing, the
mechanics and conventions are considered. The final writing should be readable and polished.
The correct placement of punctuation such as commas ensures readability and flow.
Proofreading is also done at this time to remove typos. Teachers can create editing circles and
provide checklists for self-checking and peer-checking.

Publishing

The publishing process involves formatting, decorating, and getting binding done to create a
published book to share with others. In the digital age, it is relatively easy to publish your work
online. Kids blogs, Flipgrid videos, and eBooks have been created on various platforms. Little
Bird Tales is for younger kids and combines pictures with the text to create a story. Bookcreator
is another story-creation platform that can be used with guidance from adults.

Writing strategies for children

  · Choose and narrow the topic. (What?)
  · Set a purpose. (Why?)
  · Consider the audience. (For whom?)
  · Decide on the genre. (How?)
  · Generate and organize ideas.
  · Re-read, revise, elaborate, question, self-monitor, self-evaluate, share, and get peer

      feedback.
  · Edit, proofread, format, and publish.
                                                                                                                                CHAPTER 8. WRITING | 154

    Things that strategic writers do:

          · They make deliberate choices based on their purpose.
          · They engage in self-regulation strategies such as self-monitoring and self-evaluating.
          · They are willing to take feedback from peers and adults.
          · Initially, they focus on developing the content, postponing looking for errors until

              towards the end.

Types of writing

Narrative writing

Narrative writing is story writing containing the elements of setting, characters, plot, and
theme. The story can be based on personal experiences, as in the case of personal narratives, or
they can be fictional stories written using imagination and creativity.

Personal narratives

Personal narratives are about personal experiences, and they convey the point of view of the
author. Some of them, such as biographies and simulated journaling, convey the point of view
of another individual the author has decided to write about.

Journal writing
Journaling is expressive writing. Incorporating journaling into your curriculum taps into the
background experiences of the kids, and it functions as a connecting bridge between expressive
writing and formal, academic, and transactional writing. I would suggest exploring children's
books written as journals at the developmentally appropriate level for the children. Daily
journaling builds a positive attitude toward writing, where writing is seen as a medium for
communicating ideas, processing life, and connecting with others. Through writing, thinking
becomes visible.
155 | CHAPTER 8. WRITING

Dialogue journals

Dialogue journaling is written dialogue that occurs between two individuals. It is a writing
activity that builds positive, trusting relationships between the teacher and the students. It
provides access to the teacher for the students and lets them share their thoughts and ask
questions. When the teacher responds, the teacher's writing provides authentic text that the
students can read for meaning. The teacher's writing also acts as a model of correct spelling and
grammar for the students; this is especially valuable for dual-language learners.

Simulated journals

Simulated journals are a creative way for students to develop the point of view of an imaginary
or real-life character by writing a journal while taking on the identity of that person.

Performance poetry or spoken-word poetry

Performance poetry is performed for an audience with voice and gestures to communicate
an idea or theme. It develops civic agency in students to think about socio-cultural or
environmental issues they are passionate about. Amanda Gordan and Sarah Kay are two well-
known spoken-word poets. Performing poetry develops fluency in children as they learn to read
with expression and conviction, using their voice and body as tools to convey ideas. Adults can
help and guide children in writing poems and practicing their delivery.

Biographies

Children can read about their favorite historical or sports figures and write short biographies or
bio poems of them.

Autobiographies

The children can write about themselves. In Literacy Con Carino, the children wrote the
"autobiographies of not so famous people," writing about themselves and envisioning their
futures.

Fictional narratives

There are different strategies for inspiring story-writing in children. One effective way is to
have them write a story, play, letter, or newspaper article that is prompted by a picture. For
                                                                                                                                CHAPTER 8. WRITING | 156

example, I have used the following picture for this purpose. Pictures spark creativity in writing.
Students use their imagination to create a unique story. My students have come up with creative
responses in the forms of poetry, a letter, a newspaper article, an eyewitness account, or a short
story that is uniquely reflective of the author.

  Figure 3: Flying pigeons writing prompt (Source: Picture taken by Nandita during her visit to India.)

Cartoon strips
Cartoon strips are a lot of fun to write, as they focus on visuals more than words. The strips can
be five frames long for starters.
Wordless picturebooks
Children who love to draw will enjoy creating a story by drawing a picture on each page. Adult
guidance may be needed as the child plans and verbalizes the story's beginning, middle, and end.
157 | CHAPTER 8. WRITING

Short stories

The children can plan a story on a graphic organizer with a setting, characters, plot, and theme.
They may leave some space at the top of the page for drawings and at the bottom for writing.

Fractured fairy tales

The children can tell a different version of the story from the point of view of another character
through words and drawings. Then they can write that version of the fairy tale.

Children's original endings

Coming up with their own endings to the story ignites creative thinking and imagination, and
helps them understand the story better.

Plays

Pretend play makes it natural to write dialogues with quotation marks. The children may pair
up with a buddy to create an imaginative scene out of their pretend play. After they write it, let
them engage in pretend play with it to make it come alive.

Reader's theater

Writing a reader's theater script is like writing a play. In reader's theater, the children read from
a script they wrote. Reading and re-reading the script helps to build fluency.

Poetry writing

Poetry writing develops vocabulary and concise writing skills. Explore some poetry interactives
at www.readwritethink.com

Limericks

A limerick is a rhyming poem with the "aa, bb, a" rhyme scheme. The first two lines rhyme;
the third- and fourth lines rhyme, and the fifth line rhymes with the first two. Limericks can be
written with a partner, taking turns coming up with words to match the rhyme scheme:

  · Line 1: _______ a
  · Line 2: _______ a
                                                                                                                                CHAPTER 8. WRITING | 158

  · Line 3: _______ b
  · Line 4: _______ b
  · Line 5: _______ a

Haikus

A haiku is a popular Japanese poem that has 3 lines. The first line has 5 syllables; the second has
7, and the last has 5. The children may write haikus on nature, the seasons, or any topic of their
choice:

  · Line 1: _______ (5 syllables)
  · Line 2: _______ (7 syllables)
  · Line 3: _______ (5 syllables)

Cinquains

A cinquain is a 5-line poem and follows the following structure:

  · Line 1: _______ (a 1-word title)
  · Line 2: _______, ______ (2 words describing the title)
  · Line 3: _______, ______, ______ (3 words expressing a feeling)
  · Line 4: _______, ______, ______, ______ (4 words expressing an action)
  · Line 5: _______ (a synonym for the title or one word describing the title)

The children can write about their pets or their favorite sport or food.

Six-word memoirs

Six-word memoirs are great for motivating reluctant writers to write. They are short and simple,
and the children only need to be motivated to write six words. An example of a six-word memoir
is "I help my mom with chores!"

Diamantes

A diamante demonstrates opposites or antonyms. It is a 7-line diamond-shaped poem
describing opposites:

  · Line 1: ______ (noun)
159 | CHAPTER 8. WRITING

  · Line 2: ______, ______ (two describing words)
  · Line 3: ______, ______, ______ (three words with "ing")
  · Line 4: ______, ______, ______, ______ (four words - two related to line 1, two related to

      line 7)
  · Line 5: _______, ______, ______ (three words with "ing")
  · Line 6: _______, ______ (two describing words)
  · Line 7: _______ (opposite noun)

Concrete or shape poems

Children draw a shape and then write phrases or sentences related to the drawing inside or
around it. Shape poems are fun for children to create as it taps into their love for drawing and
coloring.

Acrostic Poems

First the children choose a word or name, such as their own. Then they write it vertically going
down, and each letter of the word is used to begin a descriptive word, phrase, or sentence. It
makes for a great beginning-of-the-year activity for self-introductions. For example:

  · N: Nice
  · A: Amiable
  · N: Nurturing
  · D: Delightful
  · I: Intelligent
  · T: Teacher
  · A: Attentive

Expository writing (nonfiction)

Informational writing

Informational writing conveys information to readers through recorded observations,
interpretations, connections, research reports, processes, instructions, and problem solutions.
                                                                                                                                CHAPTER 8. WRITING | 160

Science journals

In science journals, students make hypotheses, and write procedures, observations, and
conclusions.

Double-entry journals

The double-entry journal is like a T-chart, where the child writes the main points on the left and
comments on the right.

Math journals

Math journals can be used for solving word problems or other math-related problems.

Research reports

Children research a topic and write a detailed report on it.

ABC books on a country

An example of an ABC book is a research book on aspects of a country or culture. For example,
if I were doing a book on India, I may have A for architecture, B for Bollywood movies, C for
customs, D for traditions, E for elephants, F for food, and so on.

Recipes

Make writing playful and fun by coming up with weird recipes and fun names! Children enjoy
bugs. Utilize their interests in developing recipes alongside them. Create a list of ingredients
and develop a step-by-step process for preparing it.

Persuasive writing

Persuasive writing is done to persuade the readers to embrace a certain point of view or idea. To
be convincing, the writer must provide strong reasons to support their assertions.
161 | CHAPTER 8. WRITING

Newspaper articles

Some newspaper articles are written to persuade people about policies, programs, or
procedures.

Letters

Letters can be written to persuade someone to take an action such as make a playground safer,
improve the functionality of an old school building, address climate change, and so on.

Opinion writing

Opinion writing is a form of expository writing where students express their opinions on a
choice of topics. Opinions are supported by evidence.

Children enjoy writing in the OREO format.

  · O - State your opinion.
  · R - Provide a reason. (Why?)
  · E - Present evidence.
  · O - Re-state the opinion.

Teachers engage the children in OREO writing by celebrating their writing with an OREO
cookie party!

The writing workshop

Generally, writing workshops (Graham, 1983; Portalupi & Fletcher, 1995; Ray & Cleveland, 2004)
are conducted anywhere from 45-60 minutes on a consistent basis to provide opportunities for
students to write. Ray and Cleveland (2004) encourage free writing and drawing with younger
students by providing them writing tools (chalk, shaving cream, finger paints, sand, modeling
clay, etc.) of various kinds. This writing is supported by talk that focuses on communicating
meaning, elaborating, and clarifying. Conferring with the children is very important throughout
the writing process.

In the writing workshop, the teacher begins by first reading aloud the mentor's text (Culham,
                                                                                                                                CHAPTER 8. WRITING | 162

2014). The text exemplifies the features or a skill that the teacher is focusing on as a modeling
example. Then, the teacher conducts a mini lesson that is usually 8-10 minutes long, and
models with "I do" where she defines the feature or skill, explains how it is used, and shows
an example. For example, in preschool, the teacher might demonstrate and provide a moving
model for how to write "I." She provides an example by using it in a sentence and asks the
students to use it in a sentence also. Next, she continues guided practice with the students with
"We do" and scaffolds their learning by checking for understanding. Lastly, she provides an
opportunity for them to practice the skill independently with "you do," while she watches and
helps. Then the children brainstorm ideas, draft, craft leads, revise, edit, proofread, and publish
their work. Writing circles (Vpat, 2009) are synonymous with literature circles, where students
work collaboratively to write, revise, and publish. Providing a choice in writing (Calkins, 1994)
and having a consistent writing time (Graves, 1983) support children's writing development.

Conferring in the writing workshop

Student-teacher conferences in the writing workshop are an important method for supporting
the students' writing. Anderson (2019) notes: "Writing conferences help students become better
writers. In conferences, students become known to us as people, writers, and learners. Through
conferring, we become known to our students" (p. 10). While conferring, the teachers and
students engage in purposeful talk (Hawkins, 2016) that scaffolds the students' writing.

Conducting the student-teacher writing conference

Anderson (2019) suggests the following steps for conducting the writing conference:

 1. First, think about the logistics of conferring. Confer with the students at their own desks.
 2. Second, decide on the amount of time you will devote to each conference. Five-seven

      minutes is recommended.
 3. Confer with the students when they are still writing, and they will be more receptive to

      constructive feedback than when they are finished.
 4. Start the conferring process by asking the student an open-ended question - "How is it

      going?" - to see what the student is doing as a writer (Murray, 1985). Examine the student's
      draft to assess the areas of strength and those needing growth.
 5. Decide on what to teach the student after assessing their draft.
 6. Provide positive feedback by focusing on what the child already understands and is doing
      well. Next, suggest the next step you would like the student to take to improve the writing.
163 | CHAPTER 8. WRITING

 7. Explicitly teach a skill the student can apply to improve their writing. Provide modeling
      examples.

 8. Make your expectation clear that you would like the student to apply the skill that you just
      taught and that you will check back after you are done conferring with another student.

Benefits of conferring

  · Conferring builds the student-teacher relationship. It sustains student motivation.
  · Conferring is differentiated instruction, i.e., based on what the student needs.
  · Conferring reinforces strategic writing: knowing the audience, choosing the topic and

      genre, crafting the writing, revising, and editing.
  · Conferring informs whole-group instruction. Through conferring the teacher comes to

      know what most of the students are struggling with so they can revisit and reteach those
      concepts and skills.

Assessing writing with the 6+1 Traits Rubric (K-2 Rubric)

Please click on the hyperlink above to see the specific features we are looking for when
evaluating a child's writing. The 6+1 Traits of Writing (Culham, 2005) uses an analytical rubric
that provides feedback on each area to inform instruction for strengthening the areas needing
improvement.

Ideas

The goal here is to communicate clear, focused, well-developed ideas that are fresh and original
through drawing, dictation, and writing. Our ideas for writing come from various sources, such
as nature, personal experiences, books, videos, newspaper articles, and the people around us.
Well-developed ideas are important in writing. One of the ways to assess writing is for the ideas
and whether the child is communicating them well through writing, drawing, or dictation. Their
writing also needs supporting details. Ideas need to be fresh and original, supported by details.

Organization

Good writing needs to be organized, with a grabber or hook, for an inviting start. It should be
                                                                                                                                CHAPTER 8. WRITING | 164

structured in paragraphs with topic sentences and supporting details, with smooth transitions
between the paragraphs. The concluding paragraph needs to provide a strong finish.

Voice

Voice means it should sound like the person who has written it. The writing reflects the
author's personality and unique way of expression. The author conveys the feelings, mood, and
awareness of the audience through their drawing and writing to connect with the readers. For
example, Kwame Alexander writes novels in verse that is reminiscent of a shape or concrete
poem. Authors' personality often shines through in their writing. Providing choice brings out
the writer's voice, which makes the writing engaging, with humor, storytelling, or a unique way
of presenting the content.

Word choice

The author chooses precise and vivid vocabulary from the wide range of words in their linguistic
repertoire. Additionally, the author uses strong verbs that show how the action is performed
instead of weak, overused verbs. For example, instead of look or see, the author uses glance, stare,
gaze, and so on. Or, instead of walk, the author uses strut, hop, skip, swagger, skitter, and so on.

Sentence fluency

Is the child writing in sentences or not? Are the sentences decodable? What types of sentences
are there in their writing? Sentence fluency reflects the cadence or rhythm of the language. The
child enjoys reading aloud. There is variety in the sentence structures. There are dialogues and
other sentence phrasing as needed to enhance the meaning. The punctuation marks are placed
appropriately.

Conventions

Does the child display grade-level-appropriate knowledge of conventions such as punctuation,
spelling, and grammar? Are they demonstrating skill in letter-sound relationships in their
writing? Are they spelling conventionally or phonetically? Are most high-frequency words
spelled correctly? Do they use periods, commas, question marks, and capital letters well? Where
are they capitalizing?
165 | CHAPTER 8. WRITING

Presentation

Presentation is important for the readability of the writing. Does the child have one finger
space between words? Do they produce readable writing, with mostly correct letter formation,
spacing, and the correct placement of drawings and other graphic elements about the writing?
Is the handwriting polished and easy to read? Are the white spaces used well, and do all the
elements contribute to clarifying the meaning?

Penmanship

Handwriting is still pertinent even in the 21st century. There is a strong connection between
the desire to communicate and growth in handwriting (Graves, 1983). Consistent time spent in
meaningful writing with the freedom to choose the topic are the determining factors in the
quality of handwriting (Graves, 1995).

There is evidence of a connection between the motor movement of writing and enhanced brain
activity (Hannover Research Group, 2012). We remember more when we write by hand. When
handwriting flows fluently, we think more cohesive thoughts.

Handwriting is an essential skill for children to have. Teach children how to hold a pencil
because once habits form, they are hard to break. Provide chunky pencils that are easier
for young children to work with. Have a consistent time of at least 15 minutes to teach
handwriting by providing a moving model while verbalizing your thinking as you form the
letters. Manuscript and cursive writing are essential to teaching, even in the digital age.

As a teacher, you should have three goals when teaching handwriting to children: legibility,
fluency (speed), and mechanics. Your method of instruction is to provide a moving model while
verbalizing the process of forming letters, reminding them about size and proportion, spacing,
consistency in the slant, alignment, symmetry, and line quality.

Elements of handwriting legibility

There are six elements of legibility in handwriting (Caravolas et al., 2020; Fogel et al., 2022), as
explained below.

 1. Letter formation: Letter formation is the way the letters are constructed. Teachers model
                                                                                                                              CHAPTER 8. WRITING | 166

    how to form each letter using three-lined paper. They demonstrate how to produce the
    letters as a moving model by making their thinking visible (think-aloud) while giving
    verbal instructions to the children.
2. Size and proportion: The size and proportions of each letter are important for legibility.
    There should be a consistent size, and the parts of the letters should be in the right
    proportion to each other.
3. Spacing: There should be a consistent rule for spacing. Generally, we tell young children
    to keep a one-finger space between words.
4. Slant: The letters should be consistent for a neat and organized look.
5. Alignment: The alignment and symmetry of the letters are components of legibility.
6. Line quality: The lines used to form the letters need to be solid, not squiggly, for the
    writing to be neat and legible.
167 | CHAPTER 8. WRITING

Forms of handwriting

Manuscript

                    Zaner-Bloser handwriting chart, being used here after a fair use
                    assessment.
           CHAPTER 8. WRITING | 168

D'Nealian

                "D' Nealian" from Donald Neal Thurber is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

From D'Nealian to Cursive

           "D'Nealian Cursive" by AndrewBuck is licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0
169 | CHAPTER 8. WRITING

Handwriting stations

Make handwriting fun with handwriting stations. Let them doodle when they have extra time!
Make handwriting authentic and creative by supplying the stations with materials such as
shaving cream, finger paints, sand, playdough, and so on.

Best practices in handwriting instruction

  · Integrate handwriting in authentic writing contexts for science, social studies, math, and
      the writing workshop.

  · Set aside time consistently (15-20 min.) to teach handwriting by providing a moving model
      and time to practice.

  · The handwriting practice should be on a meaningful, open-ended prompt.
  · Students self-evaluate their handwriting and set personalized goals.
  · The goal of handwriting should always be legibility and not perfection.
  · Portfolios that reflect growth over time are encouraged.

Adapting for diverse learners

  · Incorporate Universal Design for Learning's principles to remove perceivable barriers
      with multiple means of representation (video, visuals, audio, text, etc.); provide multiple
      means of engagement (learning pathways and experiences), and multiple means of
      expression, allowing the students to choose how to showcase their learning.

  · Leverage students' cultural and linguistic capital.
  · Allow students to write in their native language.
  · Incorporate Rebus or a combination of drawings and text.
  · Use dialogue journaling to build relationships with all students.
  · Use wordless picturebooks or visual prompts to inspire writing using students'

      background knowledge.
  · Create writing circles where each student contributes a line to construct a collaborative

      story.
                                       CHAPTER 8. WRITING | 170

Discussion-based reflection questions

1. How can you motivate children to write?
2. How can you engage children in authentic, fun writing experiences?
3. How would you structure your classroom instruction to enhance the amount of writing

    children engage in daily?

Learning Activities

An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=303#h5p-37
171 | CHAPTER 8. WRITING

  Learning Activities

    Writing across the content areas

     Create cross-curricular centers on a thematic topic for a grade level of your choice (K-2). Choose
     from one of the topics in the list provided. Please incorporate writing across content areas
     (science, social studies, and math) in an engaging way to motivate students to learn the content in
     depth.
     Some themes to choose from:

          · Places and Spaces (Iowa Core social studies topic for kindergarten)
          · Community and Culture (Iowa Core social studies topic for 1st grade)
          · Choices and Consequences (Iowa Core social studies topic for 2nd grade)

    Digital storytelling

     Create an eBook on a social-justice topic in a genre of your choice. You may use Bookcreator or
     any other tool to create a multimodal book. Think about your purpose, audience, topic, and
     genre. Gather or take pictures, record a short video, and explore multimodal resources to add
     visuals, texts, and hyperlinks.
               CHAPTER 8. WRITING | 172

Key Takeaways

· Provide a choice in writing.
· Choice brings out the writer's voice.
· Graciously accept all forms of writing, including scribbles, mock letters, and pictures.
· Focus on meaning while conversing with the children about their writing.
· Have a consistent writing time.
· Confer with children.
· Read mentor texts aloud.
· Do mini lessons to teach specific skills.
· Differentiate instruction through the 6+1 traits of writing.
· Bring in writers' cultural identities and heritage through culturally relevant prompts and

   read-alouds.

    Resources for teacher educators

          · Traits Rubric for K-2 | Education Northwest [PDF]
          · Graphic Organizers to Help Kids With Writing | Reading Rockets
          · Writing Reports in Kindergarten? Yes! | Read Write Think
          · Seven great ways to encourage your child's writing
          · Composing multimodal writing with BookCreator
          · Assessing Writing: Six Traits of Writing
          · OER_Writing Process.pptx
          · OER_ Self-Evaluation

References

Anderson, C. (2019). Let's put conferring at the center of writing instruction. Voices from the
Middle, 26(4), 9-13.
173 | CHAPTER 8. WRITING

Bear, D. R., Invernizzi, M., Templeton, S., & Johnston, F. (2012). Words their way: Word study for
phonics, vocabulary, and spelling instruction. Pearson.

Calkins, L. (1994). The art of teaching writing (New Ed.). Heinemann.

Caravolas, M., Downing, C., Hadden, C. L., & Wynne, C. (2020). Handwriting legibility and
its relationship to spelling ability and age: Evidence from monolingual and bilingual children.
Frontiers in Psychology, 11, 10-97. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01097

Clay, M. (2010). How very young children explore writing. Heinemann.

Culham, R. (2005). 6+1 Traits of writing: A complete guide for the primary grades. Scholastic.

Culham, R. (2014). The writing thief: Using mentor texts to teach the craft of writing. International
Reading Association.

Cunningham, P., & Allington, R. (2016). Classrooms that work: They can all read and write. Pearson.

Fletcher, R., & Portalupi, J. (2001). Writing workshop: The essential guide. Heinemann.

Fogel, Y., Rosenblum, S., & Barnett, A. L. (2022). Handwriting legibility across different writing
tasks in school-aged children. Hong Kong Journal of Occupational Therapy, 35(1), 44-51.
https://doi.org/10.1177/15691861221075709

Forney, M. (2001). Razzle, dazzle, writing: Achieving excellence through 50 target skills. Maupin House
Publishing.

Gentry, J.R. (2005). Instructional techniques for emerging writers and special needs students
at kindergarten and grade 1 levels. Reading & Writing Quarterly, 21(2), 113-134. doi:10.1080/
10573560590915932

Graves, D. (1983). Writing: teachers and children at work. Heinemann.

Graves, D. (1995). A fresh look at writing. Heinemann.

Hanover Research Group (2012). The importance of teaching handwriting in the 21st century.
Hanover Research Report, 2-11.

Hawkins, L. K. (2016). The power of purposeful talk in the primary-grade writing conference.
Language Arts, 94(1), 8-21.
                                                                                                                                CHAPTER 8. WRITING | 174

Leija, M.G., & Peralta, C. (2020). Día de los muertos: Opportunities to foster writing and reflect
students' cultural practices. The Reading Teacher, 73(4), 543-48. https://doi.org/10.1002/trtr.1871

Louie, B., & Sierschynski, J. (2015). Enhancing English learners' language development using
wordless picture books. The Reading Teacher 69(1)103-11.

Murray, D. (1985). A writer teaches writing. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.

Ray, K. W. & Cleveland, L.B. (2004). About the authors: Writing workshop with our youngest writers.
Heinemann.

Schickedanz, J. A., & Collins, M. F. (2013). So much more than the ABCs: The early phases of reading
and writing. National Association for the Early Childhood Education

Strassman, B. K. & O'Connell, T. (2007). Authoring with video. The Reading Teacher, 61(4),
330-333.

VanNess, A. R., Murnen, T. J., & Bertelsen, C.D. (2013). Let me tell you a secret: Kindergartners
can write. The Reading Teacher, 66(7), 574-85.

Vpat, J. (2009). Writing circles: Kids revolutionize workshop. Heinemann.
175 | CHAPTER 9. LITERACY INSTRUCTION FOR DIVERSE LEARNERS

Chapter 9. Literacy Instruction for Diverse
Learners

   Constance Beecher; Sohyun Meacham; and Nandita Gurjar

      "We have become not a melting pot but a beautiful mosaic. Different people, different beliefs,
      different yearnings, different hopes, different dreams." - Jimmy Carter
      "We should all know that diversity makes for a rich tapestry, and we must understand that all the
      threads of the tapestry are equal in value no matter what their color." - Maya Angelou

"A word cloud featuring culture" by EpicTop10 is licensed under CC BY 2.0.

      Keywords: cultural literacy, dual-language learners, universal design for learning, trauma-
      informed instruction
CHAPTER 9. LITERACY INSTRUCTION FOR DIVERSE LEARNERS | 176

Imagine a class with diverse kids - some with invisible

or visible disabilities, different ethnicities, and       Learning Objectives
nationalities - who feel a sense of belonging and

whose cultural capital, customs, traditions, and

languages are valued in the classroom space. The          · Apply effective ELL
teacher focuses on building relationships with each          strategies to engage
child to scaffold and enrich their learning as s/he has      learners in higher-order
an undaunted belief in their capabilities and strengths.     thinking (InTasc Standards
In this nurturing environment, every child could             #2 & #5).
blossom and reach for the stars. This is the class every
child deserves, no matter where they come from or         · Analyze the characteristics
where they are going!                                        of dyslexia to address the
                                                             needs of students with

Culturally responsive instruction begins with getting        dyslexia (InTasc Standards
to know our students - their home lives and cultures.        #1).
Having an appreciation and respect for each child and     · Synthesize your
their cultural and linguistic backgrounds and                understanding of trauma-
leveraging them in classroom instruction in reading          informed instruction
and writing lets the children know that they belong in       (InTasc Standards #3).
the classroom community. A positive self-concept and      · Apply principles of
self-esteem are crucial for learning and engagement to       Universal Design for
occur. Therefore, it is the teacher's job to embrace and     Learning (UDL) to create
welcome each child's cultural and linguistic identities      inclusive classrooms
to foster a culturally inclusive learning environment.       (InTasc Standards #7).
                                                          · Use children's literature

Teachers should build relationships with parents and      that provides mirrors,
students and welcome parents as volunteers and guest      windows, and sliding doors
speakers into the classroom space. Invite parents to      for children to identify with
read a folktale, fable, myth, or legend from their        and learn from diverse
culture to the class. Have "Show and Tell" days where     perspectives (InTasc
children can bring cultural artifacts to show their       Standards #4).

peers and take pride in who they are. During

reciprocal teaching, they can teach a peer some

expressions from their native language or a song from their culture. Also, ensuring that the child

sees themselves in the literature they read is vital for their self-concept. Therefore, having books
177 | CHAPTER 9. LITERACY INSTRUCTION FOR DIVERSE LEARNERS

that are mirrors, windows, and sliding doors (Sims Bishop, 1990) will ensure that all children see
themselves in literature and media.

To get to know your students and their families, learn about their family literacy practices.
Some children come from an oral storytelling tradition where they grow up listening to stories
from grandparents, uncles, and aunts or learning family arts and crafts such as quilt making
and basket weaving; these are all valid family cultural practices that contribute to building the
children's native language and cultural literacies, upon which school literacies are built.

                  One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online
                  here: https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=323#oembed-1

Begin with family cultural literacy practices

Alma Flor Ada (2003) reminds us: "Students live in two worlds: home and school. If these two
worlds do not recognize, understand, and respect each other, students are put in a difficult
predicament (p.11)"; and very little learning can occur. The Global Family Research Project
emphasizes that literacy begins at home.

Researchers who study diverse learners say that     Culturally and linguistically diverse
teachers must talk with families to understand       parents value literacy and see it as
their lives outside of school. Teachers will see a  the single, most powerful hope for
complete picture of the families' socio-cultural
contexts, and they will also recognize the                   their children's future
wealth of stories, history, motivations, and            (Ordonez-Jasis & Oritz, 2006)

cultural information, or "funds of knowledge"

(Moll & Gonzalez 2004), that the parents contribute to their children's literacy learning. These

funds of knowledge become the building blocks for a comprehensive literacy program. Positive

early literacy experiences in families - reading with a parent, grandparent, or aunt, visiting the

library, or enjoying books with other children at their childcare prepares them to learn to read

at school. Here are seven research-based ways families contribute to the child's literacy

development:
                                                                  CHAPTER 9. LITERACY INSTRUCTION FOR DIVERSE LEARNERS | 178

 1. Creating a literacy-friendly home environment.
       a. The number of books in the home is a predictor of the children's success in reading.
       b. Reading to children and asking questions about the story builds vocabulary, letter
            knowledge, and comprehension.

 2. Having lots of conversations.
       a. Children need to hear a lot of language from birth in order to grow the neural
            networks that are the basis of their language development.
       b. The number of words children hear by age 3 strongly predicts kindergarten readiness.

 3. Having high expectations for the children's learning.
       a. When parents believe their children will succeed in school, their children have greater
            success than the children of parents who do not believe it.

 4. Making reading enjoyable.
       a. When families nurture encouraging interactions, the children are interested in
            reading, which helps their literacy skills grow.
       b. Adults benefit too - these enjoyable experiences help reduce stress!

 5. Families use their home language.
       a. Around 25% of young children in the U.S. are learning two languages at the same
            time.
       b. Using the home language helps the children build vocabulary and have a healthy self-
            identity.

 6. Families and teachers communicate.
       a. Research clearly shows that when parents are involved with a child's schooling, the
            children's learning is enhanced.
       b. Schools/childcare centers can invite the parents into the classroom and share
            information so they can support their children.

 7. Visiting the library.
       a. Kindergartners who visit libraries with their families score higher on assessments of
            reading, mathematics, and science in third grade than those who rarely visit.

It is important for teachers to connect with families and validate their roles in their children's
learning. After all, children only spend around 25% of their waking time in school! (Wherry,
2004).
179 | CHAPTER 9. LITERACY INSTRUCTION FOR DIVERSE LEARNERS

Diversity and children's Books

Diversity and social justice are two key themes in literacy-education research today. This
research focuses on teaching children to understand the diversity within human beings in
this world and injustice issues associated with the diversity. In this context, scholars use
"multicultural children's literature" as the term for the children's literature that deals with
diversity and social justice (Cai, 2002). In many early childhood classrooms, multicultural
picturebooks from different countries are considered to be the main resources for diversity
education. However, the use of international picturebooks may not be sufficient to reduce our
children's cultural biases and develop their ability to make social changes. Helping our children
become aware of injustices perpetrated because of cultural differences and to actually act on the
issues should be an ultimate goal when exposing them to multicultural picturebooks. Botelho
and Rudman's (2009) critical multicultural analysis of children's literature gives us some ideas
about how to use multicultural picturebooks in attaining this goal. Introducing the topics of
race, gender, and social class, they emphasize that understanding who exercises the power in
our society, where these three aspects of humanity are intertwined, is a key consideration when
deciding which picturebooks to read with our children and what conversations we will have
with them.

Facilitating critical reading

In addition, critical reading is something we should promote during read-alouds with our
children, after selecting culturally sensitive, high-quality multicultural picturebooks for our
classroom library. High-quality texts do not overly explain the story, to invite readers to "draw
their own conclusions without being told precisely what to think " (Young et al., 2020, p.
32). Quality multicultural picturebooks do not necessarily tell the systemic factors regarding
social inequity but show the issues. In addressing them, the adults' role in facilitating critical
conversations around the readings with the children is significant (Quast & Bazemore-Bertrand,
2019).

Last Stop on Market Street, written by Matt de la Peña and illustrated by Christian Robinson, is
a multicultural picturebook that stands out in my mind. This book is frequently discussed in
the recent literacy-education literature that focuses on diversity and social justice. It deals with
economic inequality portrayed in an urban U.S. context. The main storyline follows CJ's bus
rides with his grandmother. He usually takes the bus with his grandma after church, even on
rainy days. Although in the early part of the story he questions why he needs to take the bus
                                                                  CHAPTER 9. LITERACY INSTRUCTION FOR DIVERSE LEARNERS | 180

but his friend rides in the family's car, he and his grandma find real beauty around them during
their bus rides.

CJ needs to ride the bus because they don't own a car. CJ asks his grandma, "Nana, how come we
don't got a car?" Grandma responds, "Boy, what do we need a car for? We got a bus that breathes
fire, and old Mr. Dennis, who always has a trick for you" (De la Peña, 2015). In the United States,
the use of public transportation is often associated with poverty. Cities and towns there have
been built primarily for people with personal vehicles. Therefore, except for metropolitan areas
such as New York and Chicago, the use of public transportation is an inconvenience that mostly
people on low incomes end up needing to bear. Rather than complaining about the situation,
however, CJ's grandma and he talk about enjoyable things. They focus on people that they enjoy
seeing and being with - from the bus driver to a guitar player.

While deficit views and devaluing the cultures of people in poverty are prevalent in society (e.g.,
they are lazy; something's wrong with them), Last Stop on Market Street supports the counter-
narrative. The last stop, which CJ and his grandma get off at, is a soup kitchen where they
volunteer weekly. They are not lazy. They are helping others.

Race is not explicitly spoken of in this book, although readers can see CJ's skin color is
dark. This is where we can have a critical conversation about how people with certain racial
backgrounds tend to experience poverty more often than others, and about "how people from
all different racial, ability, and cultural backgrounds might share similar poverty experiences"
(Quast & Bazemore-Bertrand, 2019, p. 221). As the book does not speak about the reasons for CJ
and his grandma's current economic condition either, more critical conversations between the
teacher and the children will be needed for the children to become aware of systemic factors
contributing to inequity.

Last Stop on Market Street speaks about the Blind culture (capitalized to indicate that this person
belongs to the Blind culture, not just that they do not see) a little more explicitly than racial
issues. Another rider on the bus is Blind. When CJ sees the man, he asks his grandma, "How
come that man can't see?" A conversation among this man, CJ, and his grandma ensues in
which it is revealed how the Blind culture has a rich appreciation of their world because of their
enhanced olfactory and auditory senses. The man tells CJ's grandma that he even closes his eyes
to feel music.

Last Stop on Market Street is a rare picturebook, earning a Newbery Medal, an award that is
not for the illustrations but for the quality of the writing. Considering that most of the books
181 | CHAPTER 9. LITERACY INSTRUCTION FOR DIVERSE LEARNERS

receiving the Newbery Medal are chapter books, the accomplishment of this picturebook is
remarkable. It is also notable that Matt de la Peña is one of only three Latin-background authors
to have won the Newbery. This talented author also won Pura Belpré Honor Book Awards for
both this book and his young-adult novel The Living, in 2014. The Pura Belpré Award was
founded in 1996 to celebrate the work of Latinx writers and illustrators. Christian Robinson, the
African-American illustrator of Last Stop, won the Coretta Scott King Illustrator Honor Award;
Coretta Scott King Book Awards have gone to one African-American author and one African-
American illustrator annually since 1974. Last but not least, this book won the Caldecott Honor
in 2016.

The urban atmosphere as depicted in Robinson's paintings and collages can make us feel
some human warmth, rather than seeming merely cold, sterile, and industrial. His illustrations
effectively delineate a remarkable level of diversity among the characters through the many
different shades of people's skin color, hair texture, clothing, gestures, props that the characters
hold or use, and whatnot. This quality is also evident in Robinson's more recent wordless
picturebook titled Another, which was published in March 2019. In both of the books illustrated
by Robinson, he only uses dots for people's eyes, although the colors of the dots vary. By doing
so, the illustrations avoid potentially stereotypical eye shapes (e.g., thin slanted eyes).

In conclusion, we should reiterate that there are many things that are not explicitly articulated
in Last Stop on Market Street, while it delineates an unexpected beauty in the experiences of
people who live in poverty. Children's literature scholars suggest that quality multicultural
children's literature should "avoid the single story or allowing one story to speak for an entire
group of individuals" (Young et al., 2020, p. 81). This book does not attempt to speak for an
entire group of people in poverty, people of color, or people with (dis)abilities. Still, it vividly
depicts cultural specificity, which makes it a high-quality multicultural picturebook (Sims
Bishop, 1992). Picturebooks like this can foster our children's intercultural understanding and
the development of empathy.

DLL strategies in reading and writing

Dual-language learners' and emergent bilinguals'/multilinguals' needs should be addressed
based on the policies and standards of the Iowa Department of Education. The number of
English-language learners continues to increase in Iowa, which it has by almost 60% since
2010 (per the Iowa Department of Human Rights). One hundred seventy-seven languages were
spoken by 31, 236 students in Iowa in the year 2020-2021 (Iowa Department of Human Rights).
                                                                  CHAPTER 9. LITERACY INSTRUCTION FOR DIVERSE LEARNERS | 182

Here is a poster with the number of languages spoken in Iowa [PDF]. There are 18 languages
spoken in Black Hawk County, where the University of Northern Iowa is located. Crawford
County has the highest number of ELL students (32.7%) followed by Buena Vista with 26% and
Marshall with 24.7%. There is an 83% increase in Iowa in the number of foreign-born residents.
Embarc, in Waterloo, Iowa, is a non-profit community-based organization that addresses the
needs of refugee children who migrated to Iowa due to socio-political upheavals.

                  One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online
                  here: https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=323#oembed-2

We have a moral responsibility to reduce barriers and enhance educational, healthcare, and
supportive services for ELLs, especially those who are new to the country and culture, and
students with disabilities. The following inclusive strategies should be incorporated while
reducing barriers for diverse learners in Iowa.
183 | CHAPTER 9. LITERACY INSTRUCTION FOR DIVERSE LEARNERS

Incorporate Universal Design for Learning

                "Universal Design for Learning from Center for Applied Special Technology" by
                Giulia Forsythe is in the public domain, CC0

  Video Example

     Watch this video on the Universal Design for Learning for addressing the needs of diverse
     learners by adapting our instruction to meet their needs.

                         One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online
                         here: https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=323#oembed-3
                                                                  CHAPTER 9. LITERACY INSTRUCTION FOR DIVERSE LEARNERS | 184

ELL strategies

It is important to reduce anxiety in newcomers and second-language learners. We should aim
at lowering the affective filter of our students so they can function at their best. It is important
for us to understand the silent phase of language acquisition: second-language learners go
through a period in which they are quiet but very receptive to comprehensible input. During this
phase, the teacher's job is to continue to provide comprehensible input with visuals, gestures,
and simplified language, without slang or idioms. If you choose to include idioms, explain them
in a simple form through writing and drawing. Idioms are very hard to understand, as they are
culturally specific.

Comprehensible input (Krashen, 1981) is the linguistic input that can be easily understood.
It usually has more than one mode of expression. Along with simplified verbal expressions,
other means of communicating used to make material clear and easily understood by second-
language learners include visuals, videos, gestures, simulations, and hands-on experiences such
as movement.

Motivate ELLs by engaging them in authentic
reading and writing activities. Motivation
plays a huge role in engagement. Relevance,
interest, confidence (expectation of success),
and satisfaction (enjoyment, extrinsic reward)
play important roles in motivating learners
(Keller, 1987). Having choices based on their
interests and a supportive community that
fosters collaboration provide linguistic
support for emergent ELLs and DLLs. Social "Motivation" by Nick Youngson is licensed under
learning can be fun and playful. Students learn CC BY-SA 3.0
while discovering and playing. Leverage
nature, creative opportunities, and teamwork in learning. Incorporate art, music, movement,
theater, dance, play, discovery, and building. Children are naturally inquisitive. Tap into that!
Engage in dialogic reading outdoors in nature! Let children express themselves through
painting, drawing, pretend-play, and makerspace experiences to form hypotheses, test them, and
develop their own interpretations of the world. As an ILA Literacy Brief suggests, children are
active constructors of meaning. Let them play, discover, and learn!
185 | CHAPTER 9. LITERACY INSTRUCTION FOR DIVERSE LEARNERS

Translanguaging

For DLLs, welcome translanguaging in their two languages. The use of both languages is an
expression of their bicultural and bilingual identity. Translanguaging is very common and
natural for non-native speakers of English who speak more than one language.

Here is a brief synopsis of some effective strategies (Hayes et al., 1998) that you can implement
in your classroom:

 1. Rebus is a very useful strategy that ensures that students have more than one way of
      expression by using a combination of pictures and writing to communicate meaning.

 2. Idioms are culturally specific expressions, so much so that even after years of living in the
      U.S., some idioms can still be hard to understand, especially if they are connected to a
      culturally specific local context or sports which newcomers or immigrants might be
      unfamiliar with, for example, "knee-high by the Fourth of July" - an Iowa-specific idiom
      referring to the hoped-for corn growth. Idioms are important to understanding dialogue,
      so teaching them to ELLs through illustrations and the relevant background information
      is essential. Have the children follow this pattern:
       a. State the idiom.
       b. Illustrate the idiom.
       c. Provide the literal meaning of the words.
       d. State the cultural context and significance. Provide the actual meaning.

 3. Illustrate the vocabulary - "Sketch to stretch." Drawing the vocabulary words
      communicates meaning. In addition, ELLs can act them out; they can write synonyms,
      antonyms, and put the words in sentences.

 4. Dialogue journaling is a conversation that happens between the teacher and the student.
      This has been shown to build relationships, and it is helpful to students for them to have
      access to the teacher when they are going through the transition to a new culture.

 5. Create a story using wordless picturebooks. Use picturebooks to leverage ELLs'
      background knowledge and cultural capital to make meaning while reading and writing
      stories. This activity also develops oral language.

 6. Writing Weird Recipes with bugs and insects is a lot of fun for kids! Make a dish using the
      class recipe.

 7. Do collaborative writing where one child describes an alien and another one draws it.
 8. Have the children collect some interesting items on a nature walk and describe them to a

      peer. What can you do with the object?
                                                                  CHAPTER 9. LITERACY INSTRUCTION FOR DIVERSE LEARNERS | 186

 9. Write a play or reader's theater with a peer with dialogues and enact it in class.
10. Have the children write a poem or a song from their culture and teach it to others.
11. Implement guided reading groups to differentiate instruction for ELLs with varying levels

      of English and first-language proficiency.
12. Engage in a Global Goals project. Choose one of the sustainable Global Goals and engage

      in researching it as a small group. Collaborate with another classroom from another part
      of the world!

                    "Network Digital Marketing" by Mohamed Hassan is in the Public
                    Domain, CC0

Lastly, ensure that you create an inclusive space where other countries, cultures, and people are
not stereotyped. The video below shows us the importance of not judging any child or their
family based on a single story. It is key for the teacher to provide multicultural, diverse literature
that provides mirrors where children can see themselves and windows and sliding doors that
widen children's perspective of other cultures (Sims Bishop, 1990).

                  One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online
                  here: https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=323#oembed-4
187 | CHAPTER 9. LITERACY INSTRUCTION FOR DIVERSE LEARNERS

  Reflection Questions

         1. What is the essence of this video?
         2. Discuss the quotes that resonated with you and why? What implications do they have for

             your future classroom?

Dyslexia

According to the Iowa Code:

       "Dyslexia is a specific learning disability that is neurobiological in origin. It is
       characterized by difficulties with accurate and/or fluent word recognition and by poor
       spelling and decoding abilities. These difficulties typically result from a deficit in the
       phonological component of language that is often unexpected in relation to other
       cognitive abilities and the provision of effective classroom instruction. Secondary
       consequences may include problems in reading comprehension and reduced reading
       experience that can impede growth of vocabulary and background knowledge."

As you learned in the chapter on phonics, the National Reading Panel found that many
difficulties encountered in learning to read were caused by poor phonemic awareness, and
that systematic and explicit instruction in phonemic awareness contributed directly to
improvements in children's reading and spelling skills.

The following list shows common ways young children may show that they have difficulty
"breaking the code":

  · Difficulty hearing or producing rhymes.
  · Difficulty remembering or naming letter names and sounds.
  · Inability to sound out known words.
  · Slow, effortful oral reading.
  · Misreading or omitting common short words.
  · Inconsistent sight-word recognition.
  · Difficulty remembering simple sequences such as reciting the alphabet, counting to 20, or
                                                          CHAPTER 9. LITERACY INSTRUCTION FOR DIVERSE LEARNERS | 188

naming the months of the year.

Dyslexia is NOT a visual problem with confusing letters; rather, it is a difficulty in processing
the sounds of language. In other words, children don't confuse b and d because they look alike;
they confuse them because they sound alike.

However, young children often confuse letters, so letter

reversal alone is insufficient to signal an underlying             For more details see these

problem. If you notice a child who struggles with any of           helpful resources on

these tasks, it is essential to document the areas of difficulty.  Iowa's AEA page,

Keep in mind that people have only been reading for a few          including Dyslexia in the
hundred years. Our brains were not developed to read -             Classroom: What every
rather they are designed to recognize language and objects.        teacher should know

So having difficulty reading is not an indication that someone

is not intelligent - in fact, many people with reading

difficulties are very talented! It is a problem with the way the brain processes the sounds of

language. Brain research [YouTube video] demonstrates that people with dyslexia rely too much

on their memory, neglecting to use the faster system of sounding words out. However, research

has also demonstrated that with training, the patterns can be changed. In other words, we can

retrain the brain to use the sound system.

Early intervention is key! The earlier we can recognize the signs of a possible reading difficulty,
the earlier systematic instruction can begin.

Learning Activities

In the next video, a parent discusses how difficult it was to get help for her child who was
struggling with reading. What were the signs of reading problems?

                  An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
                  https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=323#h5p-3
189 | CHAPTER 9. LITERACY INSTRUCTION FOR DIVERSE LEARNERS

How to provide support

First, if you have documented that a student has trouble in the areas listed above, talk with your
schools' Special Education staff about a referral.

However, you can support the student in your classroom. The first thing you can do is to
develop a positive, supportive relationship with the student. A review of close to 150 studies on
motivation found that to help children succeed, you must help them feel 3 things:

  · Competent: A feeling of competence doesn't mean that students already know how to do
      something, but that they have the confidence that they're capable of learning it. Starting
      off a reading lesson with something the students already know can build the feeling of
      competence. Then go to something that might be harder and encourage them to try it.

  · Belonging: This is feeling accepted and connected to others. Listen to a student's
      thoughts and feelings and respond with empathy: "Yes, learning new things can be hard. I
      know what that feels like." Help the student build the identities of a learner and a reader.

  · Autonomy: This is about choices and deciding for yourself what you want to do. Even
      little choices make a difference. Let the student pick their own books and personalize
      their assignments. Explain the rules and requirements of lessons so that the students can
      understand why they're being asked to do them.

These suggestions by the International Dyslexia Association (see Resources, pp.7-8) can help any
student who might be struggling. These work for students who are learning English as a second
or third language as well.

  · Clarify and simplify written directions. Some directions are written in paragraph form
      and contain unnecessary information. These can be overwhelming to some students. The
      teacher can help by underlining or highlighting the significant parts of the directions.
      Rewriting the directions is also often helpful.

  · When confronting unacceptable behavior, do not inadvertently discourage the child with
      dyslexia. Words such as "lazy" or "incorrigible" can seriously damage the child's self-
      image.

  · Present a small amount of work. The teacher can tear pages from workbooks and other
      materials to present small assignments to students who are anxious about the amount of
      work to be done. This technique prevents students from examining an entire workbook or
      other large amount of text and becoming discouraged.
                                                               CHAPTER 9. LITERACY INSTRUCTION FOR DIVERSE LEARNERS | 190

· Block out extraneous stimuli. If a student is easily distracted by visual stimuli on a full
   worksheet or page, a blank sheet of paper can be used to cover sections of the page not
   being worked on at the time. Also, line markers can be used to aid reading, and windows
   can be used to display individual math problems. Additionally, using larger font sizes and
   increasing spacing can help separate sections.

· Provide additional practice activities. Some materials do not provide enough practice
   activities for students with learning problems to acquire mastery of selected skills.
   Teachers then must supplement the material with practice activities. Recommended
   practice exercises include instructional games, peer-teaching activities, self-correcting
   materials, computer software programs, and additional worksheets.

· Use assistive technology. Products such as tablets, electronic readers/dictionaries/spellers,
   text-to-speech programs, audio books, and more can be very useful tools.

· Employ peer-mediated learning. The teacher can pair peers of different ability levels to
   review their notes, study for a test, read aloud to each other, write stories, or conduct
   laboratory experiments. Also, a partner can read math problems for students with reading
   problems to solve.

· Make work times flexible. Students who work slowly may be given additional time to
   complete written assignments.

· Provide additional practice. Students require different amounts of practice to master
   skills or content, and students with learning problems need ample practice.
191 | CHAPTER 9. LITERACY INSTRUCTION FOR DIVERSE LEARNERS

Adverse childhood experiences and trauma-informed
instruction

ACEs, or adverse childhood experiences, are      "Person Holding Photo" is by Anita Jankovic on
traumatic events that can dramatically upset     Unsplash.
a child's sense of safety and well-being. These
experiences can include substance abuse in
the home, the death of a parent, divorce,
abuse, or witnessing violence. We know in
our state that 64% of Iowans have
experienced at least 1 ACE (Iowa ACES 360).
Data from the 2016 National Survey of
Children's Health (NSCH) showed that 46% of
America's children had experienced at least
one adverse childhood experience, with the
number rising to 55 percent for children aged
12 to 17. One in five U.S. children had had two
or more ACEs.

Image credit: Harvard University Center for the Developing Child.
                                                                  CHAPTER 9. LITERACY INSTRUCTION FOR DIVERSE LEARNERS | 192

When we are threatened by stressful events, our body's stress system kicks in to prepare us to
respond by increasing our heart rate, blood pressure, and stress hormones such as cortisol. But
not all stress is created equal. Some, as in the top circle, gets our heart pumping a little faster
and slightly elevates our stress hormones, but it's considered positive stress because it gets us
moving to do something we need to or want to do. For example, maybe you are chatting with
your spouse or friend when you realize how late it is getting. The stress of realizing that time
before class is short gets you motivated to meet your goal of being on time to class.

The next level of stress is tolerable stress, shown in the yellow circle. This is a serious, but
temporary stress that's buffered by supportive relationships. Think about goodbyes between a
parent and their child in your classroom in the morning. These can be highly stressful for both
the child and their parent, but with support from you - a warm welcoming smile to the parent,
a hug and engaging activities for the child - the stress is tolerable.

Toxic stress, the red circle, is prolonged stress. The biological stress response - what naturally
happens in the body in stress situations - stays engaged, and in this case there are few, if
any, protective relationships to buffer that stress. With toxic stress, the body just doesn't get
a break. Adverse Childhood Experiences from abuse, neglect, dysfunctional households, and
violent situations can cause children to experience toxic stress.

How can a teacher recognize when a student might have experienced trauma? The signs can
include:

  · not following or understanding directions;
  · overreacting to statements or events in the classroom;
  · interpreting comments as negative;
  · lack of understanding of cause and effect;
  · poor communication skills; and
  · difficulty in regulating emotions.

                    Download this trauma toolkit for educators [PDF]
193 | CHAPTER 9. LITERACY INSTRUCTION FOR DIVERSE LEARNERS

The following recommendations for supporting students' social emotional learning are drawn
from the Trauma Toolkit: Tools to support the Learning and Development of Students
Experiencing Childhood & Adolescent Trauma, by First Book:

 1. Create a safe classroom environment. Incorporating consistent routines and rituals in the
      classroom helps students experience predictability and security. Take a zero-tolerance
      stance on bullying, teasing, and other behaviors that make children feel unsafe or
      threatened.

 2. Help students identify an area of competence. Whether it is an academic subject,
      extracurricular activity, or other creative outlet, helping students identify an area where
      they feel successful is important to their healing and development.

 3. Develop rapport and positive relationships with students. Students experiencing trauma
      greatly benefit from having strong, positive relationships with adults and peers.

The Responsive Classroom

An evidence-based program that helps to build positive relationships in the classroom is "The
Responsive Classroom." Here are the basic components of the Responsive Classroom approach:

Shared practices (K-8)

  · Interactive modeling: an explicit practice for teaching procedures and routines (such as
      those for entering and exiting the room), as well as academic and social skills (such as
      engaging with the text or giving and accepting feedback).

  · Teacher language: the intentional use of language to enable students to engage in their
      learning and develop the academic, social, and emotional skills they need to be successful
      in and out of school.

  · Logical consequences: a non-punitive response to misbehavior that allows teachers to set
      clear limits and students to fix and learn from their mistakes while maintaining their
      dignity.

  · Interactive learning structures: purposeful activities that give students opportunities to
      engage with content in active (hands-on) and interactive (social) ways.
                                                                  CHAPTER 9. LITERACY INSTRUCTION FOR DIVERSE LEARNERS | 194

Elementary practices (K-6)

  · Morning meeting: Everyone in the classroom gathers in a circle for twenty to thirty
      minutes at the beginning of each school day and proceeds through four sequential
      components: greeting, sharing, group activity, and morning message.

  · Establishing rules: The teacher and students work together to name individual goals for
      the year and establish rules that will help everyone reach those goals.

  · Energizers: short, playful, whole-group activities that are used as breaks in lessons.
  · Quiet time: a brief, purposeful, and relaxed time of transition that takes place after lunch

      and recess, before the rest of the school day continues.
  · Closing circle: five to ten minutes at the end of the day in which everyone participates in a

      brief activity that promotes reflection and celebration.

You can read more about the principles and practices on the Responsive Classroom website.
While the teacher can support students with practices like these, remember that if you suspect
trauma or abuse, you should follow your school's policies on reporting and seeking help for
children.

  Video Example

                         One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online
                         here: https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=323#oembed-5

                               Download Responsive Classroom Video Transcript [DOC]
195 | CHAPTER 9. LITERACY INSTRUCTION FOR DIVERSE LEARNERS

  Key Takeaways

         · This chapter has covered how to support many different types of students, but the main
             takeaway should be that each student has a right to receive a quality education with a
             teacher who cares.

         · When teachers take time to form relationships with students and their caregivers, teachers
             can better serve the students in their class.

    Resources for teacher educators

          · The Influence of Home on School Success
          · Learning for Justice
          · 6 Essential Strategies for Teaching English Language Learners
          · 12 Ways to Support English Learners in the Mainstream Classroom | Cult of Pedagogy
          · Innovative strategies for teaching English language learners | UMass Global
          · eLearning - Online Literacy Professional Development (module on Dyslexia)
          · What is Dyslexia?: An Overview for Educators [Powerpoint slides] provides general

              information about dyslexia from Iowa's Area Education Agencies (AEA).

References

Barshay, J (2021). Proof points: What almost 150 studies say about how to motivate students.
   PROOF POINTS: What almost 150 studies say about how to motivate students - The
   Hechinger Report

Bartlett, J. D., Smith, S., & Bringewatt, E. (2017). Helping young children who have experienced
   trauma: Policies and strategies for early care and education.
   https://academiccommons.columbia.edu/doi/10.7916/d8-f1gn-7n98
CHAPTER 9. LITERACY INSTRUCTION FOR DIVERSE LEARNERS | 196

Botelho, M. J., & Rudman, M. K. (2009). Critical multicultural analysis of children's literature: Mirrors,
   windows, and doors. New York, NY: Routledge.

Cai, M. (2002). Multicultural literature for children and young adults. Greenwood Press.

CDC. (2019). Fast Facts: Preventing adverse childhood         experiences.                Retrieved
   https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/aces/fastfact.html

De La Peña, M. (2015). Last stop on Market street (C. Robinson, Illus.).The Penguin Group.

Hayes, C., Bahruth, R., & Kessler, C. (1998). Literacy con carino. Heinmann.

Iowa Area Education Agencies (n.d.) Iowa Dyslexia Resources. https://sites.google.com/a/
   heartlandaea.org/dyslexia-resources/additional-resources?authuser=0#h.p_f4d16xk6z91m

Keller, J.M. (1987). Development and use of the ARCS model of instructional design. Journal of
   Instructional Development 10 (3), 2-10. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02905780

Krashen, S. (1981). Second language acquisition and second language learning. Prentice-Hall.

Sims Bishop, R. (1992). Multicultural literature for children: Making informed choices. In V. J.
   Harris (Ed.), Teaching multicultural literature in grades K-8 (pp.37-54). Christopher-Gordon.

Sims Bishop, R. (1990). Mirrors, windows, and sliding glass doors. Perspectives: Choosing and
Using Books for the Classroom, 6(3), ix-xi.

Quast, E., & Bazemore-Bertrand, S. (2019). Exploring economic diversity and inequity through
   picturebooks. The Reading Teacher, 73(2), 219-222.

Wherry, J. H. (2004). The influence of home on school success. PRINCIPAL-ARLINGTON-, 84(1),
   6-7.

Williams, J.M. & Scherrer, K. (2017). Trauma toolkit: Tools to support the learning and
   development of students experiencing childhood & adolescent trauma. First Book.

Young, T. A., Bryan, G., Jacobs, J. S., & Tunnel, M. O. (2020). Children's literature, briefly (7th ed.).
   Pearson.
197 | CHAPTER 10. READING AND WRITING ACROSS CONTENT AREAS - DISCIPLINARY LITERACY

Chapter 10. Reading and Writing Across
Content Areas - Disciplinary Literacy

   Emily Hayden and Constance Beecher

      "Wisdom is not a product of schooling, but of the lifelong attempt to acquire it" - Albert Einstein

               Photo by MI PHAM on Unsplash
      Keywords: content-area literacy, disciplinary literacy

From birth, children use their voices and developing speech sounds to communicate, and they
make sense of the world through language. Perhaps you have noticed that children who are
engaged in play or other activities often talk simultaneously about what they are doing, using
talk to plan their next steps or to generate solutions to some problem they have encountered
in the course of their work or play. Vygotsky (1986) believed that language and thought were
                      CHAPTER 10. READING AND WRITING ACROSS CONTENT AREAS - DISCIPLINARY LITERACY | 198

practically inseparable. The internal and external language children engage in while they are
learning advances their reasoning and problem-solving abilities. Later, these processes can be
replicated through writing - another way to use language. These literacy skills, talking and
listening, as well as writing and reading, should be used in all content areas in the elementary
classroom to help students learn new information.
199 | CHAPTER 10. READING AND WRITING ACROSS CONTENT AREAS - DISCIPLINARY LITERACY

Learning Objectives                     Literacy in content-area classes

      · Demonstrate                     The academic standards in mathematics, science, and
          understanding of              social studies acknowledge that children use language
          disciplinary literacy by      and literacy to make sense of what they are learning.
          identifying discipline        The same literacy skills taught in English Language
          specific literacy skills and  Arts (ELA) can be used to help students gain
          strategies (InTasc Standard   knowledge and master these content areas as well.
          #4).
                                        The CEEDAR Center (Collaboration for Effective
      · Describe and develop            Educator Development, Accountability, and Reform)
          cross-curricular literacy     illustrates essential literacy skills that are used across
          centers (mathematics,         content areas. Teaching your students to use their
          science, and social           skills and strategies to make sense of texts they read in
          studies)(InTasc Standard      science, social studies, and mathematics can be called
          #5).                          disciplinary literacy.

      · Describe and develop text       Disciplinary literacy and content-area
          sets that combine literacy    literacy
          skill and strategy
          development with              You may have heard of both content-area literacy and
          discipline-specific           disciplinary literacy. Content-area literacy refers to
          objectives in mathematics,    strategies that can be used to make sense of text in any
          science, or social studies    content area. For example, a KWL chart (what I
          (InTasc Standard #7).         KNOW, what I WANT to know, and what I
                                        LEARNED) can be used in almost any context to
      · Develop activities that use     organize learning before and after reading texts.
          reading and writing to        Here's a sample lesson using the KWL method entitled
          demonstrate discipline-       Let's Build a Snowman.
          specific learning in
          mathematics, science, or      However, there are ways to use literacy strategies that
          social studies (InTasc        are specifically suited to certain content areas or
          Standard #8).                 disciplines. This is disciplinary literacy. Disciplinary
                                        literacy recognizes that reading, writing, and other
                                        language processes vary depending on the discipline.
                      CHAPTER 10. READING AND WRITING ACROSS CONTENT AREAS - DISCIPLINARY LITERACY | 200

For example, the literacy skills for mathematics include the ability to read and write number
sentences, using particular symbols and conventions. The following number sentence:

                                                         2 + 9 = 11

uses two symbols generally seen only in mathematics: + and =. Likewise, there are certain
literacy comprehension tools and strategies that are especially suited to the requirements
of mathematics. For example, a T-chart may be just the right comprehension tool to use
when developing an important mathematics skill - separating necessary information from
unnecessary information in a story problem, as shown below:

       Sammy and three friends want to share a pizza. The pizza is cut into 12 pieces. They all
       think that pepperoni is the best kind of pizza. If Sammy and her three friends each get the
       same number of pieces, how many will each person get?

T-Chart to organize information in a story problem.

Information I need to solve this problem    Extra information that I do not need
Sammy and three friends want to share a     They all think that pepperoni is the best kind
pizza.                                      of pizza.
The pizza is cut into 12 pieces.
Each person gets the same number of pieces
of pizza.

Components of disciplinary literacy

Choosing the best-fitting comprehension strategies for a discipline depends on recognizing
several components of disciplinary literacy:

 1. Learning the specific vocabulary of a discipline is essential for gaining knowledge in that
      discipline.

 2. Reading and writing are used differently in mathematics, science, social studies, and ELA.
201 | CHAPTER 10. READING AND WRITING ACROSS CONTENT AREAS - DISCIPLINARY LITERACY

                           Image adapted from example on example of basic and
                           disciplinary literacy on study.com

  Learning Activities: Learning specific vocabulary

     Watch this video about the sun. Make a list of some subject-specific vocabulary words used in
     this video that you would want to teach students who were learning about the sun. Compare your
     list with those of your classmates.

                         An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
                         https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=359#h5p-34

Maybe your vocabulary list looked something like this:
                      CHAPTER 10. READING AND WRITING ACROSS CONTENT AREAS - DISCIPLINARY LITERACY | 202

  · Energy
  · Light
  · Surface
  · Fahrenheit
  · Celsius
  · Dwarf star

Teaching the vocabulary that goes with specific topics is an important part of disciplinary
literacy. Knowing vocabulary words and their meanings supports comprehension in science,
mathematics, and social studies just as it does in English Language Arts. In fact, all
components of literacy - reading, writing, speaking, and listening - help children learn content
in every discipline. Introducing and emphasizing the literacy components below will
strengthen students' understanding of the content areas as well.

Reading and writing are used differently

In the mathematics T-chart example above you saw how a specific graphic organizer could help
with a specific mathematics language task: sorting necessary from unnecessary information
in a story problem. The ability to determine the relevance of information is a highly complex
and challenging task; and while there are times when students will need to sort information in
this way in social studies, science, and ELA, this task occurs early and often in mathematics
instruction. This is one way that reading is used differently in mathematics.

Social studies experts and scientists also use reading and writing in ways that are unique to their
disciplines. For example, in elementary social studies tasks, students are asked to determine
cause and effect relationships and to use timelines to keep track of events. In elementary science
tasks, students record observations and hypothesize about outcomes. Classroom learning in the
early elementary years establishes these discipline-specific ways of using literacy; and like all
other early learning, these skills are expanded on in later school experiences. A strong base of
disciplinary literacy skills is crucial for later success.
203 | CHAPTER 10. READING AND WRITING ACROSS CONTENT AREAS - DISCIPLINARY LITERACY

How to start

You can help your students establish a strong  Photo by Suad Kamardeen on Unsplash
foundation of disciplinary knowledge by
incorporating reading, writing, speaking, and
listening into as many learning activities as
possible. A good way to start is by reading
informational texts to explore topics of
student interest, because having a purpose
for reading enhances students' engagement.
Dr. Nell Duke, a literacy researcher, has
studied informational text. In her blog post
for the National Association for the
Education of the Young Child, Dr. Duke
suggests the following:

· Read informational texts to learn how to care for a class pet.
· Write instructions for something of importance, for example, how-to instructions for the

   staff who will be taking care of the school garden over the summer.

As students become more comfortable with informational texts, use such texts to introduce
new topics and to set a purpose for the learning to come:

· Read and compare a few informational texts to prepare for a class field trip or to get an
   overview of a new topic at the start of the unit.

For example, you might read 12 Ways to Get to 11 (Merriam, 1996) as a way of introducing how to
conceptualize and write math number sentences:

One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online
here: https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/teachingearlyliteracy/?p=359#oembed-1

Some published curricula will include suggestions for companion texts and writing activities.
For example, see this open-access social studies lesson: What Makes a Hero?
                      CHAPTER 10. READING AND WRITING ACROSS CONTENT AREAS - DISCIPLINARY LITERACY | 204

Sometimes you will need to think of your own ways to include literacy. Look again at the lesson
example for Let's Build a Snowman. By clicking on the Resources & Preparation Tab you will see
three texts, fictional and informational, that were chosen to help students build the knowledge
and disciplinary ways of thinking that are needed for this lesson.

What about science?

Scientists also use reading and writing in very specific ways, and young children can begin to
practice these disciplinary literacy skills. See this slide show for some ways that literacy use in
science compares to that in ELA, and for student writing examples.

Writing

An effective way for young children to start writing in any discipline is to make lists.
You try it! Start by making a list of things you see (observe) in this picture:

             Hayden, (2017). Horses at the Iowa State University horse barn.
205 | CHAPTER 10. READING AND WRITING ACROSS CONTENT AREAS - DISCIPLINARY LITERACY

I see ...

  ·
  ·
  ·

Now, think like a scientist and generate some questions.

I wonder ...

  ·
  ·
  ·

  Learning Activities

     Once again, work with a partner to search online book sites and find at least three texts (both
     fictional and informational) that you could use to learn about your questions.
     Generate some vocabulary words to teach as well.

  Key Takeaways

     The disciplinary literacy skills that children learn in the primary grades will set the stage for
     learning across the content areas in the middle grades and beyond. Learning to use the literacy
     components - reading, writing, speaking, and listening - in mathematics, science and social
     studies depends on knowing

         · the vocabulary that is essential for gaining knowledge in that discipline; and
         · that reading and writing are used in different and unique ways in mathematics, science,

             social studies, and ELA.
                      CHAPTER 10. READING AND WRITING ACROSS CONTENT AREAS - DISCIPLINARY LITERACY | 206

    Resources for teacher educators

          · KWL Chart [PDF]
          · Olness, R. L. (2022). Let's build a snowman.
          · What makes a hero? [Lesson plan]
          · Hayden, H. E. (2018) Reading and writing in science. [Powerpoint slides]

References

Carr, J., (2020). Math read-aloud: 12 ways to get to 11. https://youtu.be/rJJ1HhSv4LY
Council of Chief State School Officers. (2011, April). Interstate Teacher Assessment and Support

   Consortium (InTASC) Model Core Teaching Standards: A Resource for State Dialogue.
   Washington, DC.
Disciplinary Literacy. CEEDAR Center: Collaboration for Effective Educator Development,
   Accountability, and Reform. https://ceedar.education.ufl.edu/.
Duke, N. K. (2019). Making the most of informational text. https://www.naeyc.org/resources/blog/
   making-most-informational-text
Hayden, H. E. (2017). Horses at the Iowa State University horse barn.
207 | REVIEW STATEMENT

Review Statement

Methods of Teaching Early Literacy was produced with support from the Iowa State University
Digital Press. In addition to production support from Iowa State University's Open Education
lead, Abbey K. Elder, this book also underwent a peer review and editing process.

Peer reviews for this book were provided by subject matter experts and structured around
considerations related to the text's usefulness as a teaching resource. Reviewers provided
feedback based on a rubric adapted from the Open Textbook Library's Review Rubric, rating
the text on various aspects of its organization and content. Comments from peer reviewers were
used to guide edits and additions to the book's content, which were incorporated by the lead
authors prior to publication.
                   ABOUT THE AUTHORS | 208

About the Authors

Nandita Gurjar, Ph.D., is an Assistant Professor of Elementary Education at Rhode Island
College, Providence, RI. Before her current position, she was an Assistant Professor of Literacy
Education at the University of Northern Iowa in the Literacy division. While at UNI, she
taught undergraduate and graduate courses in literacy, particularly Methods of Teaching Early
Literacy, for several years. Nandita led America Reads program and was an Iowa Reading
Research advisory council member. She co-chairs Early Childhood Education SIG at the Society
for Information Technology and Teacher Education. Nandita earned her Ph.D. in Elementary
Education from the University of Central Florida. Her research promotes inclusive, equitable
learning and virtual learning communities. She has been published in numerous peer-reviewed
journals: The Reading Teacher, Reading Horizon-the Journal of Literacy and Language Arts, Childhood
Education, TechTrends, Applied Instructional Design, Italian Journal of Educational Technology, and
Educational Technology Research and Development. Nandita is passionate about promoting
developmentally appropriate technology and literacy skills in children and mentoring preservice
teachers through community engagement and service learning in her classes. She has been
selected as the 2023-2024 Open Education Research fellow.

Sohyun "Soh (pronounced as so)" Meacham, Ph.D., is an Associate Professor of Literacy
Education at the University of Northern Iowa. Her research interests include teachers' language
use, young children's oral language development in the classroom, and representations of
minoritized children in picturebooks. With this research background, she teaches early literacy
courses. She has been the state secretary of Iowa Reading Association since 2021. Her early
literacy research has been published in numerous peer-reviewed journals such as The Reading
Teacher, Early Childhood Research Quarterly, Early Education and Development, European Early
Childhood Education Research Journal, Journal of Children's Literature, Race, Ethnicity, and Education,
and Science and Children. Last but not least, in addition to this brand new OER textbook, her
newer co-authored book titled Supporting Korean American children in early childhood education:
Perspectives from mother-educators is forthcoming through Teachers College Press in November,
2023. She is currently writing another book about Asian American early childhood and
intersectionality under a contract with Routledge.

Constance Beecher, Ph.D., is an Associate Professor of Literacy in the School of Education
209 | ABOUT THE AUTHORS

at Iowa State University. She an Early Intervention researcher and educator, with an emphasis
on language and literacy development. Her research is centered in the context of community-
based research, and involves developing, evaluating, and disseminating interventions for young
children that can be implemented by or for parents, teachers and caregivers in community
settings. Her work has been published in peer-reviewed journals in early childhood, child
development, special education and community engagement such as Early Childhood Research
Quarterly, Journal of Early Intervention, Topics in Early Childhood Special Education, and the Journal
of Extension among others. She leads state-wide efforts to increase literacy access in
communities through outreach programs such as Read Across Iowa and Raising School-Ready
Readers.
