Preparing for College
Success

SENIOR CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS

AMY BALDWIN, UNIVERSITY OF CENTRAL ARKANSAS
OpenStax
Rice University
6100 Main Street MS-375
Houston, Texas 77005

To learn more about OpenStax, visit https://openstax.org.
Individual print copies and bulk orders can be purchased through our website.

©2023 Rice University. Textbook content produced by OpenStax is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0). Under this license, any user of this textbook or the textbook
contents herein must provide proper attribution as follows:

- If you redistribute this textbook in a digital format (including but not limited to PDF and HTML), then you
    must retain on every page the following attribution:
    "Access for free at openstax.org."

- If you redistribute this textbook in a print format, then you must include on every physical page the
    following attribution:
    "Access for free at openstax.org."

- If you redistribute part of this textbook, then you must retain in every digital format page view (including
    but not limited to PDF and HTML) and on every physical printed page the following attribution:
    "Access for free at openstax.org."

- If you use this textbook as a bibliographic reference, please include
    https://openstax.org/details/books/preparing-for-college-success in your citation.

For questions regarding this licensing, please contact support@openstax.org.

Trademarks
The OpenStax name, OpenStax logo, OpenStax book covers, OpenStax CNX name, OpenStax CNX logo,
OpenStax Tutor name, Openstax Tutor logo, Connexions name, Connexions logo, Rice University name, and
Rice University logo are not subject to the license and may not be reproduced without the prior and express
written consent of Rice University.

B&W PAPERBACK BOOK ISBN-13   978-1-711472-05-8
DIGITAL VERSION ISBN-13      978-1-961584-11-2
ORIGINAL PUBLICATION YEAR    2023
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 CJP 23
OPENSTAX

OpenStax provides free, peer-reviewed, openly licensed textbooks for introductory college and Advanced
Placement® courses and low-cost, personalized courseware that helps students learn. A nonprofit ed tech
initiative based at Rice University, we're committed to helping students access the tools they need to complete
their courses and meet their educational goals.

RICE UNIVERSITY

OpenStax is an initiative of Rice University. As a leading research university with a distinctive commitment to
undergraduate education, Rice University aspires to path-breaking research, unsurpassed teaching, and
contributions to the betterment of our world. It seeks to fulfill this mission by cultivating a diverse community
of learning and discovery that produces leaders across the spectrum of human endeavor.

PHILANTHROPIC SUPPORT

OpenStax is grateful for the generous philanthropic partners who advance our mission to improve educational
access and learning for everyone. To see the impact of our supporter community and our most updated list of
partners, please visit openstax.org/impact.

Arnold Ventures                                  Burt and Deedee McMurtry
Chan Zuckerberg Initiative                       Michelson 20MM Foundation
Chegg, Inc.                                      National Science Foundation
Arthur and Carlyse Ciocca Charitable Foundation  The Open Society Foundations
Digital Promise                                  Jumee Yhu and David E. Park III
Ann and John Doerr                               Brian D. Patterson USA-International Foundation
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation                  The Bill and Stephanie Sick Fund
Girard Foundation                                Steven L. Smith & Diana T. Go
Google Inc.                                      Stand Together
The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation         Robin and Sandy Stuart Foundation
The Hewlett-Packard Company                      The Stuart Family Foundation
Intel Inc.                                       Tammy and Guillermo Treviño
Rusty and John Jaggers                           Valhalla Charitable Foundation
The Calvin K. Kazanjian Economics Foundation     White Star Education Foundation
Charles Koch Foundation                          Schmidt Futures
Leon Lowenstein Foundation, Inc.                 William Marsh Rice University
The Maxfield Foundation
  Study where you want, what
   you want, when you want.

                        When you access your book in our web view, you can use our new online
                         highlighting and note-taking features to create your own study guides.

                                               Our books are free and flexible, forever.
                      Get started at openstax.org/details/books/preparing-for-college-success

Access. The future of education.
openstax.org
  CONTENTS

    Preface 1

1 Getting into College 7

        Introduction 7
        1.1 What Are the Benefits of College? 9
        1.2 Your Academic Journey and Personal Story 14
        1.3 Finding the Right "Fit" 17
        1.4 Applying for College and Making Your Decision 24
        Family & Friends Matter 30
        Summary 30

2 Transitioning to College 33

        Introduction 33
        2.1 Why College? 35
        2.2 The First Year of College Will Be an Experience 40
        2.3 College Culture and Expectations 42
        2.4 It's All in the Mindset 53
        Family & Friends Matter 58
        Summary 58
        Checking In: Your College Readiness Checklist 59

3 Managing Your Time and Priorities 63

        Introduction 63
        3.1 Time Management in College 65
        3.2 Procrastination: The Enemy Within 68
        3.3 How to Manage Time 71
        3.4 Prioritization 78
        3.5 Enhanced Strategies for Time and Task Management 85
        Family & Friends Matter 91
        Summary 91

4 Reading and Note-Taking 93

        Introduction 93
        4.1 The Learning Process 95
        4.2 The Nature and Types of Reading 97
        4.3 Effective Reading Strategies 100
        4.4 Helpful Note-Taking Strategies 110
        Family & Friends Matter 126
        Summary 127
Checking In: Your College Readiness Checklist 127

5 Studying, Memory, and Test Taking 131

Introduction 131                 133
5.1 Deepening Your Learning       157
5.2 Memory 134
5.3 Studying 140
5.4 Test Taking 150
5.5 Developing Metacognition
Family & Friends Matter 159
Summary 159

6 Building Relationships 161

        Introduction 161
        6.1 The Benefits of Healthy Relationships 163
        6.2 Building Relationships in College 168
        6.3 Working in Groups 175
        Family & Friends Matter 183
        Summary 183
        Checking In: Your College Readiness Checklist 184

7 Maintaining Your Mental Health and Managing Stress 187

        Introduction 187
        7.1 Creating Your Best Self 189
        7.2 Your Overall Well-Being 191
        7.3 The Mind-Body Connection 193
        7.4 Mental Health Basics 196
        7.5 The Role of Social Media on Mental Health 205
        7.6 Physical Health Basics 210
        Family & Friends Matter 219
        Summary 219

8 Understanding Financial Literacy 221

        Introduction 221
        8.1 Personal Financial Planning 223
        8.2 Savings, Expenses, and Budgeting 227
        8.3 Credit Cards 233
        8.4 Paying for College 236
        Family & Friends Matter 245
        Summary 246
        Checking In: Your College Readiness Checklist 246

Access for free at openstax.org
9 Planning Your Future 249

        Introduction 249
        9.1 Setting Goals and Staying Motivated 251
        9.2 Planning Your Degree Path 256
        9.3 Making a Plan 267
        9.4 Using the Career Planning Cycle 271
        Family & Friends Matter 280
        Summary 280

    Index 283
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                 Preface 1

Preface

Welcome to Preparing for College Success, an OpenStax resource. This textbook was written to increase
student access to high-quality learning materials, maintaining highest standards of academic rigor at little to
no cost.

About OpenStax

OpenStax is part of Rice University, which is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit charitable corporation. As an educational
initiative, it's our mission to transform learning so that education works for every student. Through our
partnerships with philanthropic organizations and our alliance with other educational resource companies,
we're breaking down the most common barriers to learning. Because we believe that everyone should and can
have access to knowledge.

About OpenStax Resources

Customization

Preparing for College Success is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY)
license, which means that you can distribute, remix, and build upon the content, as long as you provide
attribution to OpenStax and its content contributors.

Because our books are openly licensed, you are free to use the entire book or pick and choose the sections
that are most relevant to the needs of your course. Feel free to remix the content by assigning your students
certain chapters and sections in your syllabus, in the order that you prefer. You can even provide a direct link in
your syllabus to the sections in the web view of your book.

Instructors also have the option of creating a customized version of their OpenStax book. The custom version
can be made available to students in low-cost print or digital form through their campus bookstore. Visit the
Instructor Resources section of your book page on OpenStax.org for more information.

Art Attribution in Preparing for College Success

In Preparing for College Success, most art contains attribution to its title, creator or rights holder, host
platform, and license within the caption. For art that is openly licensed, anyone may reuse the art as long as
they provide the same attribution to its original source. Some art has been provided through permissions and
should only be used with the attribution or limitations provided in the credit. If art contains no attribution
credit, it may be reused without attribution.

Errata

All OpenStax textbooks undergo a rigorous review process. However, like any professional-grade textbook,
errors sometimes occur. Since our books are web based, we can make updates periodically when deemed
pedagogically necessary. If you have a correction to suggest, submit it through the link on your book page on
OpenStax.org. Subject matter experts review all errata suggestions. OpenStax is committed to remaining
transparent about all updates, so you will also find a list of past errata changes on your book page on
OpenStax.org.

Format

You can access this textbook for free in web view or PDF through OpenStax.org, and for a low cost in print.

About Preparing for College Success

Preparing for College Success is designed to meet the needs of college preparation courses for high school
students. Because a college preparation course may vary greatly from school to school or district to district,
this high school edition has been developed to provide the most flexibility possible for course coordinators
and teachers. The open license and multiple formats provide many opportunities to tailor the material to meet
2 Preface

    classroom or program-specific needs.

    The basis for this high school edition, College Success and College Success Concise, addresses the evolving
    challenges and opportunities of today's diverse students. The intensive development work leveraged expertise
    from hundreds of FYE coordinators and faculty across the country. In particular, this high school version was
    crafted with the input of high school teachers who have offered a course on preparing students to apply and
    go to college after graduation. The topics have been carefully chosen to prioritize the most critical topics in
    helping students prepare for the expectations and opportunities of college, and the authors have organized
    them to create a logical and reinforcing flow. While the content mirrors the College Success Concise book, this
    version includes a chapter on researching the best options after high school and applying to college. Users will
    see distinctive additions in certain areas, such as a new section on group work and greatly expanded coverage
    of stress, social media, and wellbeing. All of this content provides high school teachers the opportunity to
    prepare their students to research postsecondary pathways and make an informed decision about where to
    attend. This high school edition also gives students an introduction to the mindsets, behaviors, habits, and
    strategies they need to be successful throughout their entire college career.

    While some content was removed in creating this derivative, our open license and platform allow instructors
    and students to reliably utilize content from the original College Success text. As with all of our books,
    instructors can link to individual textbook sections or utilize the various means of customization.

    Preparing for College Success shares the vision and approach of the original textbook, and is rooted in core
    values of motivation, growth mindset, student support, and equity. The material highlights resources available
    to students as they embark on new roads of independence and responsibility. Within the chapters, students
    are given the opportunity to engage in self-analysis and reflection in order to understand their strengths,
    challenges, and aptitudes. Faculty and students will see the following consistent themes and approaches:

    Student engagement and self-analysis are reflected in each section through applications and activities.

    The diversity and intersectionality of students were considered in every example, context, and application,
    and the text's active surveys and detailed profiles make student voices a key element of the reading.

    Interconnected topics are acknowledged and built upon, demonstrating that no element of college learning
    and growth occurs in isolation. The result is a cumulative, more complete understanding, which better
    prepares students to meet the multi-dimensional challenges of higher education.

    Openly licensed and free in all digital formats, the text provides unparalleled flexibility in its use,
    customization, and accessibility for faculty and students. The book is provided at no cost in online, PDF, and
    other formats. It is also available in print for a very low price.

    Robust instructor ancillaries will support faculty and course designers with teaching notes, additional
    exercises, worksheet versions of the in-text activities, lecture slides, and assessment items.

   Features

      · Student Profiles: The voices of real students inform every chapter. These students grapple with the same
          concepts, from improving study skills to embracing diversity, and through their experiences and successes
          we share important stories.

      · Get Connected: Apps, websites, and technology that our experts recommend to help students face the
          challenges of college, develop critical academic and professional skills, and increase their overall success.

      · Analysis and Applications: Peppered through every chapter are opportunities for students to reflect on
          concepts, try out processes, and apply what they're learning.

      · Student Surveys: Chapters begin with a survey, posing questions that will get readers engaged in
          considering their own level of connection and understanding of the chapter's concept, from time
          management to personal finance to career planning.

      · Student Stories: Each chapter opens with a character-driven story about one of three different students.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                 Preface 3

      These stories provide a glimpse into the complexity of emotions, behaviors, mindsets, and decisions they
      will make.
  · The Real Deal: This feature offers advice and words of encouragement from college students about how
      to transition to college successfully. Real students were asked to tell their high school selves what they
      wished they'd known; these are the words of wisdom learned from their experiences.
  · Friends & Family Matter: A character-driven scenario is introduced in which a student is faced with
      making a choice. Readers are asked to think critically about the situation and to talk through the decision
      with friends and family.
  · Checking In: Your College Readiness Checklist: This feature offers a four-year, term-by-term checklist for
      students to track the tasks necessary for meeting college readiness standards and for applying to college.
  · Summary & Next Steps for College Success: A summary of the chapter's main points comes at the end
      of each chapter and includes a checklist for what to do when they are in college.

Estimated Module Completion Time

Each section of Preparing for College Success includes an estimate of the average time needed to read
through the material and work on the activities and applications. Each student will engage the material
differently, and faculty will likely prioritize or assign certain components over others. As a result, the actual
time students spend will vary greatly. OpenStax will periodically update these estimates based on user
feedback.

Answers to Questions in the Book

Answers to the "Questions to Consider" questions are not provided to students due to the high variability of
responses. The Instructor's Manual on the Instructor Resources page provides additional insight to assist in
discussion about these questions. There is also a Test Bank of questions and answers only available to the
instructor.

Additional Resources

Student and Instructor Resources

We've compiled additional resources for both students and instructors, including Getting Started Guides,
lecture slides, and a Test Bank.

The most robust of these is the Instructor Resource Manual, developed by author Amy Baldwin based on
extensive experience and requests from faculty reviewers and survey respondents. For each chapter, the IRM
will contain:

  · Detailed teaching suggestions
  · Bloom's Taxonomy matrix, indicating the alignment of each chapter activity and application to the level of

      Bloom's it fulfills.
  · Overarching "big picture" questions from the chapter
  · Topical and cumulative case scenario activities, which present a realistic situation based on the concepts,

      and ask students to respond via writing or another method. These may be adapted and assigned by
      instructors.

Instructor resources require a verified instructor account, which you can apply for when you log in or create
your account on OpenStax.org. Instructor and student resources are typically available within a few months
after the book's initial publication. Take advantage of these resources to supplement your OpenStax book.

Academic Integrity

Academic integrity builds trust, understanding, equity, and genuine learning. While students may encounter
significant challenges in their courses and their lives, doing their own work and maintaining a high degree of
authenticity will result in meaningful outcomes that will extend far beyond their college career. Faculty,
4 Preface

    administrators, resource providers, and students should work together to maintain a fair and positive
    experience.
    We realize that students benefit when academic integrity ground rules are established early in the course. To
    that end, OpenStax has created an interactive to aid with academic integrity discussions in your course.

                                          Figure 1 attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license

    Visit our academic integrity slider (https://www.openstax.org/r/academic-integrity-slider). Click and drag icons
    along the continuum to align these practices with your institution and course policies. You may then include
    the graphic on your syllabus, present it in your first course meeting, or create a handout for students.
    At OpenStax we are also developing resources supporting authentic learning experiences and assessment.
    Please visit this book's page for updates. For an in-depth review of academic integrity strategies, we highly
    recommend visiting the International Center of Academic Integrity (ICAI) website at
    https://academicintegrity.org/ (https://academicintegrity.org/).

   Community Hubs

    OpenStax partners with the Institute for the Study of Knowledge Management in Education (ISKME) to offer
    Community Hubs on OER Commons--a platform for instructors to share community-created resources that
    support OpenStax books, free of charge. Through our Community Hubs, instructors can upload their own
    materials or download resources to use in their own courses, including additional ancillaries, teaching
    material, multimedia, and relevant course content. We encourage instructors to join the hubs for the subjects
    most relevant to your teaching and research as an opportunity both to enrich your courses and to engage with
    other faculty.
    To reach the Community Hubs, visit www.oercommons.org/hubs/OpenStax.

   Technology Partners

    As allies in making high-quality learning materials accessible, our technology partners offer optional low-cost
    tools that are integrated with OpenStax books. To access the technology options for your text, visit your book
    page on OpenStax.org.

   About the Authors

    Senior Contributing Author
    Amy Baldwin, University of Central Arkansas
    Amy Baldwin has dedicated her entire career to supporting students in their successful transition to college.
    She wrote the first, groundbreaking student success textbook for community colleges and for first-generation
    students. After 18 years as an award-winning community college professor, she now serves as Director of the
    Department of Student Transitions at the University of Central Arkansas. This unique blend of experience
    provides perspective on two critical student and faculty populations, which she has brought to this book as

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                 Preface 5

well as her extensive work with Complete College America, Achieving the Dream, and the Developmental
Education Initiative.

Amy and her husband Kyle live in Arkansas and have two children, Emily and Will.

Contributing Authors

Lisa August, Canisius College
James Bennett, Herzing University
Larry Buland, Metropolitan Community College
Jill Kaar, University of Colorado
Sabrina Mathues, Brookdale Community College
Susan Monroe, Northern Virginia Community College
MJ O'Leary, WellnessMultiplied
Ann Pearson, San Jacinto College
Joshua Troesh, El Camino College
Margit Misangyi Watts, University of Hawai'i at Manoa
Julia Byrd, Essay Coach

Reviewers

Nagash Clarke, Washtenaw Community College
Laura Crisp, Pellissippi State Community College
Abbie Finnegan, Des Moines Area Community College
Kim Fragopoulos, University of Massachusetts-Boston
Maria Galyon, Jefferson Community & Technical College
Kimberly A. Griffith, Bristol Community College
Anna Howell, Portland Community College
Sarah Howard, The Ohio State University
Stacy L. Hurley, Baltimore County Community College
Dawn Lee, Charleston Southern University
Gail Malone, South Plains College
Kim Martin, Chemeketa Community College
Sherri Powell, Shawnee State University
Bobby E. Roberts, Jr., Savannah State University
Laila M. Shishineh, University of Maryland, Baltimore County
Shavecca M. Snead, Albany State University
Jason Smethers, University of Tennessee, Knoxville
Angela C. Thering, SUNY Buffalo State
Antione D. Tomlin, Anne Arundel Community College
Jessica Traylor, Gordon State College
Makeda K. Turner, University of Michigan
Dave Urso, Blue Ridge Community College
Margit Misangyi Watts, University of Hawaii at Manoa
Ann Wolf, New Mexico Highlands University
6 Preface
     Access for free at openstax.org
1 · Introduction                                                                                                                    7

1
           Getting into College

Figure 1.1 Deciding to go to college can be both exciting and challenging because you are setting yourself on a pathway to fulfill
your dreams. (credit: modification of "College of DuPage 2014 Commencement Ceremony 59" by COD Newsroom/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Chapter Outline

  1.1 What Are the Benefits of College?
  1.2 Your Academic Journey and Personal Story
  1.3 Finding the Right "Fit"
  1.4 Applying for College and Making Your Decision

      Introduction

 STUDENT STORY

  The first time JT applied to college, he wasn't able to attend because of financial issues, so he decided to
  work a few years so he could save money to put toward expenses.
  When he reached out to the institution after he applied, he was told that the costs of tuition and fees would
  be $10,000 a year and that as a first-year student, JT would have to live on campus, which would cost
  $9,000. JT had no idea that he would be looking at almost $20,000 a year, or over $80,000 for the entire
  degree. He had not saved anywhere near enough to cover the costs of his degree.
  JT reached out to the financial aid office to determine how he would pay for his expenses. They shared with
  him the information about grants, scholarships, and loans. He is not sure of the best option, but he looks at
  the loans first because he was told he would definitely qualify for them. The grants and scholarships will be
  based on qualifications and need, so they are not guaranteed.
  JT discovers that he can take out about $6,000 a year in loans, but realizes that it won't cover all his
  expenses and will calculate to $24,000 by the time he graduates. He is not sure what to do, and the thought
  of taking a loan is not appealing to him.
8 1 · Getting into College

      What Do You Think?
         · If you were JT, what would you do in this situation?
         · What would you do if you found that the costs of college were more than you had anticipated?
         · How would you get more information about the options for paying for college?
         · How do you feel about finding ways to pay for college? Why do you feel this way?

   Student Survey

    How do you feel about the process of applying for college? These questions will help you determine how the
    chapter concepts relate to you right now. As we are introduced to new concepts and practices, it can be
    informative to reflect on how your understanding changes over time. Take this quick survey to figure it out,
    ranking questions on a scale of 1--4, 1 meaning "least like me" and 4 meaning "most like me."
    Don't be concerned with the results. If your score is low, you will most likely gain even more from this book.
     1. I am confident that I know the process for applying for college and selecting the right school for me.
     2. I know how to increase my chances of getting into a college that fits my needs and long-term goals.
     3. I am on track now to be prepared for applying for scholarships and figuring out how to pay for college.
     4. I feel comfortable with my goal of going to college.
    You can also take the Chapter 1 survey (https://openstax.org/l/collegehighschoolsurvey01) anonymously
    online.

     STUDENT PROFILE

       "Applying for college is a scary yet exciting thing to do. You will experience so many new things when you
       get there. As a freshman in college, my best advice is to put yourself out there. When you are finally on
       your own, you will feel homesick, but please explore campus clubs, go to sporting events, attend guest
       appearances, etc. Also, talk to your professors and advisors. They are incredibly helpful and want the best
       for you. It's okay if you don't have a major chosen yet because many freshmen don't know either. Go to
       class and study as much as you can. Remember this is not high school; therefore, the rules are different,
       but it's better because you are now an adult and can do whatever you want! The most important thing to
       remember is that you are responsible for your grades now, and you no longer have your parents to tell you
       to stay on top of things. That's your job now, so please stay on top of yourself because it's very easy to slip
       up and start failing a class. Enjoy your first year and have fun!"
       --Maya Johnson, University of Central Arkansas

   About This Chapter

    Deciding to go to college can be an exciting and nerve-wracking time. Will you be able to balance your high
    school work and activities with the process of applying to college? Will you find a school that you want to go
    to? Will you be able to afford it? Will you make new friends and feel comfortable there? How far away from
    home will you be and will a new community feel welcoming? All of the thoughts and the accompanying
    emotions will come and go as you move through high school and towards making a decision as to what you
    want to do after earning a diploma. Be assured that you can complete the requirements for getting through
    high school and plan for setting yourself on the pathway to what we call "postsecondary" education, or the
    training program or college that you attend after you complete the 12th grade or earn a general education
    diploma (GED).
    In this chapter, you will learn about the purpose of a college education, the process of applying to college and

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                   1.1 · What Are the Benefits of College? 9

what you need to think about to make the most of the time you have now to prepare yourself. By the time you
complete this chapter, you should be able to do the following:

  · Understand the benefits of a college education.
  · Describe how to create your academic and personal story.
  · Identify institutions and their characteristics so that you can determine the right "fit."
  · List the steps for applying to college.

 1.1 What Are the Benefits of College?

                                                                                                  Estimated completion time: 18 minutes.

Questions to Consider:
  · Why is college a good opportunity to become a learner?
  · How can a college education help me develop as a person?

Figure 1.2 Decision-making about college and our future can be challenging, but with self-analysis and support, you can feel more
confident and make the best choices. (credit: "Sailor helps a high school student complete cybersecurity challenges." by Official U.S.
Navy Page/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Usually, when we talk about the benefits of college, we make the argument that people who graduate with a
degree are more likely to earn higher salaries or amass more lifetime earnings, experience better health and
wellness outcomes, and embrace a more positive outlook on life. However, there are more rewards for going
to college than just these long-term gains. In fact, you may have already identified a few that are motivating
you to consider college: You get to study topics and develop skills that interest you; you get to live on your own
(or with a roommate); and you get to have more control over what you do and when you do it. These are all
good reasons to go to college, but there are other ways that college can benefit you.

College Allows You to Become a Learner

In his book, Becoming a Learner1 , Matthew Sanders (2018) makes the argument that the fundamental
purpose of college is not to fill you with specific knowledge or give you a set of career skills that you can take
with you directly on the job. Its purpose, instead, is to help you "become a learner." Sanders points out that
learning to learn while taking a variety of required courses will help you develop the very skills that will help
you reach your long-term goals and adapt to the changing world of work after you graduate.
According to Sanders, your time in college is best spent if you approach the courses that you are taking as
opportunities to develop your learning skills and your character. In other words, college will give you the

1 Sanders, M. (2018). Becoming a learner. Hayden-McNeil Publishing.
10 1 · Getting into College

chance to challenge and ultimately strengthen your values and beliefs, develop an awareness of who you are
and what you want, embrace and learn from adversity, and demonstrate integrity and work ethic. College is
not the only place for you to grow in these ways, but it is specially designed to allow you to do so with minimal
repercussions.

In order for you to make the most of the college experience, consider making the shift from student to learner
by adopting the behaviors and habits that are presented in Table 1.1.

                                 Moving from Student to Learner

           A student...                                          A learner...

Studies for a test by cramming the day or night    Studies effectively throughout each term to move from
before.                                            remembering information to comprehending it deeply.

Cuts corners when completing assignments           Completes assignments with integrity even if this means
because the learning opportunity doesn't           the grade will be lower.
matter.

Is more concerned about the grade than what        Is more concerned about improving their understanding
was learned.                                       than the grade.

Doesn't look at feedback on graded                 Asks for and reviews feedback to determine what to do
assignments for opportunities to improve           differently next time.
performance.

Doesn't reflect on how to get better at learning.  Regularly monitors their learning habits and makes
                                                   necessary changes to their processes.

Table 1.1

Becoming a learner doesn't happen overnight if you have had the habits of a student for many years. It will be
a process of determining what your professors expect of you and making changes to your approaches to
learning. In some cases, you may fail a test, an assignment, or a course. But those experiences will be helpful
to you if you choose to see them as additional educational opportunities.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                   1.1 · What Are the Benefits of College? 11

ACTIVITY

                                        Becoming a Learner

           Student behaviors                                Strategies I can do now to become a
                                                                                 learner

Ex. Studying the night or day before a test.                Ex. I can study a little at a time each
                                                            day for a week.

Cutting corners on assignments to get them done.            I ...

Being more concerned about the grade I earned.              I ...

Ignoring feedback on tests and papers.                      I ...

Moving from assignment to assignment without thinking I ...
about how I am learning.

Table 1.2

College Allows You to Explore and Grow

In addition to helping you become a learner, college is a good place to explore who you are and who you want
to be. Experts in student development theory believe that your early adult years (ages 18-23) are the optimal
time to determine your values, beliefs, and goals--or at least work through the options and learn more about
what you like and don't like. Two researchers developed a theory about the ways in which students in college
develop. Arthur W. Chickering and Linda Reisser (1993) published their theory of identity development2 for
young adults. While it sounds mysterious, plainly stated, it is a theory about how and in what capacity you will
grow and change while in college. The following seven components, or "vectors," of the theory can provide you
with a preview of what you will experience:

  · Developing competence. This means that you will improve as you gain knowledge and skills through
      learning activities and through challenges and setbacks.

  · Managing emotions. You will get many chances to learn how to identify how you are feeling and why and
      act on those emotions in a mature way.

  · Moving through autonomy to interdependence. This sounds like a complicated process, but it refers to
      your ability to become an adult in all ways by taking ownership of your choices and their consequences
      and for recognizing that you have a role in society to ask for help and to help others.

  · Developing mature relationships. In college, you will get many chances to establish relationships with a
      variety of different people--professors, mentors, classmates, friends--and you will benefit from learning
      how to communicate clearly and openly.

  · Establishing identity. Each one of us has multiple identities, or lenses through which we view ourselves
      and the world. College allows you to explore those identities--and maybe even discover new ones--and
      develop your sense of self and improve your self-esteem.

  · Developing a purpose. Setting goals, seeing yourself as someone who wants to help others,

2 Chickering, A. W. & Reisser, L. (1993). Education and identity (2 ed.). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
12 1 · Getting into College

            demonstrating a commitment to your future are all parts of developing a sense of purpose. In college,
            your courses, interactions with professors and classmates, and participation in activities will help you
            develop a sense of purpose.
        · Developing integrity. This is more than just doing the right thing. Integrity includes living your values
            and beliefs and respecting the values and beliefs of others.

      Now that you have an idea of how college will likely change you and help you grow as a person, let's look at
      the opportunities you will have to move through these stages during college.

     College Courses

      Whether you decide to earn a certificate, associate degree, or a bachelor's degree, you will take courses not
      related to your intended major. In some cases, you may have to take 10 or more courses in a variety of areas
      (or disciplines). These courses are often referred to as "general education courses," but other names include
      "core courses," or "liberal arts courses." Each higher education institution is different in how many and what
      courses they require. You may have to take courses in writing, mathematics, sciences, arts, humanities, and
      social and behavioral sciences such as psychology or sociology. These courses may seem to stand in your way
      of learning about topics that directly relate to a major, but they are important to helping you develop yourself
      as a learner and build competence in your skills. When you register for classes once you are admitted to
      college, view your first academic terms as an opportunity to explore different topics and push yourself outside
      your comfort zone. You don't know why taking a biology class will help you if you are a business major? Recall
      the section above about becoming a learner: adopting a "learner" mindset can help you frame the experience
      productively. Instead of feeling disconnected from such a course when your major is something different,
      think about how scientists, and their ways of thinking, provide us with ways in which to improve our health and
      environment. Or think of taking these courses that are not aligned with your major as opportunities to develop
      a broad range of learning and thinking skills that you will rely on for the rest of your life. At the very least, you
      will be a stronger learner and at the most, you may discover that what you really love to learn is something
      you had never considered studying before.

    Organizations and Extracurricular Activities

      During high school, you may have participated in school activities and organizations for the social aspect, for
      the opportunity to effect a chance and serve the community, or for the ability to develop important skills.
      These reasons don't change much when you go to college. Most institutions offer a wide variety of clubs,
      organizations, societies, and Greek fraternities and sororities for the same reasons: to help students develop
      socially, personally, and professionally. Once you determine where you are going and what you will be
      studying, you will also want to take the time to decide how, what, where, and when you want to get involved.
      There is a balance, of course, and you don't want to be so involved socially that you forget to go to class!
      Instead, look for organizations that fit your interests and find out what the commitment level is. Some will be
      very casual, meeting only once a semester or only for social interaction. Others will be more involved and may
      even cost a considerable amount of money each term (e.g., fraternities and sororities). Even before you choose
      an institution to attend, check out their list of opportunities to get involved. Then, when you make your choice,
      make a goal of exploring your options further. Here are some things to consider:

        · Making friends. You will most likely find many clubs and organizations that serve as social gatherings,
            usually organized around an interest or hobby. A film appreciation club, for example, could be a great way
            to meet people and enjoy something you like to do, like watching movies.

        · Exploring your values and beliefs. Most college campuses have faith-based or politically-affiliated
            groups that give you the chance to connect with others who share your values. Consider pushing yourself
            outside of your comfort zone, however, and look for groups that also provide a different perspective.

        · Developing leadership skills. One of the benefits of participating in clubs and organizations is that you
            can have the chance to develop key leadership skills. Most groups need a leader or several to carry out
            their missions. Student government associations or councils or advisory boards are great ways to get

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                   1.1 · What Are the Benefits of College? 13

      involved in significant ways.
  · Staying physically active. A climbing or hiking club or intramural sports are great ways to incorporate

      physical activity into your life. If you want to learn a new skill or sport (pickleball, anyone?), these are good
      ways to try them out.
  · Improving communication and project management skills. Any group you join will most likely have an
      event they put on or participate in, and your involvement will allow you to grow as a person in meaningful
      ways and help you develop career skills.

Setbacks and Failure

You will read more about how to deal with adversity throughout the rest of the chapters of this book, but it is
worth mentioning here how setbacks and failures can help you to learn and grow. You may have already had
some experiences with stumbling academically or personally up to this point. While it seems cruel to suggest
that there will be more of these negative experiences in your future, being prepared for disappointments can
help you prepare for them. The first setback you may experience with college is not getting into your dream
school--or getting in but not being able to afford it, or it is too far away for you to attend, or it does not have
the major you want. One way to handle these obstacles successfully is to consider the following:

  · Recognize that everyone slips up, makes mistakes, and fails before, during, and after college. It is normal
      and not fatal. You can and will recover.

  · How you handle yourself--your attitude, your emotions, and your reaction--is the key to staying focused
      on bouncing back. You can't always control what happens to you, but you can control how you react when
      it does.

  · Sometimes you may need to ask for help. Some setbacks, such as a failing grade on a test in college, may
      indicate that you need someone to show you how to study more effectively. Use the experience to assess
      what kind of help you need and then ask for it.

  · View the failure as a learning experience. If you don't get what you want, then ask yourself "What can I
      learn from this?"

Experiencing a failure, setback, obstacle, or disappointment should not derail you from your goal, but it can
help you rethink your approach and give you information about what is not working or what you can do
differently the next time.

Figure 1.3 Your college courses will provide you with an opportunity to explore who you are and what you want to do with your life,
develop mature relationships with professors and classmates, and demonstrate integrity in your work. (credit: "Early College
Initiative Students Welcomed to College of DuPage 2015 23 1" by COD Newsroom/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)
14 1 · Getting into College

      ANALYSIS QUESTION

        In what ways do you anticipate you will change and grow during college? What experience or growth
        opportunity are you looking forward to the most?

    1.2 Your Academic Journey and Personal Story

                                                                                                        Estimated completion time: 14 minutes.

      Questions to Consider:
        · How can your academic journey develop skills needed for college success?
        · How can your personal story prepare you for applying to college?

    Your Academic Journey

      Now that you have a better understanding of what college can do for you, it is time to focus on how high
      school is preparing you for college, or better yet, how you can prepare yourself in high school to become
      college ready. It is clear that what you do (or don't do) in high school can affect your ability to get into the
      colleges of your choice, but there is more to preparing yourself than just earning a high GPA or class rank.
      Your high school education can provide you with ample opportunity to help you hone your academic skills.

     Take Difficult Courses

      Any student who is serious about applying to college should consider taking challenging classes while in high
      school. Why? Because those classes can help lay a foundation of high expectations and hard work and they are
      often highly regarded by college admissions counselors. These classes are sometimes called Advanced
      Placement (AP), International Baccalaureate (IB), or honors/advanced classes. If you are considering taking
      such courses, talk to your guidance counselor or current teachers. They may be able to offer suggestions for
      how to get selected (if there is an application process) and give you a realistic picture of what will be expected.
      There is no need to take all AP, IB, or advanced classes to prove you are ready for college, but taking a few can
      provide a college admissions committee evidence that you are open to challenge.

     Manage Time and Tasks

      If there is one skill that you can develop now that will help you throughout your college career, it is the ability
      to manage your time and complete tasks. If you already use a planner to track what you need to do and when
      it is due, then you are on the right track. You can enhance these skills by setting reminders for yourself--and
      not relying on teachers or parents to tell you when to complete or submit an assignment. The most important
      part of managing your time and tasks effectively is to build in time well before something is due to complete
      the work and to overestimate (at least initially) how long you need, which can provide time "buffers" that will
      keep you from rushing through work to finish it.

     Learn to Learn

      Earlier, you were introduced to the argument that the purpose of college is to become a learner. You don't have
      to wait until college, though, to figure out how best to learn different subject matters. This is one reason you
      should consider taking challenging classes-they require that you put more time and effort in them to learn the
      material. And those skills will make transitioning to college much easier. How can you "learn to learn"? You may
      have little control over what you are learning and how you are tested, but you can control how you approach
      the learning. One way to learn how to learn is to space out your learning over time (as best as you

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                     1.2 · Your Academic Journey and Personal Story 15

can--sometimes teachers like to give you a pop quiz when you least expect it!). Reviewing a bit of material for
a short amount of time over several days (as opposed to cramming it in right before a test) produces better
results. Another way to learn how to learn is to monitor how well your learning strategies work. Did you do
well on a test? Take some time to reflect on what you did that resulted in a good grade. Did you space out your
studying? Did you look for connections in the material? Likewise, if you do poorly on a test, determine what led
to the result. The more you can identify what works and doesn't for you, the easier it is to make improvements
in your learning strategies.

Demonstrate Integrity and Ownership of Learning

Being a high school student often means having a lot on your plate. It can be easy to put off homework and
studying, not do it at all, or cut corners to complete the work. While you may be able to get away with some
stumbles like forgetting to turn in an assignment, other behaviors, such as getting someone (including
Artificial Intelligence software) to do your homework or write a paper for you can get you into trouble. Now is
the time to build the skills you will need later in college. Taking full responsibility for your learning as well as
demonstrating integrity in all assignments no matter how big or small are the foundation of those skills. How
do you do this? For one, you acknowledge that every action or inaction will produce a result. If you put in the
work to write the paper, you will earn the grade you receive. If you do not put in the work or find a way to
shortcut the process by using someone else's writing, then you have missed an opportunity to improve your
writing, your thinking, and your project management skills. Plus, you may get into trouble for academic
dishonesty, which could mean failing an assignment or a course, or getting a more substantial punishment,
such as expulsion. The stakes only get higher when you are in college.

Keep Test Scores in Perspective

You will learn more about standardized test scores and their purpose for getting into college later in this
chapter, but it is worth noting that while what you make on the ACT, SAT, or equivalent standardized test, may
factor into your ability to get into and pay for the college of your dreams, it is not necessarily a reflection of
who you are and what you are capable of. Definitely do all you can to raise your test scores through practicing,
prepping, and doing your best on the day of the test. But do not assume that a low test score will be the end of
your long-term goals or educational journey. They are just one piece of information by which an institution
may evaluate your potential, but it shouldn't be the only thing that tells who you are.

Your Personal Story

Just as important as your academic journey is your personal story. You will need to develop and reflect on both
for your applications to college and scholarships. Those who read about you will want to know not only about
your accomplishments, but also your challenges and how you have overcome them.

What Makes You Unique

It may seem cliché to say "There is only one you!" But there is some truth in the fact that you are
unique--there is no one else like you. To that end, you may want to draw upon those unique characteristics as
you begin to shape the story that you will share with college admissions staff and scholarship committees. Will
you be the first in your family to go to college? Do you live on a working farm and feed the goats, cows, and
horses every morning before school? Can you ride a unicycle or juggle or both? There may be both personal
characteristics as well as experiences that make you stand out from others, and if there are, consider weaving
these details into the tapestry of your story. Start by making a list of your characteristics--no trait is too small
or typical at this point. You can eliminate items later when you start building your story, but for now, create the
list and add to it as you think of new things that you are or can do.

Getting Gritty

Many college essay prompts include an opportunity to share a time in your life in which you faced adversity
and overcame it. For some students, this prompt is difficult for they have either not experienced a life-
16 1 · Getting into College

      changing setback or not considered themselves challenged. It is important to remember that any setback or
      disappointment--no matter how inconsequential it may seem to you--can be the basis for an essay that
      responds to such a prompt. There is no need to embellish the circumstance if it is truly not harrowing, but it is
      acceptable to frame the experience as something that was difficult for you. Most readers of essays are less
      looking for a made-for-Hollywood story and more wanting to see someone who has demonstrated tenacity,
      resilience, and reflection no matter how big or small the adversity is. Even if you are not required to write an
      essay on a time in your life in which you failed or experienced disappointment, having a story handy for
      interviews (for scholarships, internships, or jobs) can help you share insight into your personality and
      strengths in a succinct way.

     Finding the Themes of Your Life

      In Katharine Brooks' (2010) book You Majored in What?3 she shares a writing and reflecting activity called
      "Wandering Pathways and Butterfly Moments" that guides readers through a series of prompts to develop a
      list of life experiences for the purpose of discovering what career pathway may be most fruitful for them to
      pursue. These life experiences could be as monumental as moving to a new state and starting a new school or
      they can be as mundane as spending the summers fishing. The goal of the exercise is to record what you have
      done or what has happened to you to get a sense of a "story." These stories are built upon the connections and
      themes that you see in the experiences. Here are some of the life experiences Brooks wants you to consider
      when you are crafting your personal story.

        · What have you done during the summer or holiday breaks from school?
        · What did you play when you were a young child?
        · What are some of your major life experiences (e.g. family events such as births, deaths, marriages,

            divorces)?
        · What do people say you do well or have a talent for or seek you out for?
        · What do you consider your greatest achievements?
        · What jobs have you had?
        · What groups have you belonged to?
        · What awards have you won?
        · What lessons have you learned?
        · What do you like to do for fun?
        · What kind of "secret" talent do you have?

      The goal of answering the questions is to capture as much about who you are and how you have been shaped
      to develop clear connections among the life elements and create themes. These themes can drive your
      personal story that can share on a deeper level who you are or who you are becoming.

      Consider this scenario: Raphael has taken the time to write down his life experiences so he can build his
      personal narrative. Some of the answers to the questions above include the following:

        · Raphael's jobs: lifeguard, babysitter for his nieces and nephews, tutor, art teacher for elementary students
        · Raphael's hobbies and interests: watching old movies, volunteering at the library, creating original jewelry

            from natural objects
        · Raphael's awards and accolades: he won a writing contest in 11th grade, his friends come to him for

            advice, he has earned high grades in all of his classes
        · Raphael's major life events: parents divorced when he was 6 years old, he started a new school in junior

            high, his aunt passed away when he was 14 years old

      From this short list, Raphael can begin to draw out themes that he can use to create a detailed picture of who
      he is. He has found himself in teaching roles with his jobs. He has a love for the arts as evidenced by his
      hobbies. He is a good communicator evidenced by his awards and accolades, and relationships are an

       3 Brooks, K.(2010). You majored in what? Plume.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                    1.3 · Finding the Right "Fit" 17

important part of his life. Raphael can use those themes--and details from his experiences--to craft his story
as someone who has demonstrated an interest in connecting with and helping others by sharing his expertise
and experience.
Recognizing the themes in your life helps you to describe how you've become the person you are now, and
helps you to understand who you will become.

      "For me, becoming isn't about arriving somewhere or achieving a certain aim. I see it instead as
      forward motion, a means of evolving, a way to reach continuously toward a better self. The journey
      doesn't end"
     --former First Lady Michelle Obama, Becoming (2018)

 ANALYSIS QUESTION

  In what ways is your academic journey in high school shaping your personal narrative? Describe how the
  following experiences are helping you "become":

    · The classes that you are taking
    · The activities you participate in as part of school (e.g., sports, performing arts, etc.)
    · The learning that you are doing outside of school (e.g., community language class)
  In what ways are your personal experiences shaping your story? Describe how the following experiences
  are helping you "become":
    · Major life events
    · Favorite activities
    · Awards and accomplishments
    · Jobs or volunteer work

1.3 Finding the Right "Fit"

                             Estimated completion time: 32 minutes.

Questions to Consider:

  · What are the characteristics of different types of colleges and universities?
  · What questions should you ask yourself when researching schools?
  · What should you do when you visit a school?

Finding the right "fit" means choosing a pathway after high school that meets your current and long-term
needs. It also means feeling as if you belong and can be successful. Of course, every new college student
doubts themselves the first few weeks of the first year, but overall, a college, university, technical program, or
military experience should feel right to you, as if it will be a place that you can thrive. To help you determine if
your final choice is the right one, you need to know what your options are. This section provides you with
information about all the different ways that a college or university can provide you with an experience that
helps you succeed.

Characteristics of Colleges and Universities

The terms "college" and "university" are often used interchangeably, but it is good to know what they mean
and how diverse the options are when you are looking for the right institution of higher education. "College" is
18 1 · Getting into College

often used when the institution is smaller and only enrolls undergraduate students; community or technical
colleges enroll first- and second-year students who will go on to earn certificates or associate degrees (often
called "two-year" degrees); and liberal arts colleges enroll first-year students through seniors who will earn
bachelor's (often called "four-year") degrees. "University" is used to refer to larger institutions that offer
bachelor's degrees and master's degrees and even doctorate degrees.

Familiarizing yourself with the different characteristics of colleges and universities is the first step to making a
decision about where to apply and eventually where to go. You don't have to narrow your choice just now, but
think about which characteristics are more appealing to you and use those to determine which institutions you
will research and then consider as part of your process.

           Characteristics of Colleges and Universities, What They Mean, and Why You Need to Know

Characteristic               What It Means              Why You Need to Know

Four-year                    Offers bachelor's degrees  If you are interested in a bachelor's degree for entry into
                             (and may also offer        the job market or as a launching pad for a graduate or
                             graduate degrees)          professional degree (master's or doctorate), then a four-
                                                        year university is ideal.

Two-year                     Sometimes called a         If you are interested in a technical profession (e.g., welding
                             "junior," "technical," or  or dental hygiene) or want to complete your first two years
                             "community" college;       of general education courses before transferring to a four-
                             offers certificates,       year institution, you will want to attend a two-year school.
                             associate degrees

Small                        Student enrollment is      What it means to be a "small" school is relative, but it can
                             about 2,000 students or    mean between 200 and 2,000 students living and learning
                             fewer                      on campus. Smaller schools often feel more intimate and
                                                        you are more likely to get to know faculty and staff
                                                        personally.

Large                        Student enrollment is      Large universities often have more options for majors and
                             10,000 students or more    more student activities (and likely sports teams). A large
                                                        student body may seem to make experiences more
                                                        impersonal, but it could also offer more options for
                                                        involvement.

Public                       Funded or supported        Public institutions still charge tuition and fees, but they are
                             through the government     also supported through government funding and
                                                        appropriations, which often reduce the overall costs for
                                                        students.

Private                      Funded or supported by     Private institutions charge tuition and fees, and they also
                             private donations and      use proceeds from endowments to cover the costs, which
                             endowments                 often allows them to provide grants and scholarships to
                                                        students.

Table 1.3

Access for free at openstax.org
                                           1.3 · Finding the Right "Fit" 19

Characteristic  What It Means              Why You Need to Know

Liberal Arts    Colleges that offer small  If you are interested in a broad education that centers your
                class sizes and a program  learning on the ability to think critically and provides you
                of study that focuses on   with an opportunity to get a well-rounded education, a
                the humanities, arts,      liberal arts college may be a good choice.
                sciences, and social
                sciences.

Comprehensive   Universities that offer    Comprehensive universities often provide more options for
                liberal arts education,    different pathways to a degree such as pre-professional
                pre-professional degrees,  programs as well as traditional liberal arts majors. If you
                and graduate programs      want more choices--or are unsure of what kind of
                                           bachelor's degree you want--this may be a good choice.

Table 1.3

ACTIVITY

Review the table that provides the characteristics of colleges and universities and read the information for
each one. While thinking quickly, indicate which of the characteristics seem most promising or intriguing to
you.

  · Two-year or four-year?
  · Public or private?
  · Large or small?
  · Liberal arts or comprehensive?

Now, review your list. Take the characteristics you have chosen and put them into an internet search engine.
Choose at least two of the results and explore the information provided. At least one of the results may be a
list of institutions. If so, choose at least two from the list to explore further.

As you start the process of researching, visiting, and deciding on where to apply and eventually go to college,
you may want to revisit this section and think more about the type of institution and how it fits into your long-
term goals.

Additional Considerations

Now that you have a better understanding of the different types of schools you may attend, the next step is
thinking through additional considerations. Each institution is unique because of its mission, its student
population, programs of study, and opportunities for getting involved. Some students want to go to a college
with a high-profile sports team while others want to live and study in a specific city or area of the country. To
help you determine your best fit for a college or university, you will want to spend some time creating
questions to ask yourself, your family, your guidance counselor, and campus representatives. With these
questions in hand, you can start gathering more detailed information about the schools that you may want to
attend. Here are just a few additional areas or characteristics that you will want to consider as you do your
research.
20 1 · Getting into College

Mission of the institution

Each institution has a unique mission, and doing a little research to determine what this is will help you narrow
your college choices. For example, if it is important for you to attend a religiously-affiliated or religiously-
focused institution, reviewing the mission of the university will help you determine if the institution is a good
fit for you. Some mission statements reflect a teaching focus, which means that faculty value teaching and
learning and may offer a rich in-class experience for students; some mission statements reflect a research
focus, which means that faculty place a greater value on their research projects, which may offer a unique
experience for students who are interested in participating in the development of knowledge. Questions to
ask: What is the mission of the institutions that you are considering? How do you think the mission will affect
your experience at the institution?

Graduation rates

When you choose a college or university, you are making the commitment to graduate from that institution.
Therefore, it is important to know how well a school does when it comes to graduation rates. There are many
reasons that students may not graduate--some decide college is not the path they want to take, some transfer
to another school, and others find that putting a pause on their studies makes more sense for them. A high
graduation rate (60% or higher) usually indicates that there are many opportunities to stay on track and
graduate within four or five years. More and more institutions are providing additional support to students so
that they can graduate, so it is worth asking what measures they have in place to help. Questions to ask: What
are the institution's four-year and six-year graduation rates? What support systems does the institution have in
place to help students who struggle to graduate on time?

Cost of attendance

Cost of attendance refers to the total amount of estimated costs that you will have in college. Each institution's
costs of attendance will differ based on tuition, fees, room, and board (also known as "meals"), but many also
estimate the costs of transportation and books and supplies. For public institutions, be sure to look at the in-
state costs versus the out-of-state costs. If you attend a public school within your state, the tuition and fees
should be lower than if someone from out of state were to attend. Tuition, fees, room, and board are
institutional costs and will be paid directly to the school you attend. The personal costs are ones that you will
be responsible for and are variable, which means they will depend on your circumstances. For example, you
may not have substantial transportation costs if you are going to a school in your hometown.

Be sure to note that an estimated cost of attendance does not equal the total amount that you or family may
pay each year because it doesn't factor in scholarships, grants, loans, and direct payments. However, it does
provide you with a realistic starting point as you do more research on where you may want to attend. The table
below shows an example of the cost of attendance at an in-state university for an undergraduate student
living on campus.

                                         Cost of Attendance

                             Type  Cost  On-campus, Undergraduate, In-state

Institutional Tuition and fees $9,728

Institutional Room and board $8,684

Total Institutional                      $18,412

Table 1.4

Access for free at openstax.org
                                1.3 · Finding the Right "Fit" 21

Type            Cost            On-campus, Undergraduate, In-state
                                $1,200
Personal        Books           $1,690
                                $3,730
Personal        Transportation  $6,620
                                $25,032
Personal        Misc. expenses

Total Personal

Total Cost of Attendance

Table 1.4

To get a better sense of what you and your family may actually pay, locate the Net Price Calculator on each
institution's website. The Net Price Calculator allows you to put in specific information about your academic
credentials (e.g., test scores, high school GPA) and demographic data as well as your family's estimated
financial contributions. The result of your calculations will give you a much more realistic picture of what you
may have to pay. Questions to ask: What are my options for reducing the cost of attendance? How does the
institution help students meet the cost of attendance?

Programs of study

Programs of study refers to the types of degrees, majors, and minors that are available to you. Some
institutions provide very specialized programs while others may offer similar degrees as many other
institutions. If you have some idea of what kind of career you want or what you want to study, you can scan
the list of majors at each institution and rule out any that don't offer what you want. For example, if you want
to be a cybersecurity expert, you will want to look for programs that provide a major if not specific coursework
that would prepare you for this career. Not all institutions will have a direct pathway to certain, specialized
careers, so doing your homework by reviewing their list of majors will help you narrow down your options. If
you do not know what you want to study, you may want to look for programs of study that provide a wide
variety of choices so that you know you have options should you decide after you are enrolled. Questions to
ask: What programs of study does the institution have that set it apart from similar institutions? What are the
institution's most popular programs of study and why?

Diversity of student body

Diversity may be a relative term, but it is worth considering if you are interested in getting to know people
from different backgrounds and experiences. A student who goes to an urban, diverse, and large high school
that attracts students from different countries may find a small, rural liberal arts college in the middle of the
country less diverse while another student with a different high school experience may find the same school
much more diverse. There is more to diversity than race and ethnicity although those are two measures.. If
you are looking to live and learn amongst a wide variety of people, review the demographic data (usually on
the college's website), but also look at the faculty and staff demographic data as well as the types of clubs,
events, and organizations that are available to students. Questions to ask: What kinds of diversity will I find on
your campus? What is your commitment to supporting diverse students?

Opportunities to get involved

Don't judge a book by its cover: A small, rural, liberal arts college that is located on a mountain, an hour's drive
from a town can offer a large number of activities, organizations, clubs, and events to keep you engaged the
entire four years. Larger institutions located in metropolitan areas don't always have more opportunities.
22 1 · Getting into College

      Instead of assuming that size matters when it comes to student involvement, consider how the colleges and
      universities that you are researching address the student need to develop leadership, work within the
      community, network with alumni, and offer partner programs with other institutions. You may, for example,
      choose a college that has a strong internship program that can place you directly into the field or company
      where you want to work after graduation. Questions to ask: What unique opportunities to get involved or
      connected does your institution offer? How can a student make the most of the involvement opportunities that
      are available?

     Location and proximity to home

      You may have heard the real estate phrase "location, location, location" that reflects the importance of where a
      piece of property is relative to its value. The same may be said about colleges and universities. For some
      students, the where is as important as the what. You want to eventually work in government and politics? An
      institution close to Washington, D.C., may be a good choice for you. You want to work in the film industry? An
      institution with ties to Hollywood may be the best fit. Want to enjoy outdoor activities such as snow skiing,
      hiking, and rock climbing? An institution in Colorado or Utah may address your needs. For some students,
      moving to a different part of the country or even a different country--far away from friends and family--is
      exciting. For others, they want or need to choose a college that is close to home or within commuting distance.
      Thus, when you start to research your college options, make location an explicit part of the discussion. There
      could be added costs to moving across the country or it may affect your ability to come back home over
      holiday breaks as well as out-of-state tuition and fees. Factor in the logistics of getting there (and back) and the
      costs before you make your final decision. Questions to ask: How many of your students are at least 50 miles
      away from home? Do students stay on campus over the weekends and during breaks or do they head home?

      ANALYSIS QUESTION

        Review the following categories and determine which are the most important to you as you start to
        research college options. Describe why they are the most important:

         1. Mission
         2. Graduation rate
         3. Cost of attendance
         4. Programs of study
         5. Diversity
         6. Involvement
         7. Location

    Planning a Campus Visit

      Once you make a list of what is important to you and you start exploring the many options you have, it is time
      to consider a campus visit. The institution may offer a student preview day in which they invite high school
      juniors and seniors on campus to take tours and learn more about their programs and amenities, or you may
      be part of a group or a class that takes a field trip to local institutions to explore what they have to offer.
      Regardless of the occasion, there are some things to consider that will help you make the most of the visit. The
      more you can plan ahead--if you have the ability--for the visit, the more likely you will come away with
      valuable information. Consider the following when visiting:

        · Time of year. When you visit is important. If you visit on a holiday break or during the summer, you may
            not get an accurate feel for the campus community. Try to visit during a fall, winter, or spring term to get a
            sense of how busy the college is.

        · First impressions. What you feel when you first arrive--for good or bad--can influence how you feel

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                    1.3 · Finding the Right "Fit" 23

      about the entire visit. First impressions go a long way.
  · Are people friendly and helpful? Is it easy to navigate the campus? Can you see yourself living and

      learning there?
  · Class atmosphere. If there is an option to sit in on a class, consider doing it. You will get a feel for how

      students interact with faculty and what kinds of learning they are involved in. Don't be intimidated if the
      content or discussion seems complicated. By the time you are sitting in the same seat, you will be
      prepared.
  · Faculty/student viewpoints. Some campus visits include talks from faculty and students. Colleges often
      choose well-spoken and positive representatives who can provide you with a sense of what it is like to be a
      student. Be sure to ask about challenges that students often face and what supports are available for
      those in need of help.
  · Amenities. Chances are good that you will visit a typical residential hall room and eat a meal in the dining
      hall. These experiences are designed to give you a good idea of what it feels like to live on campus. You
      may also get a chance to tour other special amenities such as fitness facilities, grassy lawns, or hiking
      pathways. Take it all in as part of the atmosphere of the campus.
  · Campus resources. Any good tour of campus should include visits to key campus resources. Does the
      institution have a health center, tutoring lab, library facility, office of accessibility resources? All of these
      support sources will be essential to your success in and out of the classroom, so be sure to check them
      out.
  · Neighborhood. After you take a walk around campus, circle the block. Where is the campus located? Is it
      easy to access public transportation or friendly to walkers and cyclists? Do you feel safe and comfortable?
      If you have questions about navigating the area around the school, talk to students and staff about your
      concerns and ask for advice.

If you are unable to visit a campus in person, you may be able to do a "virtual" visit by scheduling a conference
call with admissions counselors, financial aid staff, faculty, and students. Some institutions provide webinars in
which you can learn more about the campus culture and ask questions of the speakers. Even if you have to
check out video, interactive maps, and social media, you may be able to get a good idea of what the
experience and opportunities can be for you. You have so many ways to explore colleges and universities
without having to set foot on the lawn, so be sure to take advantage of all that you can do to learn more.

 GET CONNECTED

  Which websites help you plan for and apply to college? There are many that can help you stay organized
  and gather information about the schools you want to consider.

    · US Department of Education's College Scorecard (https://openstax.org/l/CollegeScorecard) allows you
        to search colleges and universities based on a variety of characteristics such as fields of study,
        graduation rates, and costs and then compare the results.

    · College Board's Big Future (https://openstax.org/l/BigFuture) provides a wide variety of resources for
        you and your family to explore how to plan for college, pay for college, and explore careers.

    · College Board's Calculate Your Costs (https://openstax.org/l/BigFutureCaclculateCosts) shows you how
        to determine what you are likely to pay to go to college.
24 1 · Getting into College

    1.4 Applying for College and Making Your Decision

                                                                                                        Estimated completion time: 14 minutes.

      Questions to Consider:
        · What is the process for applying to college?
        · What do I need to consider when making a decision about what college to attend?

      In the previous sections in this chapter, you learned about the types of colleges and universities and what to
      consider as you begin researching where you would like to go. This section focuses on the steps for applying
      to college and what you can do to prepare to make an informed decision. No matter how many months or
      years you have before you enroll in a college or university, you can start now to get organized and prepare.

       Figure 1.4 Getting organized is crucial to keeping track of all the parts of the application process. Consider creating a spreadsheet to
       track multiple applications or place key documents in folders and keep them where you can find them easily. (credit: "Hands of a
       woman writing notes in her planner at home." by Nenad Stojkovic/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

    Getting Your Application Ready

      The first step to applying to college involves getting organized. You may want to use a spreadsheet or a series
      of online folders to keep track of your applications, resumes, and essays, but you can also use the old-
      fashioned paper folders. As long as you faithfully place your important documents within the folders, it doesn't
      matter whether you store them.

     Personal Information

      Collecting information about your activities and accomplishments is the first step in getting ready to apply. You
      may even consider creating a resume that lists your personal information along with your activities, leadership
      positions, and awards. While not all applications require a formal resume, creating one can help you capture
      what you have been doing over the past four years and help you stay organized. Because you may be applying
      for scholarships, grants, college admissions, and even internships or other selective programs, it will be
      important to maintain a list of not only what you have accomplished, but also what you have gained from
      those experiences. Consider creating a table, such as Table 1.5 below, to help you capture your achievements
      as well as the effect they have had on you.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                            1.4 · Applying for College and Making Your Decision 25

                         Achievement                                           Impact

  Made the varsity basketball team in 10th  Showed me that dedicating myself to practicing and
  grade                                     improving can pay off

  Selected to represent school in regional  Allowed me to get outside my comfort zone and hone my
  debate tournament                         speaking skills

Table 1.5

Transcripts

Official high school transcripts are records of the courses you have taken and the grades you have earned.
They also include your high school GPA (at the time) as well as your class rank. Colleges will need your official
transcript prior to admitting you. Oftentimes, your high school guidance counselor submits your transcripts on
your behalf and usually before your final semester in high school is complete. Thus, colleges will be judging
you for admissions and scholarships based on your 9th, 10th, 11th, and part of 12th grade work. When you
request that your transcripts be sent to colleges and universities be sure to build in enough time for the
transcript to get there, double check the correct address of the registrar's office at the campus, and be sure
you are requesting an official transcript, which may be sealed or stamped to guarantee its authenticity. Even
though you will likely be admitted to college based on an incomplete high school transcript, your ability to
enroll in classes will depend on your final, official transcript that will be sent after you graduate. Those last few
weeks of the semester matter!

Test Scores

In the past few years, more and more schools are dropping admission requirements for SAT and ACT (or
equivalent) scores; however, many still require that you submit them to be considered for scholarships or
before you enroll. This can be good news for students who feel that standardized test scores are not a true
reflection on their abilities or potential. Taking the SAT or ACT may still provide you with an advantage when
applying for college. Be sure, though, to read each institution's policies and deadlines for submitting scores
should you want them as part of your application package. In some cases, institutions that were test score
optional for a few years may decide to return to requiring test scores.

Essays

Many college admissions and scholarship applications require an essay. Even if the essay is considered
optional, you are better off submitting one. A well-written, authentic essay can help the reader get to know
you in ways that your list of accomplishments cannot. As mentioned above, your personal story helps to show
who you are. Think of the essay as the color and shape to a picture of who you are. There are many ways that
you can approach the college essay, but here are some simple rules to follow to ensure that, at the very least,
the essay is easy to read, clearly written, and a true representation of who you are:

  · Read the prompt. And then probably read it again. Make sure you understand what the instructions are
      and you follow them completely.

  · Note the word count. All essay prompts will include a maximum (and some cases a minimum) word
      count. The word count is used to help you focus and the fewer the words, the more you need to make
      each word count.

  · Open with a hook. Your first few sentences should entice, or hook, the reader to continue reading. The
      reader of your essay will no doubt have read tens if not hundreds of essays and won't spend much time on
      yours if it doesn't grab them within the first few seconds of reading.

  · Be specific. As writing professors often tell their students: Show, don't tell. This means that you should
26 1 · Getting into College

            provide vivid details. If you were disappointed that you didn't make the soccer team, then write about the
            knot in your stomach and the red splotches on your cheeks when you realized you lost a chance to play
            your senior year.
        · Be authentic. Always, always write your own essay using the words that you would use. You don't have to
            write fancy, long sentences with big words. Concise and clear--and authentic--are always preferable. And
            you don't have to experience extreme adversity to share a compelling story about how you overcame a
            challenge.
        · Check your work. Read it aloud and share it with others who can help proofread and catch any spelling or
            grammatical errors.

     Recommendation Letters

      Recommendation letters will be a necessary component of your application, especially if you are also applying
      for scholarships. Most of the time, you can ask high school teachers if they would be willing to write you a
      good letter of recommendation. You may also consider asking adults who lead organizations that you have
      participated in. For example, a coach, youth group leader, or community service coordinator may be willing to
      write you a detailed letter that attests to your attitude and work ethic. When you ask for a recommendation,
      consider the following as ways to ensure that the letters are high quality and completed on time:

        · Ask someone who knows you well. You don't have to be the varsity captain or class valedictorian to get a
            good letter of recommendation, but you do need to be visible to the person you are asking. This means
            that they know who you are and have observed your best characteristics. This will allow them to write a
            specific, detailed and positive letter.

        · Ask someone you can rely on. Be sure that if you ask someone to write a letter of recommendation that
            you can rely on them to do so in a timely manner.

        · Hand them your resume. One way to help someone write a good letter of recommendation is to hand
            them a resume or a list of your accomplishments.

        · Give them "focus" points. Share with the recommender what you need them to focus on in their letter. Is
            it academic ability or leadership qualities? Be sure to give them specific guidelines especially if the
            application requires them to.

        · Share all the details. Your letter writer will need to know what, when, where, and how to submit the
            letter. The more details, the more likely you will get the letter you need. For example, your letter writer
            may need to submit the recommendation on school letterhead and postmark it by a certain date. Or they
            may be required to submit an electronic evaluation of you that will be sent to their email address.

        · Keep it confidential. Letters of recommendation should be confidential unless otherwise stated. Don't
            ask to read the letter or keep a copy unless it is required as part of the application process. Some letter
            writers may want to share the recommendations with you or allow you to save a copy in case you need it
            for something else; of course, if the recommender suggests it and it does not violate a rule of the
            application process, you can do so.

        · Show gratitude. Last but not least, when someone writes a letter of recommendation for you, provide a
            statement of thanks. You can express your gratitude in a note card (preferable), through an email, or in
            person. Be sure to tell the writer that you appreciate the time they took to communicate your strengths.

     Application Fees

      Most colleges and universities require that you submit an application fee--$25 to almost $100. Applying to
      several schools can add up quickly. Some institutions offer fee waivers for low-income or first-generation
      college students, for example, or provide an "admission fee waiver" day when you can apply for no charge on a
      designated date. Talk to your guidance counselor or speak to an admissions officer at the institution to see if
      the schools you are applying to offer free or reduced fees.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                               1.4 · Applying for College and Making Your Decision 27

 THE REAL DEAL

  "I wish I had known the reality of how much college costs and the resources needed to meet those
  demands. My freshman year I received some money in Pell-grants and financial aid, I didn't have
  scholarships because I hadn't applied because I thought that my grades in high school weren't good
  enough (NEWSFLASH: there are scholarships for more than just good grades). About 2 weeks before the
  start of the school year, I realized that I would have to pay $800 my first day and nearly $1,000 per month.
  And I sure did pay about $7,000 my freshman year of college, all earned from my two jobs. It was extremely
  hard, but I did it! I also learned about financial help that you could receive through the university without
  federal or private loans. My advice is before applying to a college consider the price and reach out to the
  university to see what more financial help you're eligible to receive. When making a decision whether to go
  to college, decide the primary area you want to go into career wise. College is beneficial but not for
  everyone. However, if you're considering going to college, but the stress of money or the amount of work is
  keeping you from applying, there are tons of things to help with those things on college campuses. I'm not
  going to lie, college is challenging but the experiences and knowledge that you could gain is worth it. If I
  can do it, anyone can!"

  --Lulu Leon, sophomore

Making Decisions about College

You may feel relieved when you submit all your application materials and ready to wait for the offers to roll in.
But the process has just started. You will soon need to review your acceptances (in addition to waitlists and
rejections) to determine what the institution requires you to do to move forward. Typically, May 1 is considered
"National Decision Day," so you may find that you have only a few weeks to determine your next steps. This
section provides an overview of the multiple considerations you will need to make before you can start classes
as a college student.

Determining Next Steps

The days of simply being accepted or rejected are over. Because of the exponential increase in the number of
students applying to multiple colleges, more and more institutions are placing qualified applicants on waitlists,
or a list of applicants that may be admitted if students who have been accepted decline their spot in the next
college class. In some cases, applicants are not waitlisted exactly, but are granted admission that is contingent
on their first attending another school such as a community college and transferring in.

  · Accepted. Review all the information regarding deadlines for accepting admission, financial aid, and
      housing (if you are living on campus). You will need to formally accept the offer of admission and may
      need to pay a deposit to secure residential housing.

  · Waitlisted. Determine where you are on the waitlist (some institutions provide you with your number on
      the list) and how likely you would be to accept admission should you get off the waitlist. If you don't want
      to attend the school, be sure to let the institution know to take you off the waitlist. There are no hard and
      fast rules about being waitlisted and it is nearly impossible to predict if you will get a chance to be
      admitted eventually. Your chances may increase after May 1 and the closer you get to the start of classes.
      At some point, however, you may want to move on.

  · Offered Delayed Enrollment. This option is becoming more common as a way for institutions to increase
      student enrollment at times, usually the second and third years, when students often leave. Review the
      length of the delay as it could be one semester, one year, or two years as well as the requirements that will
      guarantee that you are eventually accepted. Do you need to enroll at any other institution or a satellite
      campus? Do you need to earn a certain number of credit hours and GPA?
28 1 · Getting into College

  · Rejected. Even if you are rejected, you will want to ensure that you have read all the information about
      what you may be able to do should you want to reapply. Some institutions allow prospective students to
      appeal their rejection, but require them to complete the appeal by a certain date. The student may also
      have to write a statement as to why they are appealing the rejection as well as specific documentation
      such as a letter of recommendation.

Calculating Costs

In an earlier section, you learned about the cost of attendance and how to calculate net price. Once you get an
acceptance letter, you will also be given a financial aid package to review. This will contain the information
about scholarships, grants, loans, and other methods of paying your bill and provide you with a more realistic
picture of what you will owe. The table below shows the net price, or the price you will likely pay, after you
calculate the financial aid that you will receive. Institutions that may seem out of reach because of high tuition
and fees may actually be your most affordable option because of the amount of scholarship and grant aid that
they offer. Before you make any decisions, carefully review both the total estimated costs as well as the total
estimated financial aid that you are offered.

Type                                    Cost       On-campus, Undergraduate, In-state

Institutional                    Tuition and fees  $9,728

Institutional                    Room and board    $8,684

Total Institutional                                $18,412

Personal                         Books             $1,200

Personal                         Transportation    $1,690

Personal                         Misc. expenses    $3,730

Total Personal                                     $6,620

Total Cost of Attendance                           $25,032

Financial Aid Type                                 Amount

Pell grant                                         $6,400

State scholarship                                  $2,500

Institutional scholarship                          $7,400

Work-study                                         $4,000

Total Amount of Aid                                $20,300

Net Price (Cost of Attendance - Aid) $5,032

Table 1.6

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                               1.4 · Applying for College and Making Your Decision 29

Reviewing Programs of Study

Before you make your final decision, take one more look at the programs of study that the institution offers.
Do they have the major that you are most interested in? Or do they have enough options that you feel you can
find something that will fit your long-term plans? If you have been accepted to multiple institutions, you will
want to review your notes and impressions on many different aspects of the experience, but subjects you can
study will most likely be an important part of your decision. Reach back out to professors, advisors, or students
to ask for clarification if you have any lingering questions.

Meeting Pre-Enrollment Requirements

When you get that acceptance letter and let the institution know you are going to be enrolling in a few short
months, you will determine what else you will need to do. For sure, you will need to submit a final transcript
after you graduate; you may also need to provide test scores or updated test scores if you need them before
registering for courses; you may need to register for advising and orientation; and you may also need to
choose a housing option, select a roommate, and pay a deposit for housing or a fee for summer events. You
will most likely not have to pay your bill until you get much closer to the beginning of the semester.
Nonetheless, be sure you are aware of the upcoming deadlines for completing important tasks including
paying for college.

Dealing with Uncertainty and Disappointment

In an earlier section, you learned about handling setbacks and obstacles, and the same advice will hold true if
you find that your hopes and dreams for life after high school are dashed because you didn't get accepted to
your first choice or the financial aid you are offered doesn't meet your needs. If you had hoped to attend a
specific school and are not able to, take some time to reflect on the experience, talk with friends and family
about how you feel, and focus on the pathways that are open to you. You will find a way forward and it may be
better than you could have imagined.

Making your final decision doesn't have to be so, well, final. You still have the opportunity to make a change up
until classes start. This is not to say that there may not be consequences when you change your mind at the
last minute, but you do have the power to go in a different direction. In the few months between graduation
and starting your first year of college, you may experience a change of heart or your family situation may
change drastically. If something influences your decision in this way, always reach out to the institution first to
talk through your options as soon as possible. In some cases, you may need to drop classes and officially
unenroll or cancel housing. You can then use the steps outlined above to start the process anew.
30 1 · Family & Friends Matter

    Family & Friends Matter

JT is reapplying to college after taking a break to work and earn enough money to pay his expenses. The work
that he does now is not challenging and certainly not what he wants to do the rest of his life. Although, he is
not sure what he wants to do--maybe something in health care or in finance. Either way, he wants to make
more money so he can afford the things he wants most: a house, a new car, and the ability not to worry about
how to afford all of life's surprises.

His family and friends, however, are having a hard time understanding why he wants to go to college. They all
live in a small community and help each other out when needed. They don't see why JT wants to go to college
even if it means he could get a job that he really enjoys and makes him money. They are afraid he will change,
maybe even not want to maintain a relationship with them, and they have been very vocal about their lack of
support.

When JT makes the decision to apply and asks a close friend for help with the application, his friend tells him
that he is not going to help him because he doesn't support his decision; his friend is concerned they won't
have time to hang out like they do now. He then asks his family if he could move in with them while he goes to
college so he can save some of the money he earns to pay for his expenses. They, too, refuse to help him
because they think he would be burdening them.

Let's Think About It

JT has several options. Think through the consequences of each one, and choose the best option or create
your own option.

  · JT tells his family and family that he needs to make this decision for himself and doesn't appreciate their
      negative feedback.

  · JT explains why he wants to go to college and what he thinks it would do for him in terms of a career and
      life that he wants and acknowledges that they may not be supportive, but he hopes they will be some day.

  · JT promises his family that he will keep them up to date on what he is doing and why, and he will also
      make his best effort to stay connected to them and help them when needed.

Let's Talk About It

JT's dilemma regarding whether or not to apply to college may be something you are considering as well. You
may be thinking, "Is it better to work now and attend later or not attend at all?" Here are some suggestions for
communicating with others about the dilemma that JT is facing.

  · "I have been working for a few years now, and I have a better idea of what I want to do for a career; a
      degree will help me achieve a long-term goal."

  · "I know you may be disappointed that you won't be able to see me as often as usual, but the degree will
      take only a few years and then I can participate more in family events."

  · "While earning a degree may change me in certain ways, I am committed to maintaining our relationships
      and hope that you will grow and change with me."

    Summary

This chapter provides an overview of the benefits of college or how college can shape you into an educated
person. Next, the chapter introduces strategies for creating your unique story from your academic and
personal journeys, which will help you craft the narratives needed for college applications. The chapter also
describes different types of institutions for the purpose of helping you determine what kinds of colleges and
universities are the right "fit" for your needs. The chapter ends with the steps to applying to college and
making an informed decision.

Now that you have read and reflected on the main ideas of the chapter, consider developing a plan to help you

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                  1 · Summary 31

prepare for applying to college. Review the list below and commit to working on one or more of the concepts
this term and beyond.

  · Research the types of institutions that you may want to attend. List the characteristics of each that you are
      considering and ask yourself what the benefits and drawbacks are for each.

  · Begin to craft your personal story by making a list of your unique characteristics and experiences. Use
      these details to write essays about how you are and what you want to become.

  · Create a net-price spreadsheet of the colleges you want to attend. Use their Tuition and Fees Calculator
      and their Net Price Calculators to determine the estimates of what you may be paying to attend.

  · Organize your application process by creating folders and keeping track of your correspondence with the
      institutions.
32 1 · Summary
Access for free at openstax.org
2 · Introduction                                                                                                             33

2
           Transitioning to College

Figure 2.1 When you choose to go to college, you are making a key decision about your future. (Credit: Germanna CC / Flickr
Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC-BY 2.0))

Chapter Outline

  2.1 Why College?
  2.2 The First Year of College Will Be an Experience
  2.3 College Culture and Expectations
  2.4 It's All in the Mindset

      Introduction

 STUDENT STORY

  Ana is excited to start college a few hours from her home. Even though she knows only a few people from
  her high school who have enrolled, she realizes quickly that she is starting over with new friends, a new
  routine, and a whole new experience that is nothing like high school.
  During the first few weeks, she has trouble finding her classes and getting to them on time because they
  are across campus from each other. She feels underprepared in some of her classes. The professor speaks
  quickly and covers lots of information in a short amount of time. Even though she's always done well in
  school, the amount of information and the speed at which it comes at her, makes her doubt herself.
  She also notices that she has a harder time getting to know people. Her classmates rarely chat before or
  after class and everyone in her residence hall is busy with activities and seem to have found friends.
  Ana calls home and tells her family about her feelings. While they encourage her to stick it out, they also
  offer to let her come back home and drop out if she needs to. Ana doesn't want to do that because she
  really likes her freedom and being on her own, but she is worried that things won't get better.
  What Do You Think?
34 2 · Transitioning to College

          · If you were Ana, what would you do in this situation?
          · What would you do to meet people and make friends if you were shy when everyone else seems

              connected?
          · How would you manage the feelings of being overwhelmed in classes?
          · How do you feel about being on your own in college? Why do you feel this way?

    Student Survey

      How do you feel about your ability to meet the expectations of college? These questions will help you
      determine how the chapter concepts relate to you right now. As we are introduced to new concepts and
      practices, it can be informative to reflect on how your understanding changes over time. Take this quick survey
      to figure it out, ranking questions on a scale of 1--4, 1 meaning "least like me" and 4 meaning "most like me."
      Don't be concerned with the results. If your score is low, you will most likely gain even more from this book.
      1. I am fully aware of the expectations of college and how to meet them.
      2. I know why I am in college and have clear goals that I want to achieve.
      3. Most of the time, I take responsibility for my learning new and challenging concepts.
      4. I feel comfortable working with faculty, advisors, and classmates to accomplish my goals.
      You can also take the Chapter 2 survey (https://openstax.org/l/collegeconcisesurvey01) anonymously online.

       STUDENT PROFILE

        As students transition to college, responsibility is an inherent component of self-advocacy. As someone
        accepted on full funding to a 4-year university, but whose life's circumstances disallowed attending college
        until years later, I used to dream of a stress-free college life. The reality is, college can be a meaningful
        place, but it can also be challenging and unpredictable. The key is to be your own best advocate, because
        no one else is obliged to advocate on your behalf.
        "When I began my community college studies, I knew what I wanted to do. Cybersecurity was my passion,
        but I had no understanding of how credits transfer over to a 4-year university. This came to haunt me later,
        after I navigated the complex processes of transferring between two different colleges. Not everyone
        involved volunteers information. It is up to you, the student, to be the squeaky wheel so you can get the
        grease. Visit office hours, make appointments, and schedule meetings with stakeholders so that you are
        not just buried under the sheaf of papers on someone's desk."
        --Mohammed Khalid, University of Maryland

    About This Chapter

      In this chapter, you will learn about what you can do to get ready for college. By the time you complete this
      chapter, you should be able to do the following:

        · Recognize the purpose and value of college.
        · Describe the transitional experience of the first year of college.
        · Discuss how to handle college culture and expectations.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               2.1 · Why College? 35

· List the benefits of adopting a learning mindset.

Reginald                                              Madison

Reginald has, after much thought and with a           It has been only three months since Madison
high level of family support, decided to enroll in    graduated from high school. She graduated in the top
college. It has been a dream in the making, as        10 percent of her class, and she earned college credit
he was unable to attend immediately after high        while in high school. She feels academically prepared,
school graduation. Instead, he worked several         and she has a good sense of what degree she wants to
years in his family's business, got married, had a    earn. Since Madison was 5 years old, she's wanted to be
son, and then decided that he didn't want to          an engineer because she loved building things in the
spend the rest of his life regretting that he didn't  backyard with her father's tools. He always encouraged
get a chance to follow his dreams of becoming a       her to follow her dreams, and her whole family has
teacher. Because it has been almost a decade          been supportive of her hobbies and interests. However,
since he sat in a classroom, he is worried about      Madison is concerned that her choice of major will keep
how he will fit in as an adult learner returning to   her from dance, creative writing, and other passions.
college. Will his classmates think he is too old?     Furthermore, Madison is heading to a distant college
Will his professors think he is not ready for the     with no other people she knows. Will she be able to find
challenges of college work? Will his family get       new friends quickly? Will her engineering classes crush
tired of his long nights at the library and his new   her or motivate her to complete college? Will she be
priorities? There is so much Reginald is unsure       able to explore other interests? Madison has a lot on
of, yet he knows it's a step in the right direction.  her mind, but she aims to face these challenges head-
                                                      on.

While Reginald and Madison have had different experiences before and certainly have different motivations
for enrolling in college, they have quite a bit in common. They are both committed to this new chapter in their
lives, and they are both connected to their families in ways that can influence their commitment to this pursuit.
What they don't know just yet--because they haven't started their classes--is that they will have even more in
common as they move through each term, focus on a major, and plan for life after graduation. And they have a
lot in common with you as well because you are in a similar position--starting the next chapter of the rest of
your life.

In this chapter, you will first learn more about identifying the reason you are in college. This is an important
first step because knowing your why will keep you motivated. Next, the chapter will cover the transitions that
you may experience as a new college student. Then, the chapter will focus on how you can acclimate to the
culture and meet the expectations--all of which will make the transition to a full-fledged college student easier.
Adopting a learning mindset is covered next and will provide you with research-based information that can
help you develop the beliefs and habits that will result in success. Finally, the chapter will provide you with
strategies for overcoming the challenges that you may face by providing information about how to find and
access resources.

 2.1 Why College?

                                                                                                  Estimated completion time: 22 minutes.

Questions to Consider:

  · Why are you in college?
36 2 · Transitioning to College

        · What are the rewards and value of a college degree?
      This chapter started with the profiles of two students, Reginald and Madison, but now we turn to who you are
      and why you are going to college. Starting this chapter with you, the student, seems to make perfect sense.
      Like Reginald and Madison, you are probably full of emotions as you begin a journey toward a degree and the
      fulfillment of a dream. Are you excited about meeting new people and finally getting to take classes that
      interest you? Are you nervous about how you are going to handle your courses and all the other activities that
      come along with being a college student? Are you thrilled to be making important decisions about your future?
      Are you worried about making the right choice when deciding on a major or a career? All these thoughts, even
      if contradictory at times, are normal. And you may be experiencing several of them at the same time.

       Figure 2.2 Decision-making about college and our future can be challenging, but with self-analysis and support, you can feel more
       confident and make the best choices. (Credit: SJU Undergraduate Admissions / Flickr Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC-BY 2.0))

    Why Are You in College?

      We know that college is not mandatory--like kindergarten through 12th grade is--and it is not free. You are
      making a choice to commit several years of hard work to earn a degree or credential. In some cases, you may
      have had to work really hard to get to this point by getting good grades and test scores in high school and
      earning money to pay for tuition and fees and other expenses. Now you have more at stake and a clearer path
      to achieving your goals, but you still need to be able to answer the question.
      To help answer this question, consider the following questioning technique called "The Five Whys" that was
      originally created by Sakichi Toyoda, a Japanese inventor, whose strategy was used by the Toyota Motor
      Company to find the underlying cause of a problem. While your decision to go to college is not a problem, the
      exercise is helpful to uncover your underlying purpose for enrolling in college.
      The process starts with a "Why" question that you want to know the answer to. Then, the next four "Why"
      questions use a portion of the previous answer to help you dig further into the answer to the original
      question. Here is an example of "The Five Whys," with the first question as "Why are you in college?" The
      answers and their connection to the next "Why" questions have been underlined so you can see how the
      process works.
      While the example is one from a student who knows what she wants to major in, this process does not require
      that you have a specific degree or career in mind. In fact, if you are undecided, then you can explore the "why"
      of your indecision. For example, you may consider the following "Why" questions: Is it because you have lots of
      choices, or is it because you are not sure what you really want out of college?

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                  2.1 · Why College? 37

                         The Five Whys in Action

Why are you in college?                          I am in college to earn a degree in speech pathology.

Why do you want to earn a degree in speech       I want to be able to help people who have trouble
pathology?                                       speaking.

Why do you want to help people who have trouble  I believe that people who have trouble speaking
speaking?                                        deserve a life they want.

Why do you feel it is important that people who  I feel they often have needs that are overlooked and
have trouble speaking deserve a life they want?  do not get treated equally.

Why do you want to use your voice to help these  I feel it is my purpose to help others achieve their
people live a life they deserve?                 full potential despite having physical challenges.

Do you see how this student went beyond a standard answer about the degree that she wants to earn to
connect her degree to an overall purpose that she has to help others in a specific way? Had she not been
instructed to delve a little deeper with each answer, it is likely that she would not have so quickly articulated
that deeper purpose. And that understanding of "why" you are in college--beyond the degree you want or the
job you envision after graduation--is key to staying motivated through what will most likely be some
challenging times.

How else does knowing your "why," or your deeper reason for being in college, help you? According to Angela
Duckworth (2016), a researcher on grit--what it takes for us to dig in deep when faced with adversity and
continue to work toward our goal--knowing your purpose can be the booster to grit that can help you
succeed.1 Other research has found that people who have a strong sense of purpose are less likely to
experience stress and anxiety (Burrow, 2013)2 and more likely to be satisfied in their jobs (Weir, 2013).3
Therefore, being able to answer the question "Why are you in college?" not only satisfies the person asking,
but it also has direct benefits to your overall well-being. But don't worry if you don't know your purpose, or
why, for being in college just yet. You can use your time taking classes and developing relationships to figure it
out.

 ACTIVITY

  Try "The Five Whys" yourself in the table below to help you get a better sense of your purpose and to give
  you a worthy answer for anyone who asks you "Why are you in college?"

1 Duckworth, A. (2016). Grit: The Power and Passion of Perseverance. NY: Simon & Schuster.
2 Burrow, A.L. & Hill, P.L. (2013). Derailed by diversity? Purpose buffers the relationship between ethnic composition on trains and
passenger negative mood. Personality and Psychology Bulletin, 39 (12), 1610-1619. https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167213499377.
3 Weir, K. (2013). More than job satisfaction: Psychologists are discovering what makes work meaningful--and how to create value in
any job. American Psychological Association, 44 (11), 39.
38 2 · Transitioning to College

                                 The Five Whys: Your Turn

                                 Why are you in college? I am in college to . . .

                                 Why do you . . .  I . . .

                                 Why do you . . .  I . . .

                                 Why do you . . .  I . . .

                                 Why do you . . .  I . . .

What Are the Rewards and Value of a College Degree?

Once you have explored your "why" for enrolling in college, it may be worth reviewing what we know about the
value of a college degree. There is no doubt you know people who have succeeded in a career without going
to college. Famous examples of college dropouts include Bill Gates (the cofounder and CEO of Microsoft) and
Ellen DeGeneres (comedian, actor, and television producer, among her many other roles).

These are two well-known, smart, talented people who have had tremendous success on a global scale. They
are also not the typical profile of a student who doesn't finish a degree. For many students, especially those
who are first-generation college students, a college degree helps them follow a career pathway and create a
life that would not have been possible without the credential. Even in this time of rapid change in all kinds of
fields, including technology and education, a college degree is still worth it for many people.

Consider the following chart that shows an average of lifetime earnings per level of education. As you can see,
the more education you receive, the greater the increase in your average lifetime earnings. Even though a
degree costs a considerable amount of money on the front end, if you think about it as an investment in your
future, you can see that college graduates receive a substantial return on their investment. To put it into more
concrete terms, let's say you spend $100,000 for a four-year degree (Don't faint! That is the average sticker cost
of a four-year degree at a public university if you include tuition, fees, room, and board). The return on
investment (ROI) over a lifetime, according to the information in the figure below, is 1,500%! You don't have to
be a financial wizard to recognize that a 1,500% return is fantastic.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                  2.1 · Why College? 39

Figure 2.3 Every education level brings with it potential for greater lifetime earnings and employment opportunities. These are
simply averages and may not apply to all career types and individuals. For clarity, the "professional degree," attaining the highest
earnings, refers to degrees such as those given to doctors or lawyers, and the doctoral degree refers to a Ph.D. (Credit: U.S. Bureau
of Labor Statistics, Current Population Survey))

Making more money over time is not the only benefit you can earn from completing a college degree. College
graduates are also more likely to experience the following:

  · Greater job satisfaction. That's right! College graduates are more likely to get a job that they like or to
      find that their job is more enjoyable than not.

  · Better job stability. Employees with college degrees are more likely to find and keep a job, which is
      comforting news in times of economic uncertainty.

  · Improved health and wellness. College graduates are less likely to smoke and more likely to exercise and
      maintain a healthy weight.

  · Better outcomes for the next generation. One of the best benefits of a college degree is that it can have
      positive influences for the graduate's immediate family and the next generations.

One last thing: There is some debate as to whether a college degree is needed to land a job, and there are
certainly jobs that you can get without a college degree. However, there are many reasons that a college
degree can give you an edge in the job market. Here are just a few reasons that graduating with a degree is
still valuable:

  · More and more entry-level jobs will require a college degree. According to Georgetown University's Center
      on Education and the Workforce, in 2020, 35% of jobs will require a college degree.4

  · A credential from a college or university still provides assurance that a student has mastered the material.
      Would you trust a doctor who never went to medical school to do open-heart surgery on a close relative?
      No, we didn't think so.

  · College provides an opportunity to develop much-needed soft skills. The National Association of Colleges
      and Employers has identified eight career-readiness competencies that college students should develop:
      critical thinking/problem solving, oral/written communication, teamwork/collaboration, digital technology,
      leadership, professionalism/work ethic, career management, and global/intercultural fluency.5 There are
      few occasions that will provide you the opportunity to develop all these skills in a low-stakes environment
     (i.e., without the fear of being fired!). You will learn all of this and more in your classes. Seems like a great
     opportunity, doesn't it? If you find yourself asking the question "What does this course have to do with my

4 Carnevale, A.P., Smith, N., & Strohl, J. (2013). Recover: Job growth and education requirements through 2020. Georgetown
University's Center on Education and the Workforce. Retrieved from https://cew.georgetown.edu/cew-reports/recovery-job-growth-
and-education- requirements-through-2020/.
40 2 · Transitioning to College

           major?" or "Why do I have to take that?" challenge yourself to learn more about the course and look for
            connections between the content and your larger educational, career, and life goals.

      ANALYSIS QUESTION

        In what ways will earning a college degree be valuable to you now and in the future? Be sure to describe
        the financial, career, and personal benefits to earning a college degree.

    2.2 The First Year of College Will Be an Experience

                                                                                                        Estimated completion time: 14 minutes.

      Questions to Consider:

        · How will you adjust to college?
        · What are the common college experiences you will have?

    Adjustments to College Are Inevitable

      College not only will expand your mind, but it may also make you a little uncomfortable, challenge your
      identity, and at times, make you doubt your abilities. It is hard to truly learn anything without getting messy.
      This is what education does: it transforms us. For that to happen, however, means that we will need to be open
      to the transformation and allow the changes to occur. Flexibility, transition, and change are all words that
      describe what you will experience. Laurie Hazard and Stephanie Carter (2018)6 use the word adjustment.
      Hazard and Carter (2018) believe there are six adjustment areas that first-year college students experience:
      academic, cultural, emotional, financial, intellectual, and social. Of course, you won't go through these
      adjustments all at once or even in just the first year. Some will take time, while others may not even feel like
      much of a transition. Let's look at them in brief as a way of preparing for the road ahead:

        · Academic adjustment. No surprises here. You will most likely--depending on your own academic
            background--be faced with the increased demands of learning in college. This could mean that you need
            to spend more time learning to learn and using those strategies to master the material.

        · Cultural adjustment. You also will most likely experience a cultural adjustment just by being in college
           because most campuses have their own language (syllabus, registrar, and office hours, for example) and
            customs. You may also experience a cultural adjustment because of the diversity that you will encounter.
            Most likely, the people on your college campus will be different than the people at your high school--or at
            your workplace.

        · Emotional adjustment. Remember the range of emotions presented at the beginning of the chapter?
            Those will likely be present in some form throughout your first weeks in college and at stressful times
            during the semester. Knowing that you may have good days and bad--and that you can bounce back from
            the more stressful days--will help you find healthy ways of adjusting emotionally.

        · Financial adjustment. Most students understand the investment they are making in their future by going
            to college. Even if you have all your expenses covered, there is still an adjustment to a new way of thinking
            about what college costs and how to pay for it. You may find that you think twice about spending money
            on entertainment or that you have improved your skills in finding discounted textbooks.

       5 National Association of Colleges and Employers. (2019). Career readiness defined. Retrieved from https://www.naceweb.org/
       career-readiness/competencies/career-readiness-defined/.
       6 Hazard, L., & Carter, S. (2018). A framework for helping families understand the college transition. E-Source for College Transitions,
       16(1), 13-15.

       Access for free at openstax.org
              2.2 · The First Year of College Will Be an Experience 41

  · Intellectual adjustment. Experiencing an intellectual "a-ha!" moment is one of the most rewarding parts
      of college, right up there with moving across the graduation stage with a degree in hand. Prepare to be
      surprised when you stumble across a fascinating subject or find that a class discussion changes your life.
      At the very least, through your academic work, you will learn to think differently about the world around
      you and your place in it.

  · Social adjustment. A new place often equals new people. But in college, those new relationships can have
      even more meaning. Getting to know professors not only can help you learn more in your classes, but it
      can also help you figure out what career pathway you want to take and how to get desired internships and
      jobs. Learning to reduce conflicts during group work or when living with others helps build essential
      workplace and life skills.

Table 2.1 provides a succinct definition for each of the areas as well as examples of how you can demonstrate
that you have adjusted. Think about what you have done so far to navigate these transitions in addition to
other things you can do to make your college experience a successful one.

What Is It?   Students exhibit it when they:

Academic      · Take an active role in learning.
              · Attain college-level learning strategies.
              · Are open to feedback and change.
              · Make adjustments to learning strategies as needed.

Cultural      · Accepts and welcome differences in others.
              · Recognize their own cultural identity.
              · Seek opportunities to explore other cultures.

Emotional     · Readily handle the stressors of college life.
              · Develop emotional coping strategies.
              · Seek support from campus resources.

Financial     · Manage money independently.
              · Recognize the costs of college.
              · Explore job and aid opportunities.

Intellectual  · Engage in intellectual discussions.
              · Are open to new ideas, subject areas, and career choices.
              · Integrate new ideas into belief systems.

Social        · Join a club or organization.
              · From supportive, healthy relationships.
              · Understand the impact of peer pressure.
              · Manage conflict in relationships.

                   Table 2.1 Six Areas of Adjustment for First-Year College Students. (Credit: Based on work by
                   Laurie Hazard, Ed.D., and Stephanie Carter, M.A.)

"Experiencing an intellectual `a-ha!' moment is one of the most rewarding parts of college, right
up there with moving across the graduation stage with a degree in hand."
42 2 · Transitioning to College

ANALYSIS QUESTION

Which of the six areas of adjustment do you think will be the least challenging for you, and which do you
think will be most challenging? What can you do now to prepare for the more challenging transitions?

2.3 College Culture and Expectations

                                      Estimated completion time: 32 minutes.

Questions to Consider:

  · What language and customs do you need to know to succeed in college?
  · What is the hidden curriculum?
  · What is your responsibility for learning in college?
  · What resources will you use to meet these expectations?
  · What are the common challenges in the first year?

College Has Its Own Language and Customs

Going to college--even if you are not far from home--is a cultural experience. It comes with its own language
and customs, some of which can be confusing or confounding at first. Just like traveling to a foreign country, it
is best if you prepare by learning what words mean and what you are expected to say and do in certain
situations.

Let's first start with the language you may encounter. In most cases, there will be words that you have heard
before, but they may have different meanings in a college setting. Take, for instance, "office hours." If you are
not in college, you would think that it means the hours of a day that an office is open. If it is your dentist's
office, it may mean Monday through Friday from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. In college, "office hours" can refer to the
specific hours a professor is in her office to meet with students, and those hours may be only a few each day:
for example, Mondays and Wednesdays from 1 p.m. until 3 p.m.

"Syllabus" is another word that you may not have encountered, but it is one you will soon know very well. A
syllabus is often called the "contract of the course" because it contains information about what to
expect--from the professor and the student. It is meant to be a roadmap for succeeding in the class.
Understanding that office hours are for you to ask your professor questions and the syllabus is the guide for
what you will be doing in the class can make a big difference in your transition to college. The table on
Common College Terms, below, has a brief list of other words that you will want to know when you hear them
on campus (see Table 2.2).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                           2.3 · College Culture and Expectations 43

            Common College Terms, What They Mean, and Why You Need to Know

Term        What It Means                  Why You Need to Know

Attendance  A policy that describes the    Professors will have different attendance expectations. Read
policy      attendance and absence         your syllabus to determine which ones penalize you if you
            expectations for a class       miss too many classes.

Final exam  A comprehensive                If your class has a final exam, you will want to prepare for it
            assessment that is given at    well in advance by reading assigned material, taking good
            the end of a term              notes, reviewing previous tests and assignments, and
                                           studying.

Learning    The process of acquiring       In college, most learning happens outside the classroom.
            knowledge                      Your professor will only cover the main ideas or the most
                                           challenging material in class. The rest of the learning will
                                           happen on your own.

Office      Specific hours the             Visiting your professor during office hours is a good way to
hours       professor is in the office to  get questions answered and to build rapport.
            meet with students

Plagiarism  Using someone's words,         Plagiarism carries much more serious consequences in
            images, or ideas as your       college, so it is best to speak to your professor about how to
            own, without proper            avoid it and review your student handbook's policy.
            attribution

Study       The process of using           Studying in college may look different than studying in high
            learning strategies to         school in that it may take more effort and more time to learn
            understand and recall          more complex material.
            information

Syllabus    The contract of a course       The syllabus will provide valuable information that your
            that provides information      professor will assume you have read and understood. Refer to
            about course expectations      it first when you have a question about the course.
            and policies

Table 2.2

ACTIVITY

The language that colleges and universities use can feel familiar but mean something different, as you
learned in the section above, and it can also seem alien, especially when institutions use acronyms or
abbreviations for buildings, offices, and locations on campus. Terms such as "quad" or "union" can denote a
location or space for students. Then there may be terms such as "TLC" (The Learning Center, in this
example) that designate a specific building or office. Describe a few of the new terms you have encountered
so far and what they mean. If you are not sure, ask your professor or a fellow student to define it for you.
44 2 · Transitioning to College

In addition to its own language, higher education has its own way of doing things. For example, you may be
familiar with what a high school teacher does, but do you know what a professor does? It certainly seems like
they fulfill a very similar role as teachers in high school, but in college, professors' roles are often much more
diverse. In addition to teaching, they may also conduct research, mentor graduate students, write and review
research articles, serve on and lead campus committees, serve in regional and national organizations in their
disciplines, apply for and administer grants, advise students in their major, and serve as sponsors for student
organizations. You can be assured that their days are far from routine. See the table below for just a few
differences between high school teachers and college professors.

                                 Differences Between High School and College Faculty

           High School Faculty              College Faculty

Often have degrees or certifications in     Most likely have not even taken a course in teaching as part
teaching in addition to degrees in subject  of their graduate program
matter

Responsibilities include maximizing         Responsibilities include providing students with content and
student learning and progress in a wide     an assessment of their mastery of the content
array of areas

Are available before or after school or     Are available during office hours or by appointment if a
during class if a student has a question    student needs additional instruction or advice

Communicate regularly and welcome           Cannot communicate with parents and families of students
questions from parents and families about   without permission because of the Federal Educational Rights
a student's progress                        and Privacy Act (FERPA)

Table 2.3

The relationships you build with your professors will be some of the most important ones you create during
your college career. You will rely on them to help you find internships, write letters of recommendation,
nominate you for honors or awards, and serve as references for jobs. You can develop those relationships by
participating in class, visiting during office hours, asking for assistance with coursework, requesting
recommendations for courses and majors, and getting to know the professor's own academic interests. One
way to think about the change in how your professors will relate to you is to think about the nature of
relationships you have had growing up. In Figure 2.4 You and Your Relationships Before College you will see a
representation of what your relationships probably looked like. Your family may have been the greatest
influencer on you and your development.

      "The relationships you build with your professors will be some of the most important ones
      during your college career."

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                    2.3 · College Culture and Expectations 45

                                                        Figure 2.4 You and Your Relationships Before College

In college, your networks are going to expand in ways that will help you develop other aspects of yourself. As
described above, the relationships you will have with your professors will be some of the most important. But
they won't be the only relationships you will be cultivating while in college. Consider Figure 2.5, You and Your
Relationships During College, and think about how you will go about expanding your network while you are
completing your degree.

                                                        Figure 2.5 You and Your Relationships During College

Your relationships with authority figures, family, and friends may change while you are in college, and at the
very least, your relationships will expand to peer networks--not friends, but near-age peers or situational
peers (e.g., a first-year college student who is going back to school after being out for 20 years)--and to faculty
and staff who may work alongside you, mentor you, or supervise your studies. These relationships are
important because they will allow you to expand your network, especially as it relates to your career. As stated
earlier, developing relationships with faculty can provide you with more than just the benefits of a mentor.
Faculty often review applications for on-campus jobs or university scholarships and awards; they also have
connections with graduate programs, companies, and organizations. They may recommend you to colleagues
or former classmates for internships and even jobs.
Other differences between high school and college are included in Table 2.4, Differences between High School
and College. Because it is not an exhaustive list of the differences, be mindful of other differences you may
notice. Also, if your most recent experience has been the world of work or the military, you may find that there
are more noticeable differences between those experiences and college.
46 2 · Transitioning to College

                                 Differences Between High School and College

           High School                     College                     Why You Need to Know the
                                                                                   Difference

Grades     Grades are made up of           Grades are often made up    You will need to be prepared to
           frequent tests and              of fewer assignments,       earn high grades on all
           homework, and you may be        and initial low grades may  assignments because you may
           able to bring up a low initial  keep you from earning       not have the opportunity to
           grade by completing smaller     high course grades at the   make up for lost ground.
           assignments and bonuses.        end of the semester.

Learning   Learning is often done in       Learning happens mostly     You will need to practice
           class with the teacher          outside of class and on     effective learning strategies on
           guiding the process, offering   your own. Faculty are       your own to ensure that you are
           multiple ways to learn          responsible for assigning   mastering material at the
           material and frequent           material and covering the   appropriate pace.
           quizzes to ensure that          most essential ideas; you
           learning is occurring.          are responsible for
                                           tracking and monitoring
                                           your learning progress.

Getting    Your teachers, parents, and a   You will most likely need   Because the responsibility is on
Help       counselor are responsible for   help to complete all your   you, not parents or teachers, to
           identifying your need for       courses successfully even   get the help you need, you will
           help and for creating a plan    if you did not need extra   want to be aware of when you
           for you to get help with        help in high school. You    may be struggling to learn
           coursework if you need it.      will be responsible for     material. You then will need to
           Extra assistance is usually     identifying that you need   know where the support can be
           reserved for students who       it, accessing the           accessed on campus or where
           have an official diagnosis or   resources, and using        you can access support online.
           need.                           them.

Tests      Tests cover small amounts of    Tests are fewer and cover   This change in how much
and        material and study days or      more material than in       material and the depth of which
Exams      study guides are common to      high school. If you read    you need to know the material is
           help you focus on what you      all the assigned material,  a shock for some students. This
           need to study. If you pay       take good notes in class,   may mean you need to change
           attention in class, you should  and spend time practicing   your strategies dramatically to
           be able to answer all the       effective study             get the same results.
           questions.                      techniques, you should be
                                           able to answer all the
                                           questions.

Table 2.4

Access for free at openstax.org
           2.3 · College Culture and Expectations 47

Some of What You Will Learn Is "Hidden"

Many of the college expectations that have been outlined so far may not be considered common knowledge,
which is one reason that so many colleges and universities have classes that help students learn what they
need to know to succeed. The term hidden curriculum, which was coined by sociologists,7 describes
unspoken, unwritten, or unacknowledged (hence, hidden) rules that students are expected to follow that can
affect their learning.

Situation: According to your syllabus, your history professor is lecturing on the chapter that covers the stock
market crash of 1929 on Tuesday of next week.

Sounds pretty straightforward. Your professor lectures on a topic and you will be there to hear it. However,
there are some unwritten rules, or hidden curriculum, that are not likely to be communicated. Can you guess
what they may be?

  · What is an unwritten rule about what you should be doing before attending class?
  · What is an unwritten rule about what you should be doing in class?
  · What is an unwritten rule about what you should be doing after class?
  · What is an unwritten rule if you are not able to attend that class?

Some of your answers could have included the following:

Before     Review your course syllabus or planner to determine what is being covered, read the assigned
class:     chapter, take notes, record any questions you have about the reading

During     Focus your attention on the lecture, discussion, or activity and put away any distractions, take
class:     detailed notes, ask critical thinking or clarifying questions, avoid distractions, bring your book
           and your reading notes

After      Review what you learned in that class and connect it to other class lectures or discussions,
class:     organize your notes in relation to your other notes, start the studying process by testing yourself
           on the material, make an appointment with your professor if you are not clear on a concept

Absent:    Avoid asking your professor "Did I miss anything important?", communicate with the professor,
           get notes from a classmate, make sure you did not miss anything important in your notes

Table 2.5

The expectations before, during, and after class, as well as what you should do if you miss class, are often
unspoken because many professors assume you already know and do these things or because they feel you
should figure them out on your own. Nonetheless, some students struggle at first because they don't know
about these habits, behaviors, and strategies. But once they learn them, they are able to meet them with ease.

Working Within the Hidden Curriculum

The first step in dealing with the hidden curriculum is to recognize it and understand how it can influence your
learning. After any specific situation has been identified, the next step is to figure out how to work around the
circumstances to either take advantage of any benefits or to remove any roadblocks. Let's review some other
ways that you may encounter the hidden curriculum.

Prevailing Opinions. Simply put, you are going to encounter instructors and learning activities that you
sometimes agree with and sometimes do not. The key is to learn from them regardless. In either case, take
ownership of your learning and even make an effort to learn about other perspectives, even if it is only for

7 P.P. Bilbao, P. I. Lucido, T. C. Iringan and R. B. Javier. (2008). Curriculum Development.
48 2 · Transitioning to College

your own education on the matter. There is no better time to expose yourself to other opinions and
philosophies than in college. In fact, many would say that this is a significant part of the college experience.
With the right mindset, it is easy to view everything as a learning opportunity.

Classroom Circumstances. These kinds of circumstances often require a more structured approach to turn
the situation to your advantage, but they also usually have the most obvious solutions. In a large class, you
might find yourself limited in the ability to participate in classroom discussions because of so many other
students. The way around that would be to speak to several classmates and create your own discussion group.
You could set up a time to meet, or you could take a different route by using technology such as an online
discussion board, a Zoom session, or even a group text. Several of the technologically-based solutions might
even be better than an in-class discussion since you do not all have to be present at the same time. The
discussion can be something that occurs all week long, giving everyone the time to think through their ideas
and responses.

Again, the main point is to first spot those things in the hidden curriculum that might put your learning at a
disadvantage and devise a solution that either reduces the negative impact or even becomes a learning
advantage.

Learning Is Your Responsibility

As you may now realize by reviewing the differences between high school and college, learning in college will
be your responsibility. Before you read about the how and why of being responsible for your own learning,
complete the Activity below.

 ACTIVITY

For each statement, circle the number that best represents you, with 1 indicating that the statement is least
like you, and 5 indicating that the statement is most like you.

Most of the time, I can motivate myself to complete tasks even if they are boring or challenging.

           1                     2  3                                  4             5

I regularly work hard when I need to complete a task no matter how small or big the task may be.

           1                     2  3                                  4             5

I use different strategies to manage my time effectively and minimize procrastination to complete tasks.

           1                     2  3                                  4             5

I regularly track my progress completing work and the quality of work I do produce.

           1                     2  3                                  4             5

I believe how much I learn and how well I learn is my responsibility.

           1                     2  3                                  4             5

Table 2.6

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               2.3 · College Culture and Expectations 49

Were you able to mark mostly 4s and 5s? If you were even able to mark at least one 4 or 5, then you are well
on your way to taking responsibility for your own learning. Let's break down each statement in the
components of the ownership of learning:

  · Motivation. Being able to stay motivated while studying and balancing all you have to do in your
      classes will be important for meeting the rest of the components.

  · Deliberate, focused effort. Taking ownership of learning will hinge on the effort that you put into the
      work. Because most learning in college will take place outside of the classroom, you will need
      determination to get the work done. And there will be times that the work will be challenging and
      maybe even boring, but finding a way to get through it when it is not exciting will pay in the long run.

  · Time and task management. You will learn more about strategies for managing your time and the
      tasks of college in a later chapter, but without the ability to control your calendar, it will be difficult to
      block out the time to study.

  · Progress tracking. A commitment to learning must include monitoring your learning, knowing not
     only what you have completed (this is where a good time management strategy can help you track
     your tasks), but also the quality of the work you have done.

Taking responsibility for your learning will take some time if you are not used to being in the driver's seat.
However, if you have any difficulty making this adjustment, you can and should reach out for help along the
way.

What to Expect During the First Year

While you may not experience every transition within your first year, there are rhythms to each semester of the
first year and each year you are in college. Knowing what to expect each month or week can better prepare
you to take advantage of the times that you have more confidence and weather through the times that seem
challenging. Review the table on First-Year College Student Milestones. There will be milestones each semester
you are in college, but these will serve as an introduction to what you should expect in terms of the rhythms of
the semester.

                  First-Year College Student Milestones for the First Semester

August            September                   October          November         December

Expanding social  Completing first test and   Feeling more     Balancing        Focusing on
circles           projects                    confident        college with     finishing strong
                                              about abilities  other
                                                               obligations

Experiencing      Earning "lower-than-usual"  Dealing with     Staying          Handling additional
homesickness or   grades or not meeting       relationship     healthy and      stress of the end of
imposter          personal expectations       issues           reducing         the semester
syndrome                                                       stress

Adjusting to the  Learning to access          Planning for     Thinking         Thinking about the
pace of college   resources for support       next             about majors     break and how to
                                              semester and     and degrees      manage changes
                                              beyond

Table 2.7 While each student's first semester will differ, you will likely experience some of the following typical college milestones.
50 2 · Transitioning to College

      The first few weeks will be pretty exhilarating. You will meet new people, including classmates, college staff,
      and professors. You may also be living in a different environment, which may mean that a roommate is
      another new person to get to know. Overall, you will most likely feel both excited and nervous. You can be
      assured that even if the beginning of the semester goes smoothly, your classes will get more challenging each
      week. You will be making friends, learning who in your classes seem to know what is going on, and figuring
      your way around campus. You may even walk into the wrong building, go to the wrong class, or have trouble
      finding what you need during this time. But those first-week jitters will end soon. Students who are living away
      from home for the first time can feel homesick in the first few weeks, and others can feel what is called
      "imposter syndrome," which is a fear some students have that they don't belong in college because they don't
      have the necessary skills for success. Those first few weeks sound pretty stressful, but the stress is temporary.

      After the newness of college wears off, reality will set in. You may find that the courses and assignments do
      not seem much different than they did in high school (more on that later), but you may be in for a shock when
      you get your graded tests and papers. Many new college students find that their first grades are lower than
      they expected. For some students, this may mean they have earned a B when they are used to earning As, but
      for many students, it means they may experience their first failing or almost-failing grades in college because
      they have not used active, effective study strategies; instead, they studied how they did in high school, which is
      often insufficient. This can be a shock if you are not prepared, but it doesn't have to devastate you if you are
      willing to use it as a wake-up call to do something different.

      By the middle of the semester, you'll likely feel much more confident and a little more relaxed. Your grades are
      improving because you started tutoring and using better study strategies. You are looking ahead, even beyond
      the first semester, to start planning your courses for the next term. If you are working while in college, you
      may also find that you have a rhythm down for balancing it all; additionally, your time management skills have
      likely improved.

      By the last few weeks of the semester, you will be focused on the increasing importance of your assignments
      and upcoming finals and trying to figure out how to juggle that with the family obligations of the impending
      holidays. You may feel a little more pressure to prepare for finals, as this time is often viewed as the most
      stressful period of the semester. All of this additional workload and need to plan for the next semester can
      seem overwhelming, but if you plan ahead and use what you learn from this chapter and the rest of the
      course, you will be able to get through it more easily.

      THE REAL DEAL

        "Advice that I wished I had known prior to starting college: Do not be afraid of being open to new
        experiences and opportunities. Your time in college is meant for exploration. Being open to things like
        meeting new people, having new ideas, and seeking new activities helps make the transition into college a
        little easier. Do not be afraid of stepping out of your comfort zone and just embrace the opportunities that
        come your way. If you are struggling with transitioning to college, do not hesitate to reach out for help.
        Most colleges have resources, such as counseling services, that can help you with your needs. Everyone
        experiences the transition to college differently, and it is okay to take a longer time than others to adjust to
        the new lifestyle. If you put in effort towards having a good transition to college by doing things like getting
        involved in campus organizations, finding friends, and asking for help when needed, then your time at
        college will be a more eventful and memorable experience."

        --William Kyle, junior

    Don't Do It Alone

      Think about our earlier descriptions of two students, Reginald and Madison. What if they found that the first

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     2.3 · College Culture and Expectations 51

few weeks were a little harder than they had anticipated? Should they have given up and dropped out? Or
should they have talked to someone about their struggles? Here is a secret about college success that not
many people know: successful students seek help. They use resources. And they do that as often as necessary
to get what they need. Your professors and advisors will expect the same from you, and your college will have
all kinds of offices, staff, and programs that are designed to help. This bears calling out again: you need to use
those resources. These are called "help-seeking behaviors," and along with self-advocacy, which is speaking up
for your needs, they are essential to your success. As you get more comfortable adjusting to life in college, you
will find that asking for help is easier. In fact, you may become really good at it by the time you graduate, just
in time for you to ask for help finding a job! Review the table on Issues, Campus Resources, and Potential
Outcomes for a few examples of times you may need to ask for help. See if you can identify where on campus
you can find the same or a similar resource.

           Issues, Campus Resources, and Potential Outcomes

Type       Issue                                      Campus         Potential Outcome
                                                      Resource

Academic   You are struggling to master the           The campus     A peer or professional tutor can
           homework in your math class.               tutoring       walk you through the steps until
                                                      center         you can do them on your own.

Health     You have felt extremely tired over the     The campus     A licensed professional can
           past two days and now you have a           health center  examine you and provide care.
           cough.

Social     You haven't found a group to belong to.    Student        Becoming a member of a group
           Your classmates seem to be going in        organizations  on campus can help you make
           different directions and your roommate     and interest   new friends.
           has different interests.                   groups

Financial  Your scholarship and student loan no       Financial aid  A financial aid counselor can
           longer cover your college expenses. You    office         provide you with information
           are not sure how to afford next semester.                 about your options for meeting
                                                                     your college expenses.

Table 2.8

APPLICATION

Using a blank sheet of paper, write your name in the center of the page and circle it. Then, draw six lines
from the center (see example in the figure below) and label each for the six areas of adjustment that were
discussed earlier. Identify a campus resource or strategy for making a smooth adjustment for each area.
52 2 · Transitioning to College

         Figure 2.6 For each of the six adjustment areas mentioned above--Academic, Cultural, Emotional, Financial, Intellectual, and
         Social--identify a campus resource or strategy that will aid you in making a smooth adjustment.

    Common Challenges in the First Year

      It seems fitting to follow up the expectations for the first year with a list of common challenges that college
      students encounter along the way to a degree. If you experience any--or even all--of these, the important
      point here is that you are not alone and that you can overcome them by using your resources. Many college
      students have felt like this before, and they have survived--even thrived--despite them because they were
      able to identify a strategy or resource that they could use to help themselves. At some point in your academic
      career, you may do one or more of the following:
      1. Feel like an imposter. There is actually a name for this condition: imposter syndrome. Students who feel

            like an imposter are worried that they don't belong, that someone will "expose them for being a fake." This
            feeling is pretty common for anyone who finds themselves in a new environment and is not sure if they
           have what it takes to succeed. Trust the professionals who work with first-year college students: you do
           have what it takes, and you will succeed. Just give yourself time to get adjusted to everything.
      2. Worry about making a mistake. This concern often goes with imposter syndrome. Students who worry
            about making a mistake don't like to answer questions in class, volunteer for a challenging assignment,
            and even ask for help from others. Instead of avoiding situations where you may fail, embrace the process
            of learning, which includes--is even dependent on--making mistakes. The more you practice courage in
            these situations and focus on what you are going to learn from failing, the more confident you become
            about your abilities.
      3. Try to manage everything yourself. Even superheroes need help from sidekicks and mere mortals.
            Trying to handle everything on your own every time an issue arises is a recipe for getting stressed out.
            There will be times when you are overwhelmed by all you have to do. This is when you will need to ask for
            and allow others to help you.
      4. Ignore your mental and physical health needs. If you feel you are on an emotional rollercoaster and
            you cannot find time to take care of yourself, then you have most likely ignored some part of your mental
            and physical well-being. What you need to do to stay healthy should be non-negotiable. In other words,
            your sleep, eating habits, exercise, and stress-reducing activities should be your highest priorities.
      5. Forget to enjoy the experience. Whether you are 18 years old and living on campus or 48 years old
            starting back to college after taking a break to work and raise a family, be sure to take the time to remind
            yourself of the joy that learning can bring.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                             2.4 · It's All in the Mindset 53

GET CONNECTED

Which apps help you meet the expectations of college? Will you be able to meet the expectations of being
responsible for your schedule and assignments?

  · My Study Life (https://openstax.org/l/mystudylife) understands how college works and provides you
      with a calendar, to-do list, and reminders that will help you keep track of the work you have to do.

How can you set goals and work toward them while in college?

  · The Strides (https://openstax.org/l/stridesapp) app provides you with the opportunity to create SMART
      (Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Relevant, and Time bound) goals and track daily habits. These daily
      habits will add up over time toward your goals.

What can you do to develop your learning skills?

  · Lumosity (https://openstax.org/l/lumosity) is a brain-training app that can help you build the thinking
      and learning skills you will need to meet learning challenges in college. If you want to test your
      memory and attention--and build your skills--take the fit test and then play different games to
      improve your fitness.

How can you develop networks with people in college?

  · LinkedIn (https://openstax.org/l/linkedincom) is a professional networking app that allows you to
      create a profile and network with others. Creating a LinkedIn account as a first-year college student will
      help you create a professional profile that you can use to find others with similar interests.

  · Internships.com (https://openstax.org/l/internships) provides information, connections, and support to
      help your career planning and activities. Even if you are not planning an internship right away, you may
      find some useful and surprising ideas and strategies to motivate your approach.

2.4 It's All in the Mindset

                             Estimated completion time: 14 minutes.

Questions to Consider:

  · What is a growth mindset, and how does it affect my learning?
  · What are performance goals versus learning goals?

In the previous sections in this chapter, you learned about the differences between high school and college
and what to expect from your course work, professors, and classmates. There is one more element of the
experience that will improve your ability to meet the expectations and new challenges: Your belief in your
abilities to learn, grow, and change. No doubt that you have enrolled in college because you want to do those
very things, but it is easy to get discouraged and revert to old ways of thinking about your abilities if you are
not mindful of what kinds of thoughts you have about yourself. This section covers the concept of a fixed
mindset, or the belief that you are born with certain unchangeable talents, and growth mindset, or the belief
that with effort you can improve in any area. Understanding the role that your beliefs play in the eventual
outcomes of your learning can help you get through those challenges that you may encounter.
54 2 · Transitioning to College

       Figure 2.7 Many fields of study and work create intersections of growth and fixed mindset. People may feel great ability to grow and
       learn in some areas, like art and communication, but feel more limited in others, such as planning and financials. Recognizing these
       intersections will help you approach new topics and tasks, such as working with new classmates on projects in your chosen field..
       (Credit: Lynccoff Games / Flickr Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC-BY 2.0))

    Performance vs. Learning Goals

      Much of our ability to learn is governed by our motivations and goals. Sometimes hidden goals or mindsets
      can impact the learning process. In truth, we all have goals that we might not be fully aware of, or if we are
      aware of them, we might not understand how they help or restrict our ability to learn. An illustration of this
      can be seen in a comparison of a student that has performance-based goals with a student that has
      learning-based goals.
      If you are a student with strict performance goals, your primary psychological concern might be to appear
      intelligent to others. At first, this might not seem to be a bad thing for college, but it can truly limit your ability
      to move forward in your own learning. Instead, you would tend to play it safe without even realizing it. For
      example, a student who is strictly performance-goal-oriented will often only say things in a classroom
      discussion when they think it will make them look knowledgeable to the instructor or their classmates.
      Likewise, a performance-oriented student might ask a question that they know is beyond the topic being
      covered (e.g., asking about the economics of Japanese whaling while discussing the book Moby Dick in an
      American literature course). Rarely will they ask a question in class because they actually do not understand a
      concept. Instead they will ask questions that make them look intelligent to others or in an effort to "stump the
      teacher." When they do finally ask an honest question, it may be because they are more afraid that their lack of
      understanding will result in a poor performance on an exam rather than simply wanting to learn.
      If you are a student who is driven by learning goals, your interactions in classroom discussions are usually
      quite different. You see the opportunity to share ideas and ask questions as a way to gain knowledge quickly.
      In a classroom discussion you can ask for clarification immediately if you don't quite understand what is being
      discussed. If you are a person guided by learning goals, you are less worried about what others think since you
      are there to learn and you see that as the most important goal.
      Another example where the difference between the two mindsets is clear can be found in assignments and
      other coursework. If you are a student who is more concerned about performance, you may avoid work that is
      challenging. You will take the "easy A" route by relying on what you already know. You will not step out of your
      comfort zone because your psychological goals are based on approval of your performance instead of being
      motivated by learning.
      This is very different from a student with a learning-based psychology. If you are a student who is motivated by
      learning goals, you may actively seek challenging assignments, and you will put a great deal of effort into
      using the assignment to expand on what you already know. While getting a good grade is important to you,

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                      2.4 · It's All in the Mindset 55

what is even more important is the learning itself.

If you find that you sometimes lean toward performance-based goals, do not feel discouraged. Many of the
best students tend to initially focus on performance until they begin to see the ways it can restrict their
learning. The key to switching to learning-based goals is often simply a matter of first recognizing the
difference and seeing how making a change can positively impact your own learning.

What follows in this section is a more in-depth look at the difference between performance- and learning-
based goals. This is followed by an exercise that will give you the opportunity to identify, analyze, and
determine a positive course of action in a situation where you believe you could improve in this area.

Fixed vs. Growth Mindset

The research-based model of these two mindsets and their influence on learning was presented in 1988 by
Carol Dweck. In Dweck's work, she determined that a student's perception about their own learning
accompanied by a broader goal of learning had a significant influence on their ability to overcome challenges
and grow in knowledge and ability. This has become known as the Fixed vs. Growth Mindset model. In this
model, the performance-goal-oriented student is represented by the fixed mindset, while the learning-goal-
oriented student is represented by the growth mindset.

In the following graphic, based on Dr. Dweck's research, you can see how many of the components associated
with learning are impacted by these two mindsets.
56 2 · Transitioning to College

       Figure 2.8 The differences between fixed and growth mindset are clear when aligned to key elements of learning and personality.
       (Credit: Based on work by Dr. Carol Dweck)

    The Growth Mindset and Lessons About Failing

      Something you may have noticed is that a growth mindset would tend to give a learner grit and persistence. If
      you had learning as your major goal, you would normally keep trying to attain that goal even if it took you
      multiple attempts. Not only that, but if you learned a little bit more with each try you would see each attempt
      as a success, even if you had not achieved complete mastery of whatever it was you were working to learn.
      With that in mind, it should come as no surprise that Dweck found that those people who believed their
      abilities could change through learning (growth vs. a fixed mindset) readily accepted learning challenges and
      persisted despite early failures.

    Improving Your Ability to Learn

      As strange as it may seem, research into fixed vs. growth mindset has shown that if you believe you can learn

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              2.4 · It's All in the Mindset 57

something new, you greatly improve your ability to learn. At first, this may seem like the sort of feel-good
advice we often encounter in social media posts or quotes that are intended to inspire or motivate us (e.g.,
believe in yourself!), but in looking at the differences outlined between a fixed and a growth mindset, you can
see how each part of the growth mindset path can increase your probability of success when it comes to
learning.

 ACTIVITY

Very few people have a strict fixed or growth mindset all of the time. Often we tend to lean one way or
another in certain situations. For example, a person trying to improve their ability in a sport they enjoy may
exhibit all of the growth mindset traits and characteristics, but they find themselves blocked in a fixed
mindset when they try to learn something in another area like computer programming or arithmetic.

In this exercise, do a little self-analysis and think of some areas where you may find yourself hindered by a
fixed mindset. Using the outline presented below, in the far right column, write down how you can change
your own behavior for each of the parts of the learning process. What will you do to move from a fixed to a
growth mindset? For example, say you were trying to learn to play a musical instrument. In the Challenges
row, you might pursue a growth path by trying to play increasingly more difficult songs rather than sticking
to the easy ones you have already mastered. In the Criticism row, you might take someone's comment
about a weakness in timing as a motivation for you to practice with a metronome. For Success of Others
you could take inspiration from a famous musician that is considered a master and study their techniques.

Whatever it is that you decide you want to use for your analysis, apply each of the Growth characteristics to
determine a course of action to improve.

Parts of the learning  Growth characteristic                  What will you do to adopt a
         process                                                     growth mindset?

Challenges             Embraces challenges

Obstacles              Persists despite setbacks

Effort                 Sees effort as a path to success

Criticism              Learns from criticism

Success of Others      Finds learning and inspiration in the
                       success of others

Table 2.9
58 2 · Family & Friends Matter

    Family & Friends Matter

Ana is the first in her family to go to college and they have been mostly supportive of her decision to go to
college. She enjoys texting and calling them almost every day, and they like hearing what she is doing. She
especially likes video-chatting with her younger brother. He had a hard time when she left, because he relied
on her to help him with his homework.

Because she is having a hard time during the first few weeks of class, she has shared with her parents that she
doesn't feel like she fits in and feels like she has made a bad decision. At first her parents encouraged her to
stay and join an organization to meet other people. "It will take some time to get used to being away, but it will
get better," they assured her. After some time, Ana began to feel better about being away and started making
friends in her classes.

When Ana calls to check on her brother at mid-term, her parents tell her that her father has been very sick,
and has had to take time off work. Her mother has not been able to care for him and her little brother at the
same time as her father needs daily treatments and weekly doctor's appointments. Between his being off work
and the mounting costs of his treatment, the family is concerned about being able to pay for Ana's college
expenses. They ask Ana if she can come home for a few weeks to take her brother to school and help around
the house, and want to talk to her about what to do next semester.

Let's Think About It

Ana has several options. Think through the consequences of each one, and choose the best option or create
your own option.

  · Ana goes home immediately and stays with her family until they no longer need her, even if that means
      she misses her classes and does not complete any work.

  · Ana meets with her professors and asks if she can stay on top of her work until she gets back, and then
      she heads home with her books and laptop.

  · Ana explains to her parents that if she leaves during the middle of the semester, she may jeopardize her
      progress so far, earn bad grades, and lose her scholarship, so she tells them she cannot do that.

Let's Talk About It

Ana's situation--having to make a choice about whether to continue her studies or focus on a personal
matter--is not unusual. You may also experience tension pulling you in different directions. Here are some
strategies for communicating what you need to make the best choice based on Ana's dilemma:

  · "I know that this is important to our family, and I want to be there to help, but I need to check with my
      professors about what they will allow me to do. The work I have done so far may be wasted if I just leave
      without sharing my plans and figuring out a way to stay on top of my work."

  · "I am worried about dad's health, and I would like to come home over the weekend to check in with
      everyone and see what I can do to help find additional support when I have to go back to school."

  · "What kind of compromise can we make so that you get the support you need and I can stay focused on
      the work I have to do before the end of the semester?"

Whatever choice you would make in this situation, it is always best to communicate clearly your needs, your
concerns, and even your uncertainties.

    Summary

This chapter provides an introduction to the transition to college by first asking "Why are you in college?"
Understanding your "why" and what a college degree can do for you is the foundation of making a smooth
transition. These experiences are part of being in college, and this chapter provides you with information
about what to expect and how to handle the changes you will go through.

Access for free at openstax.org
                        2 · Checking In: Your College Readiness Checklist 59

Now that you have read and reflected on the main ideas of the chapter, consider developing a plan to help you
achieve college success by considering what you want to know more about that could help you? Review the list
below and commit to working on one or more of the concepts this term and beyond.

  · Research the long-term value of your college major or degree. Look at potential careers associated with
      your major and reflect on what you will learn during college that will help you with your career.

  · Identify the hidden curriculum or unwritten rules at your institution. What do your professors expect but
      don't explicitly state? What are your strategies for uncovering the hidden curriculum during your college
      experience?

  · Create a list of resources to help you in college. Choose one or more to use this term to engage and
      determine how well the resource helped you with a challenge.

  · Reflect on the occasions in which you have exhibited a fixed mindset. What will you commit to doing that
      would help you exhibit a growth mindset?

    Checking In: Your College Readiness Checklist

Fall

                                                                       9th Grade

                   Consider signing up for the PSAT 8/9 (https://satsuite.collegeboard.org/psat-8-9) in the
                   fall. While taking the PSAT 8/9 isn't necessary, it gives you experience with standardized testing
                   and an official score report that can guide your future studying.

                   Create a college-friendly email address. Create a new email account using your first and last
                   name and graduation date (e.g., JaneSmith2024@email.com). Then use it exclusively for
                   college-related communications, like test scores, scholarships, and marketing materials from
                   colleges.

                   Create a college binder. Start saving and documenting things that will be useful for college
                   and scholarship applications, like transcripts, community service hours (including dates and
                   contact information), letters of recommendation, and usernames and passwords.

                   Introduce yourself to your school counselor and your college and career center counselor.
                   You'll need their help often over the next few years. Check in with them regularly to ensure
                   you're making college-ready decisions.

Table 2.10

            10th Grade

            Apply for scholarships. Plenty of scholarships are available for high school students of any
            grade level. Talk to your guidance counselor for suggestions. Start applying to some now!

            Create a MyACT Profile (https://www.act.org/content/act/en/myact-profile.html) and a
            College Board (SAT) (https://cbaccount.collegeboard.org/iamweb/smartRegister) account.
            Even if you're not ready to take the ACT or SAT yet, creating these accounts will ensure you get
            reminders about upcoming tests and useful college and career planning strategies.

Table 2.11
60 2 · Checking In: Your College Readiness Checklist

            Take a personality assessment. Learn more about your strengths, opportunities for
            improvement, preferred learning styles, and strategies for approaching challenges. See if your
            school offers assessments like the ASVAB (Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery) or
            YouScience, or find a free one online.

            Get involved in your school and community. Try something new and join some clubs or
            sports. You never know where you might find a new passion or hobby -- or even a lead on a
            potential major or career.

Table 2.11

                                                               11th Grade

            Add ACT (https://www.act.org/) and SAT (https://satsuite.collegeboard.org/) dates (and
            registration deadlines) to your calendar. Think about which ones you'll want to take. Consider
            opting out of sending your scores to specific colleges when you register; instead, you may want
            to see your scores before you decide to send them.

            Set your priorities. Junior year is busy, and it's easy to get overwhelmed. If you're feeling
            stressed, sit down with someone and walk through your obligations, set priorities, and make a
            plan for getting things done. This is a skill you'll rely on in college, so practice it now!

            Sign up to take the PSAT/NSMQT (https://satsuite.collegeboard.org/psat-nmsqt) in
            October. This test qualifies juniors for the National Merit Scholarship. If you're aiming for a high
            score and potential scholarship opportunities, start (or keep) prepping.

            Attend college visits on your high school campus. Meet college reps when they visit your
            high school and talk with them about what they're looking for in a student and what they can
            offer you.

Table 2.12

                                                               12th Grade

            Check your applicant portals regularly. Most colleges will ask for missing items (e.g., test
            scores, recommendations, transcripts), provide updates on your decision status, and deliver
            other important updates via their applicant portals.

            Complete the FAFSA (https://studentaid.gov/h/apply-for-aid/fafsa) and CSS Profile
            (https://profile.collegeboard.org/profile/profiledirect/index.aspx), if applicable. The Free
            Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) lets you apply for federal student aid, including
            federal grants, work-study funds, and loans. Some schools also use the CSS Profile to award
            nonfederal institutional aid. Both applications open Oct. 1.

Table 2.13

Access for free at openstax.org
            2 · Checking In: Your College Readiness Checklist 61

            Keep prepping for (and taking) the ACT or SAT. Improving your score could make you eligible
            for increased merit scholarships and could boost your chances of acceptance.

            Ask for feedback on your applications before you submit them. Ask a parent, teacher,
            counselor, or friend to review your applications, essays, and resume. They may see things
            you've missed or mistakes to be corrected.

Table 2.13
62 2 · Checking In: Your College Readiness Checklist
Access for free at openstax.org
3 · Introduction                                                                                                                         63

3
           Managing Your Time and Priorities

Figure 3.1 Our devices can be helpful tools for managing time, but they can also lead to distraction. (Credit: Nenad Stojkovic / Flickr
Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC-BY 2.0))

Chapter Outline

  3.1 Time Management in College
  3.2 Procrastination: The Enemy Within
  3.3 How to Manage Time
  3.4 Prioritization
  3.5 Enhanced Strategies for Time and Task Management

      Introduction

 STUDENT STORY

  JT decides to pick up an extra shift at work to help pay for his books and put a little more spending money in
  his pocket. His classes have started off well, but he notices that the expectations have increased and he is
  having trouble keeping up with school work and job.
  After one late shift, JT drives home to complete assignments that are due by midnight. When he sits down
  at the computer and books, he looks over the work and realizes that he doesn't have time to read the
  chapter and come up with answers to questions about the reading. Instead, he skims the work and writes a
  few short answers, so he can submit it on time.
  The next day after class, the professor stops him before he leaves. She says she has noticed that JT has not
  done well on the last few assignments and asks if he needs some help.
  JT shares that he has picked up an extra shift and sometimes works late, which makes him too tired to
  complete work some evenings. He promises to use his time more wisely--or stay up later to complete all
  the work--and let his professor know if he runs into trouble.
64 3 · Managing Your Time and Priorities

        Even though JT assures the professor he can handle it, he worries that the semester will only get harder and
        that he won't be able to turn down shifts when he really needs the money to pay for all the expenses of
        college.
        What Do You Think?

          · If you were JT, what would you do in this situation?
          · What would you do if you needed to work more hours to help pay for course resources?
          · How would you handle managing your time and your assignments?
          · How do you feel about balancing college classes with other obligations or interests? Why do you feel

              this way?

    Student Survey

      How do you feel about your time management abilities? Take this quick survey to figure it out, ranking
      questions on a scale of 1--4, 1 meaning "least like me" and 4 meaning "most like me." These questions will
      help you determine how the chapter concepts relate to you right now. As you are introduced to new concepts
      and practices, it can be informative to reflect on how your understanding changes over time.
      1. I regularly procrastinate completing tasks that don't interest me or seem challenging.
      2. I use specific time management strategies to complete tasks.
      3. I find it difficult to prioritize tasks because I am not sure what is really important.
      4. I am pleased with my ability to manage my time.
      You can also take the Chapter 3 survey (https://openstax.org/l/collegeconcisesurvey02) anonymously online.

       STUDENT PROFILE

        "Before I started college, I had heard that the amount of work would be overwhelming, and that it would
        be much harder than high school. That was true, but after being in college for a couple of weeks, I felt that
        people made it seem scarier than it actually was. I had some homework assignments here, some essays,
        some hard classes, but it wasn't that bad...until midterms and finals came knocking. I had so much to study
        and so little time. The pressure was unimaginable. And since there was so much material to learn, I kept
        procrastinating. The nights before the exams were a disaster.
        After the semester, I realized that I needed to do something differently. Instead of crashing before
        midterms and finals, I would study throughout the semester. I would review notes after class, do a few
        practice problems in the book even if homework wasn't assigned, and try to ask professors questions
        during their office hours if I was confused. This continual effort helped me do better on exams because I
        built up my understanding and was able to get a good night's sleep before the big test. I still studied hard,
        but the material was in reach and understanding it became a reasonable goal, not an impossibility. I also
        felt more confident going into the exams, because I knew that I had a deeper knowledge -- I could recall
        things more easily. Most importantly, I now had peace of mind throughout the day and during the tests
        themselves, since I knew that I was better prepared."
        --Nachum Sash, Actuarial Science Major, City University of New York

    About This Chapter

      In this chapter you will learn about two of the most valuable tools used for academic success: prioritizing and
      time management. By the time you complete this chapter, you should be able to do the following:

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                             3.1 · Time Management in College 65

· Outline the reasons and effects of procrastination and provide strategies to overcome it.
· Describe ways to evaluate your own time management skills.
· Discuss the importance and the process of prioritization.
· Detail strategies and specific tactics for managing your time.

3.1 Time Management in College

                                                                                                Estimated completion time: 11 minutes.

Questions to Consider:

  · Is time management different in college from what I am used to?
  · How different is college schoolwork from high school or on-the-job work?

You may find that time management in college is very different from anything you have experienced
previously. For high school students, almost all school time is managed by educators and parents. In many
cases, even after-school time may be set by scheduled activities (such as athletics) and by nightly homework
that is due the next day.

In the workplace, the situation is not very different, with activities and time on task being monitored by the
company and its management. An employee may also not have much say in what needs to be done and when.
This is so much a part of the working environment that many companies research how much time each task
should take, and they hold employees accountable for the time spent on these job functions. In fact, having
good time and task management skills will help you stand out on the job and in job interviews. See the table
below for a comparison of high school students and college students with regard to time and task
management.

K-12                                                         College

Many class activities are planned to facilitate, reinforce,  Class time is given to receiving information for
and assess learning.                                         the purpose of learning.

Homework is often similar for each student and               Out-of-class tasks such as reading and
assigned with the express purpose of reinforcing key         reviewing notes are often at the discretion of
concepts.                                                    the student.

Time and tasks are managed by others more often.             Time is managed by the student.

Table 3.1 Time and Task Management in K-12 and College

In college, there is a significant difference because a great deal of time management is left up to you. While it
is true that there are assignment due dates and organized classroom activities, learning at the college level
requires more than just the simple completion of work. It involves decision-making and the ability to evaluate
information. This is best accomplished when you are an active partner in your own learning activities.
66 3 · Managing Your Time and Priorities

       Figure 3.2 Students may set aside specific times and specific places to study and do homework. (Credit: ThouroughlyReviewed /
       Flickr Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC-BY 2.0))

      As an example of how this works, think about an assignment that involves giving a classroom presentation. To
      complete the assignment, you are given time to research and reflect on the information found. As a part of the
      assignment, you must reach your own conclusions and determine which information that you have found is
      best suited for the presentation. While the date of the actual presentation and how long it will last are usually
      determined by the instructor, how much time you spend gathering information, the sources you use, and how
      you use them are left to you.

    You Have Lots of Time to Manage

      For college-level learning, this approach is important enough that you can expect to spend much more time on
      learning activities outside the classroom than you will in the classroom. In fact, the estimated time you should
      spend will be at least two hours of outside learning for every one hour of lecture. Some weeks may be more
      intense, depending on the time of the semester and the courses you are taking. If those hours are multiplied
      over several courses in a given session, you can see how there is a significant amount of time to manage.
      Unfortunately, many students do not always take this into consideration, and they spend far less time than is
      needed to be successful. The results of poor time management are often a shock to them.

            "In college, as an active participant in your own education, what you do and when you do it is
            largely determined by you."

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    3.1 · Time Management in College 67

The Nature of What You Have to Do Has Changed

Returning to our example of the classroom-presentation assignment, you can see that the types of learning
activities in college can be very different from what you have experienced previously. While there may have
been similar assignments in high school, such as presentations or written papers, the level of expectation with
length and depth is significantly different in college. This point is made very clear when comparing facts about
the requirements of high school work to the type of work students produce in college. A study conducted by
the Pew Research Center, found that 82 percent of teens report that their typical high school writing
assignments were only a single paragraph to one page in length.1 This is in stark contrast to a number of
sources that say that writing assignments in lower-level college courses are usually 5-7 pages in length, while
writing assignments in upper-level courses increase to 15-20 pages.

It is also interesting to note that the amount of writing done by a college student can differ depending on their
program of study. The table below indicates the estimated average amount of writing assigned in several
disciplines. To estimate the number of pages of assigned writing, the average number of writing assignments
of a given page length was multiplied by an approximate number of pages for the assignment type (see Table
3.2 for time on task estimates.)

                                Writing Assignments Vary in Length

                    Discipline                      Number of Pages Assigned in Introductory
                                                                              Course

Arts & Humanities                               49

Biological Sciences, Agriculture, & Natural 47
Resources

Physical Sciences, Mathematics, & Computer 44
Science

Social Sciences                                 52

Business                                        48

Communications, Media, & Public Relations       50

Education                                       46

Engineering                                     46

Health Professions                              43

Social Service Professions                      47

Table 3.2 (Credit: Updated NSSE (Since 2013))2

High school homework often consists of worksheets or tasks based on reading or classroom activities. In other
words, all the students are doing the same tasks, at relatively the same time, as directed by their teachers.

1 Pew Research Center. (2008)."Writing, Technology, and Teens. https://www.pewinternet.org/2008/04/24/writing-technology-and-
teens/
68 3 · Managing Your Time and Priorities

      Using the earlier example of the presentation assignment, not only will what you do be larger in scale, but the
      depth of understanding and knowledge you will put into it will be significantly more than you may have
      encountered in previous assignments. This is because there are greater expectations required of college
      graduates in the workplace. Nearly any profession that requires a college degree has with it a level of
      responsibility that demands higher-level thinking and therefore higher learning. An often-cited example of this
      is the healthcare professional. The learning requirements for that profession are strict because we depend on
      those graduates for our health and, in some cases, our lives. While not every profession may require the same
      level of study needed for healthcare, most do require that colleges maintain a certain level of academic rigor
      to produce graduates who are competent in their fields.

      ANALYSIS QUESTION

        Can you identify any areas in your life that might be a potential problem if there were a temporary setback
        (e.g., temporary loss of transportation, temporary loss of housing, an illness that lasted more than a week,
        etc.)? What could you do for a backup plan if something did happen?

 3.2 Procrastination: The Enemy Within        Estimated completion time: 13 minutes.

Questions to Consider:
  · Why do we procrastinate?
  · What are the effects of procrastination?
  · How can we avoid procrastination?

Figure 3.3 We can think of many creative ways to procrastinate, but the outcome is often detrimental. (Credit: University of the
Fraser Valley / Flickr / Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC BY 2.0))

We all know about procrastination, the act of delaying some task that needs to be completed, because most of
us have procrastinated at some point in our lives. For most people, a little procrastination is not a cause for
great concern. But there are situations where procrastination can become a serious problem with a lot of risk.
These include when it becomes a chronic habit, when there are a number of tasks to complete and little time,

2 https://nsse.indiana.edu/html/sample_analyses/amount_of_writing.cfm

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                 3.2 · Procrastination: The Enemy Within 69

or when the task being avoided is very important. In college, students who procrastinate often report that they
feel more stress and are more likely to do poorly than those who have learned to manage their time and their
projects effectively.

Because we all procrastinate from time to time, we usually do not give it much thought, let alone think about
its causes or effects. Ironically, many of the psychological reasons for why we avoid a given task also keep us
from using critical thinking to understand why procrastination can be extremely detrimental, and in some
cases difficult to overcome.

To succeed at time management, you must understand some of the hurdles that may stand in your way.
Procrastination is often one of the biggest. What follows is an overview of procrastination with a few
suggestions on how to avoid it.

The Reasons Behind Procrastination

There are several reasons we procrastinate, and a few of them may be surprising. On the surface we often tell
ourselves it is because the task is something we do not want to do, or we make excuses that there are other
things more important to do first. In some cases this may be true, but there can be other contributors to
procrastination that have their roots in our physical well-being or our own psychological motivations.

Lack of Energy

Sometimes we just do not feel up to a certain task. It might be due to discomfort, an illness, or just a lack of
energy. If this is the case, it is important to identify the cause and remedy the situation. It could be something
as simple as a lack of sleep or improper diet. Regardless, if a lack of energy is continually causing you to
procrastinate to the point where you are beginning to feel stress over not getting things done, you should
definitely assess the situation and address it.

Lack of Focus

Much like having low physical energy, a lack of mental focus can be a cause of procrastination. This can be due
to mental fatigue, being disorganized, or allowing yourself to be distracted by other things. Again, like low
physical energy, this is something that may have farther-reaching effects in your life that go beyond the act of
simply avoiding a task. If it is something that is recurring, you should properly assess the situation.

Fear of Failure

This cause of procrastination is not one that many people are aware of, especially if they are the person
avoiding tasks because of it. To put it in simple words, it is a bit of trickery we play on ourselves by avoiding a
situation that makes us psychologically uncomfortable. Even though they may not be consciously aware of it,
the person facing the task is afraid that they cannot do it or will not be able to do it well. If they fail at the task,
it will make them appear incompetent to others or even to themselves. Where the self-trickery comes in is by
avoiding the task. In the person's mind, they can rationalize that the reason they failed at the task was because
they ran out of time to complete it, not that they were incapable of doing it in the first place.

It is important to note that a fear of failure may not have anything to do with the actual ability of the person
suffering from it. They could be quite capable of doing the task and performing well, but it is the fear that
holds them back.

 ANALYSIS QUESTION

  Consider something right now that you may be procrastinating about. Are you able to identify the cause?
70 3 · Managing Your Time and Priorities

    The Effects of Procrastination

      In addition to the causes of procrastination, you must also consider what effects it can have. Again, many of
      these effects are obvious and commonly understood, but some may not be so obvious and may cause other
      issues.

     Loss of Time

      The loss of time as an effect of procrastination is the easiest to identify since the act of avoiding a task comes
      down to not using time wisely. Procrastination can be thought of as using the time you have to complete a task
      in ways that do not accomplish what needs to be done.

     Loss of Goals

      Another of the more obvious potentially adverse effects of procrastination is the loss of goals. Completing a
      task leads to achieving a goal. These can be large or small (e.g., from doing well on an assignment to being
      hired for a good job). Without goals you might do more than delay work on a task--you may not complete it at
      all. The risk for the loss of goals is something that is very impactful.

     Loss of Self-Esteem

      Often, when we procrastinate we become frustrated and disappointed in ourselves for not getting important
      tasks completed. If this continues to happen, we can begin to develop a low opinion of ourselves and our own
      abilities. We begin to suffer from low self-esteem and might even begin to feel like there is something wrong
      with us. This can lead to other increasingly negative mental factors such as anger and depression. As you can
      see, it is important for our own well-being to avoid this kind of procrastination effect.

     Stress

      Procrastination causes stress and anxiety, which may seem odd since the act of procrastination is often about
      avoiding a task we think will be stressful in itself! Anyone who has noticed that nagging feeling when they
      know there is something else they should be doing is familiar with this.

      On the other hand, some students see that kind of stress as a boost of mental urgency. They put off a task
      until they feel that surge of motivation. While this may have worked in the past, they quickly learn that
      procrastinating when it comes to college work almost always includes an underestimation of the tasks to be
      completed-- sometimes with disastrous results.

    Strategies for Psyching Ourselves Out and Managing Procrastination

      Now that you understand a few of the major problems procrastination can produce, let's look at methods to
      manage procrastination and get you on to completing the tasks, no matter how unpleasant you think they
      might be.

     Get Organized

      Much of this chapter is dedicated to defining and explaining the nature of time management. The most
      effective way to combat procrastination is to use time and project management strategies such as schedules,
      goal setting, and other techniques to get tasks accomplished in a timely manner.

     Put Aside Distractions

      Several of the methods discussed in this chapter deal specifically with distractions. Distractions are time-killers
      and are the primary way people procrastinate. It is too easy to just play a video game a little while longer,
      check out social media, or finish watching a movie when we are avoiding a task. Putting aside distractions is
      one of the primary functions of setting priorities.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                      3.3 · How to Manage Time 71

Reward Yourself

Rewarding yourself for the completion of tasks or meeting goals is a good way to avoid procrastination. An
example of this would be rewarding yourself with the time to watch a movie you would enjoy after you have
finished the things you need to do, rather than using the movie to keep yourself from getting things done.

Be Accountable

A strong motivational tool is to hold ourselves accountable by telling someone else we are going to do
something and when we are going to do it. This may not seem like it would be very effective, but on a
psychological level we feel more compelled to do something if we tell someone else. It may be related to our
need for approval from others, or it might just serve to set a level of commitment. Either way, it can help us
stay on task and avoid procrastination--especially if we take our accountability to another person seriously
enough to warrant contacting that person and apologizing for not doing what we said we were going to do.

 THE REAL DEAL

  "First and foremost, whenever you begin your college career you need to understand the importance of
  time management. Without time management you have nothing. You will no longer have your mother or
  father banging on your door telling you to wake up, because the bus is gonna be at the house in 20
  minutes to pick you up. That is all out the window and you now have to depend on yourself. With
  understanding time management and the importance of a routine that works for you: you will have to be at
  your classes on time, appointments, and remind yourself to study. You can set alarms, make a schedule, or
  even carry a journal around with you so you can document all the things you need to complete that day to
  keep everything organized and on track. I mean, I wish I knew how important time management was when
  I started college. Maybe I would've saved myself from having multiple stressful situations, where I forgot
  something was due and took a zero, or missed a doctor's appointment that cost me $20 extra dollars I
  needed for gas to get home. Realizing how important your day to day life is and how you dedicate your
  time to your education, will certainly determine your outcome in college. Hint: It will also save you from a
  ton of unnecessary stress!"

  --Morgan Goodknight, sophomore

3.3 How to Manage Time

                        Estimated completion time: 25 minutes.

Questions to Consider:

  · How can I use time-on-task estimates to improve time management?
  · What behaviors can help or hinder when it comes to managing time?

In this next section you will learn about managing time and prioritizing tasks. This is not only a valuable skill
for pursuing an education, but it can become an ability that follows you through the rest of your life, especially
if your career takes you into a leadership role.
72 3 · Managing Your Time and Priorities

       Figure 3.4 An online calendar is a very useful tool for keeping track of classes, meetings, and other events. Most learning
       management systems contain these features, or you can use a calendar application.

      ANALYSIS QUESTION

        Read each statement in the brief self-evaluation tool below, and check the answer that best applies to you.
        There are no right or wrong answers.

                                                                                    Always Usually Sometimes Rarely Never
          I like to be given strict deadlines for each task. It
          helps me stay organized and on track.
          I would rather be 15 minutes early than 1
          minute late.
          I like to improvise instead of planning
          everything out ahead of time.
          I prefer to be able to manage when and how I
          do each task.
          I have a difficult time estimating how long a task
          will take.

         Table 3.3

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                    3.3 · How to Manage Time 73

                                                    Always Usually Sometimes Rarely Never

  I have more motivation when there is an
  upcoming deadline. It helps me focus.

  I have difficulty keeping priorities in the most
  beneficial order.

Table 3.3

This exercise is intended to help you recognize some things about your own time management style. The
important part is for you to identify any areas where you might be able to improve and to find solutions for
them. This chapter will provide some solutions, but there are many others that can be found by researching
time management strategies.

After you have decided your best response to each statement, think about what they may mean in regard
to potential strengths and/or challenges for you when it comes to time management in college. If you are a
person that likes strict deadlines, what would you do if you took a course that only had one large paper due
at the end? Can you set a series of mini deadlines that made you more comfortable and that kept things
moving along for you? Or, if you have difficulty prioritizing tasks, does it help you to make a list of the tasks
to do and order them, so you know which ones must be finished first?

How to Manage Time

The simplest way to manage your time is to accurately plan for how much time it will take to do each task, and
then set aside that amount of time. How you divide the time is up to you. If it is going to take you five hours to
study for a final exam, you can plan to spread it over five days, with an hour each night, or you can plan on two
hours one night and three hours the next. What you would not want to do is plan on studying only a few hours
the night before the exam and find that you fell very short on the time you estimated you would need. If that
were to happen, you would have run out of time before finishing, with no way to go back and change your
decision. In this kind of situation, you might even be tempted to "pull an all-nighter," which is a phrase that has
been used among college students for decades. In essence it means going without sleep for the entire night
and using that time to finish an assignment. While this method of trying to make up for poor planning is
common enough to have a name, rarely does it produce the best work.

 ACTIVITY

  Many people are not truly aware of how they actually spend their time. They make assumptions about how
  much time it takes to do certain things, but they never really take an accurate account.

  In this activity, write down all the things you think you will do tomorrow, and estimate the time you will
  spend doing each. Then track each thing you have written down to see how accurate your estimates were.

  Obviously, you will not want to get caught up in too much tedious detail, but you will want to cover the
  main activities of your day--for example, working, eating, driving, shopping, gaming, being engaged in
  entertainment, etc.

  After you have completed this activity for a single day, you may consider doing it for an entire week so that
  you are certain to include all of your activities.
74 3 · Managing Your Time and Priorities

Many people that take this sort of personal assessment of their time are often surprised by the results.
Some even make lifestyle changes based on it.

                                          Activity  Estimated Time Actual Time

                                 Practice Quiz      5 minutes          15 minutes

                                 Lab Conclusions 20 minutes            35 minutes

                                 Food shopping 45 minutes              30 minutes

                                 Drive to work      20 minutes         20 minutes

                                 Physical Therapy 1 hour               50 minutes

                                 Table 3.4 Sample Time Estimate Table

Of all the parts of time management, accurately predicting how long a task will take is usually the most
difficult--and the most elusive. Part of the problem comes from the fact that most of us are not very accurate
timekeepers, especially when we are busy applying ourselves to a task. The other issue that makes it so
difficult to accurately estimate time on task is that our estimations must also account for things like
interruptions or unforeseen problems that cause delays.

When it comes to academic activities, many tasks can be dependent upon the completion of other things first,
or the time a task takes can vary from one instance to another, both of which add to the complexity and
difficulty of estimating how much time and effort are required.

For example, if an instructor assigned three chapters of reading, you would not really have any idea how long
each chapter might take to read until you looked at them. The first chapter might be 30 pages long while the
second is 45. The third chapter could be only 20 pages but made up mostly of charts and graphs for you to
compare. By page count, it might seem that the third chapter would take the least amount of time, but actually
studying charts and graphs to gather information can take longer than regular reading.

To make matters even more difficult, when it comes to estimating time on task for something as common as
reading, not all reading takes the same amount of time. Fiction, for example, is usually a faster read than a
technical manual. But something like the novel Finnegan's Wake by James Joyce is considered so difficult that
most readers never finish it.

 ACTIVITY

  To better understand how much time different kinds of material can take to read, try this experiment. You
  will use two examples of famous texts that are very close to being the same number of words: The
  Gettysburg Address and the opening paragraphs from A Christmas Carol. Before you begin, estimate how
  long it will take you to read each, and predict which you think will take longer. When you do the reading, use
  a stopwatch function on a device such as a phone or some other timer to see how long it actually takes.

  Make certain that you are reading for understanding, not just skimming over words. If you must reread a
  section to better comprehend what is being said, that is appropriate. The goal here is to compare reading

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                   3.3 · How to Manage Time 75

of different texts, not to see how fast you can sight-read the words on a page.

After you have finished The Gettysburg Address, read and time A Christmas Carol and compare both of
your times.

The Gettysburg Address
Abraham Lincoln
Gettysburg, Pennsylvania November 19, 1863
Word count: 278

Four score and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this continent, a new nation, conceived in
Liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal.

Now we are engaged in a great civil war, testing whether that nation, or any nation so conceived and so
dedicated, can long endure. We are met on a great battle-field of that war. We have come to dedicate a
portion of that field, as a final resting place for those who here gave their lives that that nation might live. It
is altogether fitting and proper that we should do this.

But, in a larger sense, we cannot dedicate -- we cannot consecrate -- we cannot hallow -- this ground. The
brave men, living and dead, who struggled here, have consecrated it, far above our poor power to add or
detract. The world will little note, nor long remember what we say here, but it can never forget what they
did here. It is for us the living, rather, to be dedicated here to the unfinished work which they who fought
here have thus far so nobly advanced. It is rather for us to be here dedicated to the great task remaining
before us -- that from these honored dead we take increased devotion to that cause for which they gave the
last full measure of devotion -- that we here highly resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain -- that
this nation, under God, shall have a new birth of freedom -- and that government of the people, by the
people, for the people, shall not perish from the earth.

A Christmas Carol
Charles Dickens
Chapman & Hall, 1843
Word count: 260

Marley was dead: to begin with. There is no doubt whatever about that. The register of his burial was
signed by the clergyman, the clerk, the undertaker, and the chief mourner. Scrooge signed it: and Scrooge's
name was good upon 'Change, for anything he chose to put his hand to. Old Marley was as dead as a door-
nail.

Mind! I don't mean to say that I know, of my own knowledge, what there is particularly dead about a door-
nail. I might have been inclined, myself, to regard a coffin-nail as the deadest piece of ironmongery in the
trade. But the wisdom of our ancestors is in the simile; and my unhallowed hands shall not disturb it, or the
Country's done for. You will therefore permit me to repeat, emphatically, that Marley was as dead as a door-
nail.

Scrooge knew he was dead? Of course he did. How could it be otherwise? Scrooge and he were partners for
I don't know how many years. Scrooge was his sole executor, his sole administrator, his sole assign, his sole
residuary legatee, his sole friend, and sole mourner. And even Scrooge was not so dreadfully cut up by the
sad event, but that he was an excellent man of business on the very day of the funeral, and solemnized it
with an undoubted bargain.

The mention of Marley's funeral brings me back to the point I started from. There is no doubt that Marley
was dead. This must be distinctly understood, or nothing wonderful can come of the story I am going to
relate.
76 3 · Managing Your Time and Priorities

In comparing the two, was one or the other easier to understand or faster to read? Was it the piece you
predicted you would read faster?

It is important to note that in this case both readings were only three paragraphs long. While there may
have only been half a minute or so between the reading of each, that amount of time would multiply
greatly over an entire chapter.

Knowing Yourself

While you can find all sorts of estimates online as to how long a certain task may take, it is important to know
these are only averages. People read at different speeds, people write at different speeds, and those numbers
even change for each individual depending on the environment.

If you are trying to read in surroundings that have distractions (e.g., conversations, phone calls, etc.), reading
10 pages can take you a lot longer than if you are reading in a quiet area. By the same token, you may be
reading in a quiet environment (e.g., in bed after everyone in the house has gone to sleep), but if you are tired,
your attention and retention may not be what it would be if you were refreshed.

In essence, the only way you are going to be able to manage your time accurately is to know yourself and to
know how long it takes you to do each task. But where to begin?

Below, you will find a table of common college academic activities. This list has been compiled from a large
number of different sources, including colleges, publishers, and professional educators, to help students
estimate their own time on tasks. The purpose of this table is to both give you a place to begin in your
estimates and to illustrate how different factors can impact the actual time spent.

You will notice that beside each task there is a column for the unit, followed by the average time on task, and a
column for notes. The unit is whatever is being measured (e.g., pages read, pages written, etc.), and the time
on task is an average time it takes students to do these tasks. It is important to pay attention to the notes
column, because there you will find factors that influence the time on task. These factors can dramatically
change the amount of time the activity takes.

                                                       Time on Task

Activity                                  Unit          Time         Notes
                                                       on task

General academic reading                  1 page       5-7           Be aware that your personal reading speed
(textbook, professional journals)                      minutes       may differ and may change over time.

Technical reading (math, charts and       1 page       10-15         Be aware that your personal reading speed
data)                                                  minutes       may differ and may change over time.

Simple Quiz or homework question:         Per          1-2           Complexity of question will greatly influence
short answer--oriented toward             question     minutes       the time required.
recall or identification type answers

Table 3.5 Time on task for common college activities.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     3.3 · How to Manage Time 77

                                                       Time on Task

                Activity            Unit                Time         Notes
                                                       on task

Complex Quiz or homework            Per                2-3           Complexity of question will greatly influence
question: short answer--oriented    question           minutes       the time required.
toward application, evaluation, or
synthesis of knowledge

Math problem sets, complex          Per                15            For example, algebra, complex equations,
                                    question           minutes       financial calculations

Writing: short, no research         Per                60            Short essays, single-topic writing
                                    page               minutes       assignments, summaries, freewriting
                                                                     assignments, journaling--includes drafting,
                                                                     writing, proofing, and finalizing

Writing: research paper             Per                105           Includes research time, drafting, editing,
                                    page               minutes       proofing, and finalizing (built into per-page
                                                                     calculation)

Study for quiz                      Per                60            45-90 minutes per chapter, depending upon
                                    chapter            minutes       complexity of material

Study for exam                      Per                120+          1-2 hours per chapter or concept after
                                    exam               minutes       thoroughly reading and taking notes

Table 3.5 Time on task for common college activities.

Again, these are averages, and it does not mean anything if your times are a little slower or a little faster. There
is no "right amount of time," only the time that it takes you to do something so you can accurately plan and
manage your time.

There is also another element to look for in the table. These are differentiations in the similar activities that will
also affect the time you spend. A good example of this can be found in the first four rows. Each of these
activities involves reading, but you can see that depending on the material being read and its complexity, the
time spent can vary greatly. Not only do these differences in time account for the different types of materials
you might read (as you found in the comparative reading exercise earlier in this chapter), but also they also
take into consideration the time needed to think about what you are reading to truly understand and
comprehend what it is saying.

 GET CONNECTED

Which apps help you best prepare for success when managing your time?
Do you have trouble keeping track of multiple tasks over the course of a term?
Trello (https://openstax.org/l/trello) lets you organize all your obligations in helpful boards. You can share
78 3 · Managing Your Time and Priorities

them with others (project collaborators), set alerts as reminders, and mark tasks off as you complete them.
Do you use a particular app to help you manage your time?
Sticky note apps are available for PC, Mac, and mobile devices. They let you post quick reminders,
reorganize them as needed, and view them separately or as a full to-do list.
What do you wish you could improve about your time management skills?
Toggl (https://openstax.org/l/toggl) helps you keep track of how and where you are spending your time so
you can budget better and make time management changes that free you up for the really important stuff.

3.4 Prioritization

                                          Estimated completion time: 21 minutes.

                                                  Figure 3.5 Numbered lists are useful and easy tools to create.

Questions to Consider:

  · Why is prioritization important?
  · What are the steps involved in prioritization?
  · How do I deal with situations where others' priorities are not the same as my own?
  · What do I do when priorities conflict?
  · What are the best ways to make sure I complete tasks?

Another key component in time management is that of prioritization. Prioritization can be thought of as
ordering tasks and allotting time for them based on their identified needs or value.

This next section provides some insight into not only helping prioritize tasks and actions based on need and
value, but also how to better understand the factors that contribute to prioritization.

How to Prioritize

The enemy of good prioritization is panic, or at least making decisions based on strictly emotional reactions. It
can be all too easy to immediately respond to a problem as soon as it pops up without thinking of the
consequences of your reaction and how it might impact other priorities. It is very natural for us to want to
remove a stressful situation as soon as we can. We want the adverse emotions out of the way as quickly as
possible. But when it comes to juggling multiple problems or tasks to complete, prioritizing them first may
mean the difference between completing everything satisfactorily and completing nothing at all.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                  3.4 · Prioritization 79

Make Certain You Understand the Requirements of Each Task

One of the best ways to make good decisions about the prioritization of tasks is to understand the
requirements of each. If you have multiple assignments to complete and you assume one of those
assignments will only take an hour, you may decide to put it off until the others are finished. Your assumption
could be disastrous if you find, once you begin the assignment, that there are several extra components that
you did not account for and the time to complete will be four times as long as you estimated. Or, one of the
assignments may be dependent on the results of another--like participating in a study and then writing a
report on the results. If you are not aware that one assignment depends upon the completion of the other
before you begin, you could inadvertently do the assignments out of order and have to start over. Because of
situations like this, it is critically important to understand exactly what needs to be done to complete a task
before you determine its priority.

Make Decisions on Importance, Impact on Other Priorities, and Urgency

After you are aware of the requirements for each task, you can then decide your priorities based on the
importance of the task and what things need to be finished in which order.
To summarize: the key components to prioritization are making certain you understand each task and making
decisions based on importance, impact, and urgency.

 ACTIVITY

  To better see how things may need to be prioritized, some people make a list of the tasks they need to
  complete and then arrange them in a quadrant map based on importance and urgency. Traditionally this is
  called the Eisenhower Decision Matrix. Before becoming the 34th president of the United States, Dwight
  Eisenhower served as the Allied forces supreme commander during World War II and said he used this
  technique to better prioritize the things he needed to get done.
  In this activity you will begin by making a list of things you need or want to do today and then draw your
  own version of the grid below. Write each item in one of the four squares; choose the square that best
  describes it based on its urgency and its importance. When you have completed writing each of the tasks in
  its appropriate square, you will see a prioritization order of your tasks. Obviously, those listed in the
  Important and Urgent square will be the things you need to finish first. After that will come things that are
  "important but not urgent," followed by "not important, but urgent," and finally "not urgent and not
  important."

                Figure 3.6 The Eisenhower Matrix can help organize priorities and ensure that you focus on the correct tasks.
80 3 · Managing Your Time and Priorities

    Who Is Driving Your Tasks?

      Another thing to keep in mind when approaching time management is that while you may have greater
      autonomy in managing your own time, many of your tasks are being driven by a number of different
      individuals. These individuals are not only unaware of the other things you need to do, but they often also
      have goals that are in conflict with your other tasks. This means that different instructors, your manager at
      work, or even your friends may be trying to assert their needs into your priorities. An example of this might be
      a boss who would like for you to work a few hours of overtime, but you were planning on using that time to do
      research for a paper.

      Just like assessing the requirements and needs for each priority, doing the same with how others may be
      influencing your available time can be an important part of time management. In some cases, keeping others
      informed about your priorities may help avert possible conflicts (e.g., letting your boss know you will need
      time on a certain evening to study, letting your friends know you plan to do a journal project on Saturday but
      can do something on Sunday, etc.).

      It will be important to be aware of how others can drive your priorities and for you to listen to your own good
      judgment. In essence, time management in college is as much about managing all the elements of your life as
      it is about managing time for class and to complete assignments.

    Making the Tough Decision When It Is Needed

      Occasionally, regardless of how much you have planned or how well you have managed your time, events
      arise where it becomes almost impossible to accomplish everything you need to by the time required. While
      this is very unfortunate, it simply cannot be helped. As the saying goes, "things happen."

      Finding yourself in this kind of situation is when prioritization becomes most important. You may find yourself
      in the uncomfortable position of only being able to complete one task or another in the time given. When this
      occurs with college assignments, the dilemma can be extremely stressful, but it is important to not feel
      overwhelmed by the anxiety of the situation so that you can make a carefully calculated decision based on the
      value and impact of your choice.

     What Do You Do When Faced with Priority Conflicts?

      As an illustration, imagine a situation where you think you can only complete one of two assignments that are
      both important and urgent, and you must make a choice of which one you will finish and which one you will
      not. This is when it becomes critical to understand all the factors involved. While it may seem that whichever
      assignment is worth the most points to your grade is how you make the choice, there are actually a number of
      other attributes that can influence your decision in order to make the most of a bad situation. For example,
      one of the assignments may only be worth a minimal number of points toward your total grade, but it may be
      foundational to the rest of the course. Not finishing it, or finishing it late, may put other future assignments in
      jeopardy as well. Or the instructor for one of the courses might have a "late assignment" policy that is more
      forgiving--something that would allow you to turn in the work a little late without too much of a penalty.

      If you find yourself in a similar predicament, the first step is to try to find a way to get everything finished,
      regardless of the challenges. If that simply cannot happen, the next immediate step would be to communicate
      with your instructors to let them know about the situation. They may be able to help you decide on a course of
      action, or they may have options you had not thought of. Only then can you make the choices about
      prioritizing in a tough situation.

      The key here is to make certain you are aware of and understand all the ramifications to help make the best
      decision when the situation dictates you make a hard choice among priorities.

    Completing the Tasks

      Another important part of time management is to develop approaches that will help you complete tasks in a

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                  3.4 · Prioritization 81

manner that is efficient and works for you. Most of this comes down to a little planning and being as informed
about the specifics of each task as you can be.

Knowing What You Need to Do

As discussed in previous parts of this chapter, many learning activities have multiple components, and
sometimes they must occur in a specific order. Additionally, some elements may not only be dependent on the
order they are completed, but can also be dependent on how they are completed. To illustrate this we will
analyze a task that is usually considered to be a simple one: attending a class session. In this analysis we will
look at not only what must be accomplished to get the most out of the experience, but also at how each
element is dependent upon others and must be done in a specific order. The Figure 3.7 below shows the
interrelationship between the different activities, many of which might not initially seem significant enough to
warrant mention, but it becomes obvious that other elements depend upon them when they are listed out this
way.

               Figure 3.7 Many of your learning activities are dependent on others, and some are the gateways to other steps.

As you can see from the graphic above, even a task as simple as "going to class" can be broken down into a
number of different elements that have a good deal of dependency on other tasks. One example of this is
preparing for the class lecture by reading materials ahead of time in order to make the lecture and any
complex concepts easier to follow. If you did it the other way around, you might miss opportunities to ask
82 3 · Managing Your Time and Priorities

      questions or receive clarification on the information presented during the lecture.
      Understanding what you need to do and when you need to do it can be applied to any task, no matter how
      simple or how complex. Knowing what you need to do and planning for it can go a long way toward success
      and preventing unpleasant surprises.

     Knowing How You Will Get It Done

      After you have a clear understanding of what needs to be done to complete a task (or the component parts of
      a task), the next step is to create a plan for completing everything.
      This may not be as easy or as simple as declaring that you will finish part one, then move on to part two, and
      so on. Each component may need different resources or skills to complete, and it is in your best interest to
      identify those ahead of time and include them as part of your plan.
      A good analogy for this sort of planning is to think about it in much the same way you would preparing for a
      lengthy trip. With a long journey you probably would not walk out the front door and then decide how you
      were going to get where you were going. There are too many other decisions to be made and tasks to be
      completed around each choice. If you decided you were going by plane, you would need to purchase tickets,
      and you would have to schedule your trip around flight times. If you decided to go by car, you would need gas
      money and possibly a map or GPS device. What about clothes? The clothes you will need are dependent on
      how long you will be gone and what the climate will be like. If it is far enough away that you will need to speak
      another language, you may need to either acquire that skill or at least come with something or someone to
      help you translate.
      What follows is a planning list that can help you think about and prepare for the tasks you are about to begin.
      What Resources Will You Need?
      The first part of this list may appear to be so obvious that it should go without mention, but it is by far one of
      the most critical and one of the most overlooked. Have you ever planned a trip but forgotten your most
      comfortable pair of shoes or neglected to book a hotel room? If a missing resource is important, the entire
      project can come to a complete halt. Even if the missing resource is a minor component, it may still
      dramatically alter the end result.
      Learning activities are much the same in this way, and it is also important to keep in mind that resources may
      not be limited to physical objects such as paper or ink. Information can be a critical resource as well. In fact,
      one of the most often overlooked aspects in planning by new college students is just how much research,
      reading, and information they will need to complete assignments.

          Figure 3.8 Allowing time to think is an important part of learning. (Credit: Juhan Sonin / Flickr / Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC BY 2.0))

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                  3.4 · Prioritization 83

For example, if you had an assignment in which you were supposed to compare and contrast a novel with a
film adapted from that novel, it would be important to have access to both the movie and the book as
resources. Your plans for completing the work could quickly fall apart if you learned that on the evening you
planned to watch the film, it was no longer available.

What Skills Will You Need?

Poor planning or a bad assumption in this area can be disastrous, especially if some part of the task has a
steep learning curve. No matter how well you planned the other parts of the project, if there is some skill
needed that you do not have and you have no idea how long it will take to learn, it can be a bad situation.

Imagine a scenario where one of your class projects is to create a poster. It is your intent to use some kind of
imaging software to produce professional-looking graphics and charts for the poster, but you have never used
the software in that way before. It seems easy enough, but once you begin, you find the charts keep printing
out in the wrong resolution. You search online for a solution, but the only thing you can find requires you to
recreate them all over again in a different setting. Unfortunately, that part of the project will now take twice as
long.

It can be extremely difficult to recover from a situation like that, and it could have been prevented by taking
the time to learn how to do it correctly before you began or by at least including in your schedule some time to
learn and practice.

What Deadlines Will You Create?

Of course, the best way to approach time management is to set realistic deadlines that take into account
which elements are dependent on which others and the order in which they should be completed. Giving
yourself two days to write a 20- page work of fiction is not very realistic when even many professional authors
average only 6 pages per day. Your intentions may be well founded, but your use of unrealistic deadlines will
not be very successful.

Setting appropriate deadlines and sticking to them is very important--so much so that several sections in the
rest of this chapter touch on effective deadline practices.

How Will You Be Flexible?

It is ironic that the item on this list that comes just after a strong encouragement to make deadlines and stick
to them is the suggestion to be flexible. The reason that being flexible has made this list is because even the
best-laid plans and most accurate time management efforts can take an unexpected turn. The idea behind
being flexible is to readjust your plans and deadlines when something does happen to throw things off. The
worst thing you could do in such a situation is panic or just stop working because the next step in your careful
planning has suddenly become a roadblock. The moment when you see that something in your plan may
become an issue is when to begin readjusting your plan.

Adjusting a plan along the way is incredibly common. In fact, many professional project managers have
learned that it seems something always happens or there is always some delay, and they have developed an
approach to deal with the inevitable need for some flexibility. In essence, you could say that they are even
planning for problems, mistakes, or delays from the very beginning, and they will often add a little extra time
for each task to help ensure an issue does not derail the entire project or that the completion of the project
does not miss the final due date.

      "As you work through tasks, make certain you are always monitoring and adapting to ensure
      you complete them."
84 3 · Managing Your Time and Priorities

     The Importance of Where You Do Your Work

       Figure 3.9 Where you do work can be as important as when. While not everyone has a study nook, it's worth taking the time to find a
       place or a space where you can be comfortable and focused. (Credit: IMCBerea College r / Flickr / Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC BY 2.0))

      A large part of ensuring that you can complete tasks on time comes to setting up conditions that will allow you
      to do the work well. Much of this has to do with the environment where you will do your work. This not only
      includes physical space such as a work area, but other conditions like being free from distractions and your
      physical well-being and mental attitude.
      What Space Will You Use?
      Simple things, like where you are set up to do your work, can not only aid in your efficiency but also affect how
      well you can work or even if you can get the work completed at all. One example of this might be typing on a
      laptop. While it might seem more comfortable to lie back on a couch and type a long paper, sitting up at a desk
      or table actually increases your typing speed and reduces the number of mistakes. Even the kind of mouse you
      use can impact how you work, and using one you are comfortable with can make a big difference.
      There are a host of other factors that can come into play as well. Do you have enough space? Is the space
      cluttered, or do you have the room to keep reference materials and other things you might need within arm's
      reach? Are there other ways you could work that might be even more efficient? For example, buying an
      inexpensive second monitor--even secondhand--might be the key to decreasing the amount of time you
      spend when you can have more than one document displayed at a time.
      The key is to find what works for you and to treat your work space as another important resource needed to
      get the task finished.
      How Will You Eliminate Distractions?
      Few things are more frustrating than trying to do work while distractions are going on around you. If other
      people are continually interrupting you or there are things that keep pulling your attention from the task at
      hand, everything takes longer and you are more prone to mistakes.3
      Many people say they work better with distractions--they prefer to leave the television or the radio on--but
      the truth is that an environment with too many interruptions is rarely helpful when focus is required. Before
      deciding that the television or talkative roommates do not bother you when you work, take an honest
      accounting of the work you produce with interruptions compared to work you do without.
      If you find that your work is better without distractions, it is a good idea to create an environment that reduces
      interruptions. This may mean you have to go to a private room, use headphones, or go somewhere like a

       3 https://en.calameo.com/read/00009178915b8f5b352ba

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      3.5 · Enhanced Strategies for Time and Task Management 85

library to work. Regardless, the importance of a distraction-free environment cannot be emphasized enough.

What Are the Best Times for You to Work?

Most people are subject to their own rhythms, cycles, and preferences throughout their day. Some are alert
and energetic in the mornings, while others are considered "night owls" and prefer to work after everyone else
has gone to sleep. It can be important to be aware of your own cycles and to use them to your advantage.
Rarely does anyone do their best work when they are exhausted, either physically or mentally. Just as it can be
difficult to work when you are physically ill, it can also be a hindrance to try to learn or do mental work when
you are tired or emotionally upset.

Your working environment definitely includes your own state of mind and physical well-being. Both have a
significant influence on your learning and production ability. Because of this, it is not only important to be
aware of your own condition and work preferences, but to actually try to create conditions that help you in
these areas. One approach is to set aside a specific time to do certain kinds of work. You might find that you
concentrate better after you have eaten a meal. If that is the case, make it a habit of doing homework every
night after dinner. Or you might enjoy reading more after you are ready for bed, so you do your reading
assignments just before you go to sleep at night. Some people find that they are more creative during a
certain time of the day or that they are more comfortable writing with subtle lighting. It is worth taking the
time to find the conditions that work best for you so that you can take advantage of them.

 3.5 Enhanced Strategies for Time and Task Management

                                                                                                  Estimated completion time: 18 minutes.

Questions to Consider:

  · What strategy helps me prioritize my top tasks?
  · How do I make the best use of my time when prioritizing?
  · How do I make sure I tackle unpleasant tasks instead of putting them off?
  · What's the best way to plan for long-term tasks?
  · How do I find time in a busy schedule?

Over the years, people have developed a number of different strategies to manage time and tasks. Some of
the strategies have proven to be effective and helpful, while others have been deemed not as useful.

The good news is that the approaches that do not work very well or do not really help in managing time do not
get passed along very often. But others, those which people find of value, do. What follows here are three
unique strategies that have become staples of time management. While not everyone will find that all three
work for them in every situation, enough people have found them beneficial to pass them along with high
recommendations.

Daily Top Three

The idea behind the daily top three approach is that you determine which three things are the most important
to finish that day, and these become the tasks that you complete. It is a very simple technique that is effective
because each day you are finishing tasks and removing them from your list. Even if you took one day off a
week and completed no tasks on that particular day, a daily top three strategy would have you finishing 18
tasks in the course of a single week. That is a good amount of things crossed off your list.
86 3 · Managing Your Time and Priorities

      ANALYSIS QUESTION

        Analysis: Think about what would be your top three tasks for today? What would you have on the list
        tomorrow?

    Pomodoro Technique

       Figure 3.10 The Pomodoro Technique is named after a type of kitchen timer, but you can use any clock or countdown timer. (Marco
       Verch /Flickr / Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC BY 2.0))

      The Pomodoro Technique was developed by Francesco Cirillo. The basic concept is to use a timer to set work
      intervals that are followed by a short break. The intervals are usually about 25 minutes long and are called
      pomodoros, which comes from the Italian word for tomato because Cirillo used a tomato-shaped kitchen timer
      to keep track of the intervals.
      In the original technique there are six steps:
      1. Decide on the task to be done.
      2. Set the timer to the desired interval.
      3. Work on the task.
      4. When the timer goes off, put a check mark on a piece of paper.
      5. If you have fewer than four check marks, take a short break (3-5 minutes), then go to Step 1 or 2

            (whichever is appropriate).
      6. After four pomodoros, take a longer break (15-30 minutes), reset your check mark count to zero, and then

            go to Step 1 or 2.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      3.5 · Enhanced Strategies for Time and Task Management 87

                                               Figure 3.11 The Pomodoro Technique contains five defined steps.

There are several reasons this technique is deemed effective for many people. One is the benefit that is
derived from quick cycles of work and short breaks. This helps reduce mental fatigue and the lack of
productivity caused by it. Another is that it tends to encourage practitioners to break tasks down to things that
can be completed in about 25 minutes, which is something that is usually manageable from the perspective of
time available. It is much easier to squeeze in three 25-minute sessions of work time during the day than it is
to set aside a 75- minute block of time.

Eat the Frog

Of our three quick strategies, eat the frog probably has the strangest name and may not sound the most
inviting. The name comes from a famous quote, attributed to Mark Twain: "Eat a live frog first thing in the
morning and nothing worse will happen to you the rest of the day." Eat the Frog is also the title of a best-
selling book by Brian Tracy that deals with time management and avoiding procrastination.
How this applies to time and task management is based on the concept that if a person takes care of the
biggest or most unpleasant task first, everything else will be easier after that.
Although stated in a humorous way, there is a good deal of truth in this. First, we greatly underestimate how
much worry can impact our performance. If you are continually distracted by anxiety over a task you are
dreading, it can affect the task you are working on at the time. Second, not only will you have a sense of
accomplishment and relief when the task you are concerned with is finished and out of the way, but other
tasks will seem lighter and not as difficult.

 APPLICATION

 Try Three Time Management Strategies

  Over the next two weeks, try each of these three methods to see which ones might work for you. Is there
  one you favor over the others? Might each of these three approaches serve you better in different
  situations or with different tasks? Do you have a creative alternative or possibly a way to use some
  combination of these techniques?
  In addition to these three strategies, you could also develop whole new approaches from suggestions
88 3 · Managing Your Time and Priorities

found earlier in this chapter. For example, you could apply some of the strategies for avoiding
procrastination or for setting appropriate priorities and see how they work in combination with these
techniques or on their own.

The key is to find which system works best for you.

Breaking Down the Steps and Spreading Them Over Shorter Work
Periods

Above, you read about several different tried-and-tested strategies for effective time
management--approaches that have become staples in the professional world. In this section you will read
about two more creative techniques that combine elements from these other methods to handle tasks when
time is scarce and long periods of time are a luxury you just do not have.

The concept behind this strategy is to break tasks into smaller, more manageable units that do not require as
much time to complete. As an illustration of how this might work, imagine that you are assigned a two-page
paper that is to include references. You estimate that to complete the paper--start to finish--would take you
between four and a half and five hours. You look at your calendar over the next week and see that there simply
are no open five-hour blocks (unless you decided to only get three hours of sleep one night). Rightly so, you
decide that going without sleep is not a good option. While looking at your calendar, you do see that you can
squeeze in an hour or so every night. Instead of trying to write the entire paper in one sitting, you break it up
into much smaller components and schedule them over the week as shown in the two tables below:

                     Breaking Down Projects into Manageable-Sized Tasks

Day/Time                                  Task                           Time

Monday, 6:00 p.m.                Write outline; look for references.     60 minutes

Tuesday, 6:00 p.m.               Research references to support outline; look for good quotes. 60 minutes

Wednesday, 7:00 p.m. Write paper introduction and first page draft.      60 minutes

Thursday, 6:00 p.m.              Write second page and closing draft.    60 minutes

Friday, 5:00 p.m.                Rewrite and polish final draft.         60 minutes

Saturday, 10:00 a.m. Only if needed--finish or polish final draft.       60 minutes?

Table 3.6

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                   3.5 · Enhanced Strategies for Time and Task Management 89

            Monday       Tuesday Wednesday Thursday              Friday         Saturday Sunday

8:00-10:00               Work                      Work

10:00-12:00 Algebra      Work        Algebra       Work          Algebra        10         Work
                                                                                a.m.-11
                                                                                a.m. Only
                                                                                if needed

12:00-2:00  Lunch/       1 p.m.      Lunch/study   1 p.m.        Lunch/study    Family     Work
            study        English                   English                      picnic
                         Comp                      Comp

2:00-4:00   History      English     History       English       History        Family
                         Comp                      Comp                         picnic

4:00-6:00   Study for    Grocery     Study for     Study for     5 p.m.-6       Family     Laundry
            Algebra                  History       History       p.m. Rewrite   picnic
            quiz.                    exam.         exam.         and polish
                                                                 final draft.

6:00-7:00   Write        Research    Research      Write         Create         Meet       Prepare
            outline;     references  presentation  second page   presentation.  with       school
            look for     to support  project.      and closing                  Darcy.     stuff for
            references.  outline;                  draft                                   next
                         look for                                                          week.
                         good
                         quotes.

7:00-8:00   Free time    Free time   Write paper   Research      Create                    Free
                                     introduction  presentation  presentation.             time
                                     and first     project.
                                     page draft.

Table 3.7

While this is a simple example, you can see how it would redistribute tasks to fit your available time in a way
that would make completing the paper possible. In fact, if your time constraints were even more rigid, it would
be possible to break these divided tasks down even further. You could use a variation of the Pomodoro
Technique and write for three 25-minute segments each day at different times. The key is to look for ways to
break down the entire task into smaller steps and spread them out to fit your schedule.

 ANALYSIS QUESTION

 Reflection

  Analysis: Identify areas in the way you spend your day where you may be able to recapture and repurpose
  time. Are there things you can move around to gain more time? Are there ways you can combine tasks or
90 3 · Managing Your Time and Priorities

        reduce travel time?

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                            3 · Family & Friends Matter 91

    Family & Friends Matter

JT has worked many different jobs over the past few years to cover his living expenses and save up for college.
Because he didn't earn a scholarship and doesn't want to take out loans, he knows he needs to continue to
work to pay for school. In fact, JT has calculated how much he needs to earn each month to graduate on time.
He doesn't have much wiggle room--a few missed hours a week, and he will struggle to pay all his bills.

At the beginning of the semester, JT has picked up extra shifts. In addition to wanting to earn extra money, he
also has a hard time saying no even when he could use that time to study. His boss really values JT's work ethic
and has started expecting that JT will fill in whenever his co-workers ask for time off or, in some cases, just
don't show up. And JT feels that going the extra mile will help him get a promotion and raise, which would
allow him to earn more without working more.

In a few weeks, JT has several group projects and comprehensive exams coming up. This is also the busiest
season at work and their boss sent a message to all the staff that they cannot ask for time off. JT is already
concerned that he will be scheduled to work overtime, and won't have much flexibility. JT is already stressed
about getting all his work done and meeting his boss's needs for covering shifts.

Let's Think About It

JT has several options. Think through the consequences of each one, and choose the best option or create
your own option.

  · JT quits the current job and finds something that offers more flexibility even if it takes a few weeks to find
      it.

  · JT explains to his boss that he needs to earn enough hours to pay his expenses but not be overworked; in
      other words, JT asks for better control over his schedule even if this means the boss will struggle to find
      others to cover the shifts.

  · JT works the schedule he is given and spends what little time and energy he has to complete his course
      work.

Let's Talk About It

JT's dilemma is common for students who must work while in college. You may also experience a situation
when you have two very important responsibilities that conflict with one another. Here are some suggestions
for communicating with others about the dilemma that JT is facing:

  · "I appreciate your giving me the opportunity to earn extra money by picking up additional shifts, but I
      need to reduce my hours in a few weeks because I need to spend time completing class projects and
      studying for my finals. Can we find a solution that works for both of us?"

  · "While I need to work enough each week to pay my bills, I also need time in the next few weeks to focus
      on my course work. I am not sure how to balance my commitment to the job with my commitment to
      college. Can we talk about it?"

  · "I want to be a valuable worker, and I am appreciative of the opportunities I have had to take on extra
      shifts and help the company meet its goals. The next few weeks will be challenging for me as I need to
      both work and spend more time on my course work. Would it be possible to reduce my hours during that
      time?"

Whatever choice you would make in this situation, it is always best to communicate clearly your needs, your
concerns, and even your uncertainties.

    Summary

This chapter began by presenting why time management is important. Then, sections of the text covered how
time management for college can be different from what students may have experienced before. Following
92 3 · Summary

this, the chapter contained several sections on how to effectively manage time (including predicting time on
task), how to use technology to your advantage, and how to prioritize tasks. Other topics included specific
strategies for time and task management and avoiding procrastination.
Refining your time management skills based on an honest assessment is something that should never stop.
The benefits of good time management skills are something that will apply to the rest of your life, and you will
no doubt be working on improving those skills for years to come. Now that you have read and reflected on the
main ideas of the chapter, consider developing a plan to help you achieve college success by considering what
you want to know more about that could help you. Review the list below and commit to working on one or
more of the concepts this term and beyond:

  · Develop better self-awareness about the psychological reasons for procrastinating and create a plan to
      reduce your procrastination.

  · Learn to predict accurately the time needed to complete tasks in college.
  · Eliminate technology and social media as distractions by setting specific times of the day you will engage

      in them.
  · Try out additional time management strategies to supplement what you already do. Choose one to use

      this week and reflect on what worked or not and why.

Access for free at openstax.org
4 · Introduction                                                                                                                   93

4
           Reading and Note-Taking

Figure 4.1 Reading effectively in college may require combining different sources and formats, as well as finding your own way to
record and prioritize information. (Credit: Daniel Sancho / Flickr Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC-BY 2.0))

Chapter Outline

  4.1 The Learning Process
  4.2 The Nature and Types of Reading
  4.3 Effective Reading Strategies
  4.4 Helpful Note-Taking Strategies

      Introduction

 STUDENT STORY

  Ana usually loves to read, but she is not excited about some of the reading in her classes. It seems dull and
  dense, unenjoyable and difficult to get through.
  Moreover, she has a lot of it to do each week, and she notices that her professors don't really go over all of
  the reading during their lectures. Many times she skims the reading and gets the "main points," but does
  little else with it.
  Her professors expect her to be able to answer questions in class about the readings and to contribute to
  the discussion, but instead, she sits back and doodles while listening.
  She feels she does get something out of class by listening, but by the time she gets back to her room at the
  end of the day, she cannot really remember anything enough to write it down or go back to the assigned
  texts. Besides, she thinks she can read the chapters more thoroughly when she studies-this worked for her
  in high school.
  And that is exactly what Ana does two days before a biology exam. She tries to read 6 long chapters that
  have lots of information that needs to be retained for the test. She is frustrated and worried that she has
94 4 · Reading and Note-Taking

        set herself up for failure.
        What Do You Think?

          · If you were Ana, what would you have done when you had lots of reading that was not interesting to
              you?

          · What steps could you have taken to avoid reading right before a test?
          · What would you have done while in class to participate and capture the main ideas?
          · How do you feel about reading and note-taking? Why do you feel this way?

    Student Survey

      How confident are you in reading actively and critically and taking good notes? Take this quick survey to figure
      it out, ranking questions on a scale of 1--4, 1 meaning "least like me" and 4 meaning "most like me." These
      questions will help you determine how the chapter concepts relate to you right now. As you are introduced to
      new concepts and practices, it can be informative to reflect on how your understanding changes over time.
      1. I am reading on a college level.
      2. I take good notes that help me study for exams.
      3. I understand how to manage all the reading I need to do for college.
      4. I recognize the need for different note-taking strategies for different college subjects.
      You can also take the Chapter 4 survey (https://openstax.org/l/collegeconcisesurvey03) anonymously online.

       STUDENT PROFILE

        "Before I came to college, I always loathed reading from the textbook, taking notes during class, and even
        listening to lectures. I've since learned that in most cases I should do what my teacher suggests. I have a
        course that requires me to read two textbook chapters each week. Taking notes on the chapters is optional,
        making it easy to brush off these assignments. But there are reasons that professors tell students to read
        and do other classwork. They believe it is valuable information for a student to learn. Note-taking in class
        may become tedious and, in some cases, feel redundant, but you can't recall a whole class from memory.
        There is not much time to learn the contents of a class in one semester, and it can feel overwhelming. It's
        important to take notes because writing them helps you remember."
        --Christopher Naldini, Westchester Community College

    About This Chapter

      In this chapter we will explore two skills you probably think you already perform well--reading and note-
      taking. But first we will discuss what learning is and why the processes of reading and taking notes are integral
      to the learning process. The goal of this chapter, and your continued improvement on these skills, is to make
      sure you've honed them well enough to lead you to success in college. By the time you finish this chapter, you
      should be able to do the following:

        · Describe the learning process and how reading and note-taking are an important part of it.
        · Discuss the way reading differs in college and how to successfully adapt to that change.
        · Demonstrate the usefulness of strong note-taking while reading and during a lecture.
      Reading and consuming information are increasingly important today because of the amount of information
      we encounter. Not only do we need to read critically and carefully, but we also need to read with an eye to
      distinguishing fact from opinion and identifying solid sources. Reading helps us make sense of the

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                     4.1 · The Learning Process 95

world--from simple reminders to pick up milk to complex treatises on global concerns, we read to
comprehend, and in so doing, our brains expand. An interesting study from Emory University in Atlanta,
Georgia, used MRI scans to track the brain conductivity while participants were reading. The researchers assert
that a biological change to your brain actually happens when you read, and it lingers. If you want to read the
study, published in the journal Brain Connectivity, you can find it online at https://openstax.org/l/
brainconnectivity (https://openstax.org/l/brainconnectivity).

In academic settings, as we deliberately work to become stronger readers and better notetakers, we are both
helping our current situation and enhancing our abilities to be successful in the future. Seems like a win-win.
Take advantage of all the study aids you have at hand, including human, electronic, and physical resources, to
increase your performance in these crucial skill sets.

Why? You need to read. It improves your thinking, your vocabulary, and your ability to make connections
between disparate parts, which are all parts of critical thinking. Educational researchers Anne Cunningham
and Keith Stanovich discovered after extensive study with college students that "reading volume [how much
you read] made a significant contribution to multiple measures of vocabulary, general knowledge, spelling,
and verbal fluency."

Research continues to assess and support the fact that one of the most significant learning skills necessary for
success in any field is reading. You may have performed this skill for decades already, but learning to do it
more effectively and practicing the skill consistently is critical to how well you do in all subjects. If reading isn't
your thing, strive to make that your challenge. Your academic journey, your personal well-being, and your
professional endeavors will all benefit from your reading. Put forth the effort and make it your thing. The long-
term benefits will far outweigh the sacrifices you make now.

 4.1 The Learning Process

                                                                                                  Estimated completion time: 12 minutes.

Questions to Consider:

  · What are the steps to learning something new?
  · How is the brain affected by learning?
  · What kinds of learning are expected in college?

Have you ever thought about how we learn something new? Think back on a skill you have learned. Did you
start with an interest in the topic or skill? Then, did you start practicing the skill or deepening your
understanding of the topic? Perhaps you received feedback using the skill or sharing your knowledge and then
you worked on refining that skill or understanding. If you participated in that process, then you did what Rita
Smilkstein (2011) calls "The Natural Learning Process."1 Here are the steps that she says we go through any
time we learn:

(1) motivation;

(2) beginning practice;

(3) advanced practice to build a foundation upon which control, creativity, and critical and abstract thinking can
be applied;

(4) skillfulness;

(5) refinement; and

1 Smilkstein, R. (2011). We're born to learn: Using the brain's natural learning process to create today's curriculum. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Corwin Press.
96 4 · Reading and Note-Taking

      (6) mastery.

      Another way to look at learning is through the biological lens. When we go through the learning process
      outlined above, our brains actually change. This is called neuroplasticity, or the brain's ability to form or
      reorganize neural pathways in reaction to the learning process. This means that when you learn something
      new, and especially if you practice it and fail at getting it right the first time, your brain is changing. When you
      get better at a skill such as throwing a curve ball or learning how to solve for X, your brain is actually
      reorganizing itself so that you can perform those tasks more quickly.

      So what does this have to do with reading and note-taking? Your learning process has to begin somewhere
      before you can claim mastery of a concept. Too many students try to move quickly through reading or take
      only partial notes because they think that just by scanning a text or listening to a lecture and jotting down a
      few key ideas, they have adequately learned something. True, your brain is changing during those initial
      processes, but it will take much more practice (also known as studying) to help you recall that information at a
      later date. Moreover, your goal in college classes is not just to remember the information for a test, but it is to
      build on that foundational knowledge to learn different levels of thinking, which we will talk about in the next
      section.

    Bloom's Taxonomy

      One aspect of learning in college is that different professors and different courses expect different types of
      learning from you. Figuring out how you need to learn the material and how you will be tested on it is part of
      learning the (sometimes) hidden curriculum.

      If you want some insight into the types of learning you will do in college, you will want to get to know the work
      of Dr. Benjamin Bloom, an educational psychologist best known for his classification of different levels of
      learning, and the concept called Bloom's Taxonomy2 . See Figure 4.2 for a list of the levels as well as verbs that
      demonstrate what you would do at each level. The bottom two levels, Remember and Understand, are called
      "lower levels" of Bloom's because they often take less effort than the others, and they are seen as foundational
      to the learning process.

      The remaining levels are considered "higher levels" of Bloom's because they often require you not only
      understand the information, but also do something with it: apply it to a new situation, analyze its components,
      evaluate its strengths and weaknesses, or create something new from your knowledge. Not all of your learning
      in college and the workplace will be at the higher levels of Bloom's Taxonomy, but as you gain more knowledge
      and develop more sophisticated academic and workplace skills, you will move beyond merely remembering
      information.

      Let's break down the different levels so you have a better understanding of them. The first and lowest level is
      "Remember." At this level, you are attempting to recall information, such as definitions of terms or steps in a
      process. You don't have to really understand (that will come next) the concepts at this level. For example, you
      may be able to memorize the steps of the Krebs Cycle by naming them in order, but that doesn't mean you
      truly understand the processes involved and the effects of each step.

      The second level is "Understand." This is the stage in which you can explain or describe a concept in your own
      words. Usually, if you have restated a term, concept, or process in your own words, you have a basic
      understanding of it. Again, these are lower levels of Bloom's Taxonomy and are the fundamental first steps if
      you want to move higher up on the taxonomy. The next level is "Apply," which indicates that you know the
      concept well enough to use it in a new context. Math classes often ask you to remember and understand the
      steps of a formula and the reason you would use it, but then ask that you use that formula in a new problem.

      The levels in which you "Analyze" and "Evaluate" require that you be able to examine the concepts in depth and
      be able to, for example, compare and contrast a concept with another concept (Analyze) or choose the best

       2 Bloom, B.S. (1980). All our children learning. NY: McGraw-Hill.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                    4.2 · The Nature and Types of Reading 97

concept among others (Evaluate). The final level is "Create," which, according to Bloom, is the pinnacle of
learning: If you can create (or recreate) something new based on what you have learned, you have
demonstrated understanding of a concept, idea, or skill.
We will revisit Bloom's Taxonomy in the chapter on studying, but it is worth introducing in relation to reading
and note-taking because students who read texts and take notes on their readings or the professor's lectures
are often capturing information to remember it later. This is a good first step to the learning process, but as
you will see later, that is not the only or final step to learning.

Figure 4.2 Bloom's Taxonomy provides both instructors and students with a method to classify learning objectives and skills into
different levels of complexity.

 4.2 The Nature and Types of Reading

                                                                                                  Estimated completion time: 16 minutes.

Questions to Consider:
  · How can distinguishing between reading types help you academically and personally?
  · How can you best prepare to read for college?

Research supports the idea that reading is good for you. Students who read at or above reading level
throughout elementary and secondary school have a higher chance of starting--and more importantly,
finishing--college. Educational researchers convincingly claim that reading improves everything from grades
to vocabulary.3
If you don't particularly enjoy reading, don't despair. We read for a variety of reasons, and you may just have to
step back and take a bigger picture of your reading habits to understand why you avoid engaging in this
important skill. The myriad distractions we now face as well as the intense information overload we can suffer
on a daily basis in all aspects of our lives can combine to make it difficult to slow down to read, an activity that
demands at least a modicum of attention in a way that most television and music do not. You may need to
adjust your schedule for more reading time, especially in college, because every class you take will expect you

3 Cunningham, A. and Stanovich, K. (1998). "What reading does for the mind." The American Federation of Teachers. American
Educator, Vol. 22, No. 1-2, pp. 8-15.
98 4 · Reading and Note-Taking

      to read more pages than you probably have in the past.
      One last suggestion about reading: Many students report that they don't like to read unless they are already
      interested in the topic. This is understandable when considering that many assigned texts in college may be
      something students are not familiar with, don't immediately see the benefit of knowing, and are written in a
      less-than-engaging manner. Your goal when assigned reading that seems "uninteresting" is to develop your
      curiosity about the subject and approach your reading like a detective looking for clues to solve a larger
      mystery. Asking yourself "What will I gain from reading this?" and "How will this reading help me develop skills
      that I will need now and in the future?" are good places to start with developing curiosity. You may be
      surprised that you are interested in the topic and want to expand your knowledge by reading more about it.

    Types of Reading

      You may read small items purely for immediate information, such as notes, e-mails, or directions to an
      unfamiliar location. You can find all sorts of information online about how to fix a faucet or tie a secure knot.
      You won't have to spend too much time reading these sorts of texts because you have a specific goal in mind
      for them, and once you have accomplished that goal, you do not need to prolong the reading experience.
      These encounters with texts may not be memorable or stunning, but they don't need to be. When we consider
      why we read longer pieces--outside of reading for pleasure--we can usually categorize the reasons into about
      two categories: 1) reading to introduce ourselves to new content, and 2) reading to more fully comprehend
      familiar content.

       Figure 4.3 A bookstore or library can be a great place to explore. Aside from books and resources you need, you may find something
       that interests you or helps with your course work. (Credit: MarLeah Cole / Flickr Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC-BY 2.0))

     Reading to Introduce New Content

      Consider the following scenario: Glenn felt uncomfortable talking with his new roommates because he realized
      very quickly that he didn't know anything about their major--architecture. Of course he knew that it had
      something to do with buildings and construction sites, but the field was so different from his discipline of
      biology that he decided he needed to find out more so he could at least engage in friendly conversation with
      his roommates. Since he would likely not go into their field, he didn't need to go into full research mode.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                    4.2 · The Nature and Types of Reading 99

Glenn's purpose for reading was specific to his situation. When we read to discover new content, we can start
off small and increase to better and more sophisticated sources. Much of our further study and reading
depends on the sources we originally read, our purpose for finding out about this new topic, and our interest
level.

Chances are, you have done this sort of exploratory reading before. You may read reviews of a new restaurant
or look at what people say about a movie you aren't sure you want to spend the money to see at the theater.
This reading helps you decide. In academic settings, much of what you read in your courses may be relatively
new content to you. You may have heard the word volcano and have a general notion of what it means, but
until you study geology and other sciences in depth, you may not have a full understanding of the
environmental origins, ecological impacts, and societal and historic responses to volcanoes.

These perspectives will come from reading and digesting various material. When you are working with new
content, you may need to schedule more time for reading and comprehending the information because you
may need to look up unfamiliar terminology and you may have to stop more frequently to make sure you are
truly grasping what the material means. When you have few ways to connect new material to your own prior
knowledge, you have to work more diligently to comprehend it.

 APPLICATION

  Try an experiment with a group of classmates. Without looking on the Internet, try to brainstorm a list of 10
  topics about which all of you may be interested but for which you know very little or nothing at all. Try to
  make the topics somewhat obscure rather than ordinary--for example, the possibility of the non-planet
  Pluto being reclassified again as opposed to something like why we need to drink water.

  After you have this random list, think of ways you could find information to read about these weird topics.
  Our short answer is always: Google. But think of other ways as well. How else could you read about these
  topics if you don't know anything about them? You may well be in a similar circumstance in some of your
  college classes, so you should listen carefully to your classmates on this one. Think beyond pat answers
  such as "I'd go to the library," and press for what that researcher would do once at the library. What types of
  articles or books would you try to find? One reason that you should not always ignore the idea of doing
  research at the physical library is because once you are there and looking for information, you have a vast
  number of other sources readily available to you in a highly organized location. You also can tap into the
  human resources represented by the research librarians who likely can redirect you if you cannot find
  appropriate sources.

Reading to Comprehend Familiar Content

Reading about unfamiliar content is one thing, but what if you do know something about a topic already? Do
you really still need to keep reading about it? Probably. For example, what if during the brainstorming activity
in the activity above, you secretly felt rather smug because you know about the demotion of the one-time
planet Pluto and that there is currently quite the scientific debate going on about that whole de-planet-ation
thing. Of course, you didn't say anything during the study session, mostly to spare your classmates any
embarrassment, but you are pretty familiar with Pluto-gate. So now what? Can you learn anything new?

Again--probably. When did Pluto's qualifications to be considered a planet come into question? What are the
qualifications for being considered a planet? Why? Who even gets to decide these things? Why was it called
Pluto in the first place? On Amazon alone, you can find hundreds of books about the once-planet Pluto (not to
be confused with the Disney dog also named Pluto). A Google search brings up over 34 million options for your
reading pleasure. You'll have plenty to read, even if you do know something or quite a bit about a topic, but
you'll approach reading about a familiar topic and an unfamiliar one differently.
100 4 · Reading and Note-Taking

       With familiar content, you can do some initial skimming to determine what you already know in the book or
       article, and mark what may be new information or a different perspective. You may not have to give your full
       attention to the information you know, but you will spend more time on the new viewpoints so you can
       determine how this new data meshes with what you already know. Is this writer claiming a radical new
       definition for the topic or an entirely opposite way to consider the subject matter, connecting it to other topics
       or disciplines in ways you have never considered?
       When college students encounter material in a discipline-specific context and have some familiarity with the
       topic, they sometimes can allow themselves to become a bit overconfident about their knowledge level. Just
       because a student may have read an article or two or may have seen a TV documentary on a subject such as
       the criminal mind, that does not make them an expert. What makes an expert is a person who thoroughly
       studies a subject, usually for years, and understands all the possible perspectives of a subject as well as the
       potential for misunderstanding due to personal biases and the availability of false information about the topic.

     4.3 Effective Reading Strategies

                                                                                                          Estimated completion time: 25 minutes.

       Questions to Consider:
         · What methods can you incorporate into your routine to allow adequate time for reading?
         · What are the benefits and approaches to active and critical reading?
         · Do your courses or major have specific reading requirements?

     Allowing Adequate Time for Reading

       You should determine the reading requirements and expectations for every class very early in the semester.
       You also need to understand why you are reading the particular text you are assigned. Do you need to read
       closely for minute details that determine cause and effect? Or is your instructor asking you to skim several
       sources so you become more familiar with the topic? Knowing this reasoning will help you decide your timing,
       what notes to take, and how best to undertake the reading assignment.

         Figure 4.4 If you plan to make time for reading while you commute, remember that unexpected events like delays and cancellations
         could impact your concentration. (Credit: The LEAF Project / Flickr, Public Domain (CC-0))

       Depending on the makeup of your schedule, you may end up reading both primary sources--such as legal

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                     4.3 · Effective Reading Strategies 101

documents, historic letters, or diaries--as well as textbooks, articles, and secondary sources, such as
summaries or argumentative essays that use primary sources to stake a claim. You may also need to read
current journalistic texts to stay up to date in local or global affairs. A realistic approach to scheduling your
time to allow you to read and review all the reading you have for the semester will help you accomplish what
can sometimes seem like an overwhelming task.

When you allow adequate time in your hectic schedule for reading, you are investing in your own success.
Reading isn't a magic pill, but it may seem like it when you consider all the benefits people reap from this
ordinary practice. Famous successful people throughout history have been voracious readers. In fact, former
U.S. president Harry Truman once said, "Not all readers are leaders, but all leaders are readers." Writer of the
U.S. Declaration of Independence, inventor, and also former U.S. president Thomas Jefferson claimed "I cannot
live without books" at a time when keeping and reading books was an expensive pastime. Knowing what it
meant to be kept from the joys of reading, 19th-century abolitionist Frederick Douglass said, "Once you learn
to read, you will be forever free." And finally, George R. R. Martin, the prolific author of the wildly successful
Game of Thrones empire, declared, "A reader lives a thousand lives before he dies . . . The man who never
reads lives only one."

You can make time for reading in a number of ways that include determining your usual reading pace and
speed, scheduling active reading sessions, and practicing recursive reading strategies.

Determining Reading Speed and Pacing

To determine your reading speed, select a section of text--passages in a textbook or pages in a novel. Time
yourself reading that material for exactly 5 minutes, and note how much reading you accomplished in those 5
minutes. Multiply the amount of reading you accomplished in 5 minutes by 12 to determine your average
reading pace (5 times 12 equals the 60 minutes of an hour). Of course, your reading pace will be different and
take longer if you are taking notes while you read, but this calculation of reading pace gives you a good way to
estimate your reading speed that you can adapt to other forms of reading.

              Example Reading Times

Reader Pages Read in 5 Minutes Pages per Hour Approximate Hours to Read 500 Pages

Marta 4       48  10 hours, 30 minutes

Jordi      3  36  13 hours

Estevan 5     60  8 hours, 20 minutes

Table 4.1

In the table above, you can see three students with different reading speeds. So, for instance, if Marta was
able to read 4 pages of a dense novel for her English class in 5 minutes, she should be able to read about 48
pages in one hour. Knowing this, Marta can accurately determine how much time she needs to devote to
finishing the novel within a set amount of time, instead of just guessing. If the novel Marta is reading is 497
pages, then Marta would take the total page count (497) and divide that by her hourly reading rate (48 pages/
hour) to determine that she needs about 10 to 11 hours overall. To finish the novel spread out over two weeks,
Marta needs to read a little under an hour a day to accomplish this goal.

Calculating your reading rate in this manner does not take into account days where you're too distracted and
you have to reread passages or days when you just aren't in the mood to read. And your reading rate will likely
vary depending on how dense the content you're reading is (e.g., a complex textbook vs. a comic book). Your
102 4 · Reading and Note-Taking

pace may slow down somewhat if you are not very interested in what the text is about. What this method will
help you do is be realistic about your reading time as opposed to waging a guess based on nothing and then
becoming worried when you have far more reading to finish than the time available.

Chapter 2, "Managing Your Time and Priorities," offers more detail on how best to determine your speed from
one type of reading to the next so you are better able to schedule your reading.

Scheduling Set Times for Active Reading

Active reading takes longer than reading through passages without stopping. You may not need to read your
latest sci-fi series actively while you're lounging on the beach, but many other reading situations demand more
attention from you. Active reading is particularly important for college courses. You are a scholar actively
engaging with the text by posing questions, seeking answers, and clarifying any confusing elements. Plan to
spend at least twice as long to read actively than to read passages without taking notes or otherwise marking
select elements of the text.

To determine the time you need for active reading, use the same calculations you use to determine your
traditional reading speed and double it. Remember that you need to determine your reading pace for all the
classes you have in a particular semester and multiply your speed by the number of classes you have that
require different types of reading. The table below shows the differences in time needed between reading
quickly without taking notes and reading actively.

                                     Example Active Reading Times

Reader     Pages Read in 5         Pages   Approximate Hours to    Approximate Hours to Actively
                Minutes          per Hour       Read 500 Pages                Read 500 Pages

Marta 4                          48        10 hours, 30 minutes    21 hours

Jordi      3                     36        13 hours                26 hours

Estevan 5                        60        8 hours, 20 minutes     16 hours, 40 minutes

Table 4.2

Practicing Recursive Reading Strategies

One fact about reading for college courses that may become frustrating is that, in a way, it never ends. For all
the reading you do, you end up doing even more rereading. It may be the same content, but you may be
reading the passage more than once to detect the emphasis the writer places on one aspect of the topic or
how frequently the writer dismisses a significant counterargument. This rereading is called recursive reading.

For most of what you read at the college level, you are trying to make sense of the text for a specific
purpose--not just because the topic interests or entertains you. You need your full attention to decipher
everything that's going on in complex reading material--and you even need to be considering what the writer
of the piece may not be including and why. This is why reading for comprehension is recursive.

Specifically, this boils down to seeing reading not as a formula but as a process that is far more circular than
linear. You may read a selection from beginning to end, which is an excellent starting point, but for
comprehension, you'll need to go back and reread passages to determine meaning and make connections
between the reading and the bigger learning environment that led you to the selection--that may be a single
course or a program in your college, or it may be the larger discipline, such as all biologists or the community
of scholars studying beach erosion.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                           4.3 · Effective Reading Strategies 103

People often say writing is rewriting. For college courses, reading is rereading, but rereading with the intention
of improving comprehension and taking notes.
Strong readers engage in numerous steps, sometimes combining more than one step simultaneously, but
knowing the steps nonetheless. They include, not always in this order:

  · bringing any prior knowledge about the topic to the reading session,
  · asking yourself pertinent questions, both orally and in writing, about the content you are reading,
  · inferring and/or implying information from what you read,
  · learning unfamiliar discipline-specific terms,
  · evaluating what you are reading, and eventually,
  · applying what you're reading to other learning and life situations you encounter.
Let's break these steps into manageable chunks, because you are actually doing quite a lot when you read.

                     Figure 4.5 The six elements of recursive reading should be considered as a circular, not linear, process.

Accessing Prior Knowledge
When you read, you naturally think of anything else you may know about the topic, but when you read
deliberately and actively, you make yourself more aware of accessing this prior knowledge. Have you ever
watched a documentary about this topic? Did you study some aspect of it in another class? Do you have a
hobby that is somehow connected to this material? All of this thinking will help you make sense of what you
are reading.

 APPLICATION

  Imagine that you were given a chapter to read in your American history class about the Gettysburg
  Address, now write down what you already know about this historic document. How might thinking through
  this prior knowledge help you better understand the text?

Asking Questions
Humans are naturally curious beings. As you read actively, you should be asking questions about the topic you
104 4 · Reading and Note-Taking

       are reading. Don't just say the questions in your mind; write them down. You may ask: Why is this topic
       important? What is the relevance of this topic currently? Was this topic important a long time ago but
       irrelevant now? Why did my professor assign this reading?

       You need a place where you can actually write down these questions; a separate page in your notes is a good
       place to begin. If you are taking notes on your computer, start a new document and write down the questions.
       Leave some room to answer the questions when you begin and again after you read.

       Inferring and Implying

       When you read, you can take the information on the page and infer, or conclude responses to related
       challenges from evidence or from your own reasoning. A student will likely be able to infer what material the
       professor will include on an exam by taking good notes throughout the classes leading up to the test.

       Writers may imply information without directly stating a fact for a variety of reasons. Sometimes a writer may
       not want to come out explicitly and state a bias, but may imply or hint at his or her preference for one political
       party or another. You have to read carefully to find implications because they are indirect, but watching for
       them will help you comprehend the whole meaning of a passage.

       Learning Vocabulary

       Vocabulary specific to certain disciplines helps practitioners in that field engage and communicate with each
       other. Few people beyond undertakers and archeologists likely use the term sarcophagus in everyday
       communications, but for those disciplines, it is a meaningful distinction. Looking at the example, you can use
       context clues to figure out the meaning of the term sarcophagus because it is something undertakers and/or
       archeologists would recognize. At the very least, you can guess that it has something to do with death. As a
       potential professional in the field you're studying, you need to know the lingo. You may already have a system
       in place to learn discipline-specific vocabulary, so use what you know works for you. Two strong strategies are
       to look up words in a dictionary (online or hard copy) to ensure you have the exact meaning for your discipline
       and to keep a dedicated list of words you see often in your reading. You can list the words with a short
       definition so you have a quick reference guide to help you learn the vocabulary.

       Evaluating

       Intelligent people always question and evaluate. This doesn't mean they don't trust others; they just need
       verification of facts to understand a topic well. It doesn't make sense to learn incomplete or incorrect
       information about a subject just because you didn't take the time to evaluate all the sources at your disposal.
       When early explorers were afraid to sail the world for fear of falling off the edge, they weren't stupid; they just
       didn't have all the necessary data to evaluate the situation.

       When you evaluate a text, you are seeking to understand the presented topic. Depending on how long the text
       is, you will perform a number of steps and repeat many of these steps to evaluate all the elements the author
       presents. When you evaluate a text, you need to do the following:

         · Scan the title and all headings.
         · Read through the entire passage fully.
         · Question what main point the author is making.
         · Decide who the audience is.
         · Identify what evidence/support the author uses.
         · Consider if the author presents a balanced perspective on the main point.
         · Recognize if the author introduced any biases in the text.

       When you go through a text looking for each of these elements, you need to go beyond just answering the
       surface question; for instance, the audience may be a specific field of scientists, but could anyone else
       understand the text with some explanation? Why would that be important?

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                           4.3 · Effective Reading Strategies 105

 ANALYSIS QUESTION

  Think of an article you need to read for a class. Take the steps above on how to evaluate a text, and apply
  the steps to the article. When you accomplish the task in each step, ask yourself and take notes to answer
  the question: Why is this important? For example, when you read the title, does that give you any additional
  information that will help you comprehend the text? If the text were written for a different audience, what
  might the author need to change to accommodate that group? How does an author's bias distort an
  argument? This deep evaluation allows you to fully understand the main ideas and place the text in context
  with other material on the same subject, with current events, and within the discipline.

Applying

When you learn something new, it always connects to other knowledge you already have. One challenge we
have is applying new information. It may be interesting to know the distance to the moon, but how do we
apply it to something we need to do? If your biology instructor asked you to list several challenges of
colonizing Mars and you do not know much about that planet's exploration, you may be able to use your
knowledge of how far Earth is from the moon to apply it to the new task. You may have to read several other
texts in addition to reading graphs and charts to find this information.

That was the challenge the early space explorers faced along with myriad unknowns before space travel was a
more regular occurrence. They had to take what they already knew and could study and read about and apply
it to an unknown situation. These explorers wrote down their challenges, failures, and successes, and now
scientists read those texts as a part of the ever-growing body of text about space travel. Application is a
sophisticated level of thinking that helps turn theory into practice and challenges into successes.

Preparing to Read for Specific Disciplines in College

Different disciplines in college may have specific expectations, but you can depend on all subjects asking you
to read to some degree. In this college reading requirement, you can succeed by learning to read actively,
researching the topic and author, and recognizing how your own preconceived notions affect your reading.
Reading for college isn't the same as reading for pleasure or even just reading to learn something on your own
because you are casually interested.

In college courses, your instructor may ask you to read articles, chapters, books, or primary sources (those
original documents about which we write and study, such as letters between historic figures or the Declaration
of Independence). Your instructor may want you to have a general background on a topic before you dive into
that subject in class, so that you know the history of a topic, can start thinking about it, and can engage in a
class discussion with more than a passing knowledge of the issue.

If you are about to participate in an in-depth six-week consideration of the U.S. Constitution but have never
read it or anything written about it, you will have a hard time looking at anything in detail or understanding
how and why it is significant. As you can imagine, a great deal has been written about the Constitution by
scholars and citizens since the late 1700s when it was first put to paper (that's how they did it then). While the
actual document isn't that long (about 12-15 pages depending on how it is presented), learning the details on
how it came about, who was involved, and why it was and still is a significant document would take a
considerable amount of time to read and digest. So, how do you do it all? Especially when you may have an
instructor who drops hints that you may also love to read a historic novel covering the same time period . . . in
your spare time, not required, of course! It can be daunting, especially if you are taking more than one course
that has time-consuming reading lists. With a few strategic techniques, you can manage it all, but know that
you must have a plan and schedule your required reading so you are also able to pick up that recommended
historic novel--it may give you an entirely new perspective on the issue.
106 4 · Reading and Note-Taking

      Strategies for Reading in College Disciplines

       No universal law exists for how much reading instructors and institutions expect college students to undertake
       for various disciplines. Suffice it to say, it's a LOT.

       For most students, it is the volume of reading that catches them most off guard when they begin their college
       careers. A full course load might require 10-15 hours of reading per week, some of that covering content that
       will be more difficult than the reading for other courses.

       You cannot possibly read word-for-word every single document you need to read for all your classes. That
       doesn't mean you give up or decide to only read for your favorite classes or concoct a scheme to read 17
       percent for each class and see how that works for you. You need to learn to skim, annotate, and take notes. All
       of these techniques will help you comprehend more of what you read, which is why we read in the first place.
       We'll talk more later about annotating and note-taking, but for now consider what you know about skimming
       as opposed to active reading.

      Skimming

       Skimming is not just glancing over the words on a page (or screen) to see if any of it sticks. Effective skimming
       allows you to take in the major points of a passage without the need for a time-consuming reading session
       that involves your active use of notations and annotations. Often you will need to engage in that painstaking
       level of active reading, but skimming is the first step--not an alternative to deep reading. The fact remains that
       neither do you need to read everything nor could you possibly accomplish that given your limited time. So
       learn this valuable skill of skimming as an accompaniment to your overall study tool kit, and with practice and
       experience, you will fully understand how valuable it is.

       When you skim, look for guides to your understanding: headings, definitions, pull quotes, tables, and context
       clues. Textbooks are often helpful for skimming--they may already have made some of these skimming guides
       in bold or a different color, and chapters often follow a predictable outline. Some even provide an overview and
       summary for sections or chapters. Use whatever you can get, but don't stop there. In textbooks that have
       some reading guides, or especially in texts that do not, look for introductory words such as First or The
       purpose of this article . . . or summary words such as In conclusion . . . or Finally. These guides will help you
       read only those sentences or paragraphs that will give you the overall meaning or gist of a passage or book.

       Now move to the meat of the passage. You want to take in the reading as a whole. For a book, look at the titles
       of each chapter if available. Read each chapter's introductory paragraph and determine why the writer chose
       this particular order. Depending on what you're reading, the chapters may be only informational, but often
       you're looking for a specific argument. What position is the writer claiming? What support, counterarguments,
       and conclusions is the writer presenting?

       Don't think of skimming as a way to buzz through a boring reading assignment. It is a skill you should master
       so you can engage, at various levels, with all the reading you need to accomplish in college. End your
       skimming session with a few notes--terms to look up, questions you still have, and an overall summary. And
       recognize that you likely will return to that book or article for a more thorough reading if the material is useful.

        THE REAL DEAL

         "One thing I wish I would have known before going to college is about how getting to know your
         classmates can be really beneficial, because you have someone to ask questions, form study groups, as well
         as talking about stress you may be experiencing in that class. Reading and notetaking was a big adjustment
         for me when I got to college, but being here I learned that reading the material is the thing that helps me
         the most. Obviously, reading textbooks isn't fun, but it's a must especially for your classes like biology and

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                           4.3 · Effective Reading Strategies 107

  chemistry. For example, in my biology class, the chapters I need to read I take notes on the whole chapter
  then after taking my lecture notes I rewrite my notes combining the things that my professor put emphasis
  on. For notetaking it can be difficult to keep up with lectures so I record the lecture and after class I listen to
  my recording and write the things that I missed in lecture, and highlight the things that my professor said
  could be test material. If you are having trouble with reading and notetaking, ask your professor what you
  should do, don't be afraid to ask questions with your professor. I would also ask classmates around you,
  because you might learn a new way to write notes for your class. Lastly, don't be afraid to have different
  note taking techniques for each class, because sometimes it's needed."

  --Alexys Shankle, sophomore

Active Reading Strategies

Active reading differs significantly from skimming or reading for pleasure. You can think of active reading as a
sort of conversation between you and the text (maybe between you and the author, but you don't want to get
the author's personality too involved in this metaphor because that may skew your engagement with the text).

When you sit down to determine what your different classes expect you to read and you create a reading
schedule to ensure you complete all the reading, think about when you should read the material strategically,
not just how to get it all done. You should read textbook chapters and other reading assignments before you
go into a lecture about that information. Don't wait to see how the lecture goes before you read the material,
or you may not understand the information in the lecture. Reading before class helps you put ideas together
between your reading and the information you hear and discuss in class.

Different disciplines naturally have different types of texts, and you need to take this into account when you
schedule your time for reading class material. For example, you may look at a poem for your world literature
class and assume that it will not take you long to read because it is relatively short compared to the dense
textbook you have for your economics class. But reading and understanding a poem can take a considerable
amount of time when you realize you may need to stop numerous times to review the separate word
meanings and how the words form images and connections throughout the poem.

The SQ3R Reading Strategy

You may have heard of the SQ3R method for active reading in your early education. This valuable technique is
perfect for college reading. The title stands for Survey, Question, Read, Recite, Review, and you can use the
steps on virtually any assigned passage. Designed by Francis Pleasant Robinson in his 1961 book Effective
Study, the active reading strategy gives readers a systematic way to work through any reading material.

Survey is similar to skimming. You look for clues to meaning by reading the titles, headings, introductions,
summary, captions for graphics, and keywords. You can survey almost anything connected to the reading
selection, including the copyright information, the date of the journal article, or the names and qualifications
of the author(s). In this step, you decide what the general meaning is for the reading selection.

Question is your creation of questions to seek the main ideas, support, examples, and conclusions of the
reading selection. Ask yourself these questions separately. Try to create valid questions about what you are
about to read that have come into your mind as you engaged in the Survey step. Try turning the headings of
the sections in the chapter into questions. Next, how does what you're reading relate to you, your school, your
community, and the world?

Read is when you actually read the passage. Try to find the answers to questions you developed in the
previous step. Decide how much you are reading in chunks, either by paragraph for more complex readings or
by section or even by an entire chapter. When you finish reading the selection, stop to make notes. Answer the
questions by writing a note in the margin or other white space of the text.
108 4 · Reading and Note-Taking

       You may also carefully underline or highlight text in addition to your notes. Use caution here that you don't try
       to rush this step by haphazardly circling terms or the other extreme of underlining huge chunks of text. Don't
       over-mark. You aren't likely to remember what these cryptic marks mean later when you come back to use this
       active reading session to study. The text is the source of information--your marks and notes are just a way to
       organize and make sense of that information.

       Recite means to speak out loud. By reciting, you are engaging other senses to remember the material--you
       read it (visual) and you said it (auditory). Stop reading momentarily in the step to answer your questions or
       clarify confusing sentences or paragraphs. You can recite a summary of what the text means to you. If you are
       not in a place where you can verbalize, such as a library or classroom, you can accomplish this step adequately
       by saying it in your head; however, to get the biggest bang for your buck, try to find a place where you can
       speak aloud. You may even want to try explaining the content to a friend.

       Review is a recap. Go back over what you read and add more notes, ensuring you have captured the main
       points of the passage, identified the supporting evidence and examples, and understood the overall meaning.
       You may need to repeat some or all of the SQR3 steps during your review depending on the length and
       complexity of the material. Before you end your active reading session, write a short (no more than one page
       is optimal) summary of the text you read.

      Reading Primary and Secondary Sources

       Primary sources are original documents we study and from which we glean information; primary sources
       include letters, first editions of books, legal documents, and a variety of other texts. When scholars look at
       these documents to understand a period in history or a scientific challenge and then write about their
       findings, the scholar's article is considered a secondary source. Readers have to keep several factors in mind
       when reading both primary and secondary sources.

       Primary sources may contain dated material we now know is inaccurate. It may contain personal beliefs and
       biases the original writer didn't intend to be openly published, and it may even present fanciful or creative
       ideas that do not support current knowledge. Readers can still gain great insight from primary sources, but
       readers need to understand the context from which the writer of the primary source wrote the text.

       Likewise, secondary sources are inevitably another person's perspective on the primary source, so a reader of
       secondary sources must also be aware of potential biases or preferences the secondary source writer inserts
       in the writing that may persuade an incautious reader to interpret the primary source in a particular manner.

       For example, if you were to read a secondary source that is examining the U.S. Declaration of Independence
       (the primary source), you would have a much clearer idea of how the secondary source scholar presented the
       information from the primary source if you also read the Declaration for yourself instead of trusting the other
       writer's interpretation. Most scholars are honest in writing secondary sources, but you as a reader of the
       source are trusting the writer to present a balanced perspective of the primary source. When possible, you
       should attempt to read a primary source in conjunction with the secondary source. The Internet helps
       immensely with this practice.

      Researching Topic and Author

       During your preview stage, sometimes called pre-reading, you can easily pick up on information from various
       sources that may help you understand the material you're reading more fully or place it in context with other
       important works in the discipline. If your selection is a book, flip it over or turn to the back pages and look for
       an author's biography or note from the author. See if the book itself contains any other information about the
       author or the subject matter.

       The main things you need to recall from your reading in college are the topics covered and how the
       information fits into the discipline. You can find these parts throughout the textbook chapter in the form of
       headings in larger and bold font, summary lists, and important quotations pulled out of the narrative. Use

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                           4.3 · Effective Reading Strategies 109

these features as you read to help you determine what the most important ideas are.

Figure 4.6 Learning about the book you're reading can provide good context and information. Look for an author's biography and
forward on the back cover or in the first few pages. (Credit: Mark Hillary / Flickr / Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC-BY 2.0))

Remember, many books use quotations about the book or author as testimonials in a marketing approach to
sell more books, so these may not be the most reliable sources of unbiased opinions, but it's a start.
Sometimes you can find a list of other books the author has written near the front of a book. Do you recognize
any of the other titles? Can you do an Internet search for the name of the book or author? Go beyond the
search results that want you to buy the book and see if you can glean any other relevant information about the
author or the reading selection. Beyond a standard Internet search, try the library article database. These are
more relevant to academic disciplines and contain resources you typically will not find in a standard search
engine. If you are unfamiliar with how to use the library database, ask a reference librarian on campus. They
are often underused resources that can point you in the right direction.

Understanding Your Own Preset Ideas on a Topic

Consider this scenario: Laura really enjoys learning about environmental issues. She has read many books and
watched numerous televised documentaries on this topic and actively seeks out additional information on the
environment. While Laura's interest can help her understand a new reading encounter about the environment,
Laura also has to be aware that with this interest, she brings forward her preset ideas and biases about the
topic. Sometimes these prejudices against other ideas relate to religion or nationality or even just tradition.
Without evidence, thinking the way we always have is not a good enough reason; evidence can change, and at
the very least it needs honest review and assessment to determine its validity. Ironically, we may not want to
learn new ideas because that may mean we would have to give up old ideas we have already mastered, which
can be a daunting prospect.
With every reading situation about the environment, Laura needs to remain open-minded about what she is
110 4 · Reading and Note-Taking

       about to read and pay careful attention if she begins to ignore certain parts of the text because of her
       preconceived notions. Learning new information can be very difficult if you balk at ideas that are different
       from what you've always thought. You may have to force yourself to listen to a different viewpoint multiple
       times to make sure you are not closing your mind to a viable solution your mindset does not currently allow.

        ANALYSIS QUESTION

         Can you think of times you have struggled reading college content for a course? Which of these strategies
         might have helped you understand the content? Why do you think those strategies would work?

4.4 Helpful Note-Taking Strategies

                                    Estimated completion time: 21 minutes.

Questions to Consider:

  · How can you prepare to take notes to maximize the effectiveness of the experience?
  · What are some specific strategies you can employ for better note-taking?
  · Why is annotating your notes after the note-taking session a critical step to follow?

Beyond providing a record of the information you are reading or hearing, notes help you organize the ideas
and help you make meaning out of something about which you may not be familiar, so note-taking and
reading are two compatible skill sets. Taking notes also helps you stay focused on the question at hand. Taking
notes during presentations or class lectures may allow you to follow the speaker's main points and condense
the material into a more readily usable format. Strong notes build on your prior knowledge of a subject, help
you discuss trends or patterns present in the information, and direct you toward areas needing further
research or reading.

Figure 4.7 Strong notes build on your prior knowledge of a subject, help you discuss trends or patterns present in the information,
and direct you toward areas needing further research or reading. (Credit: Betsy Weber / Flickr Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC-BY 2.0))

It is not a good habit to transcribe every single word a speaker utters--even if you have an amazing ability to
do that. Most of us don't have that court-reporter-esque skill level anyway, and if we try, we would end up

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                       4.4 · Helpful Note-Taking Strategies 111

missing valuable information. Learn to listen for main ideas and distinguish between these main ideas and
details that typically support the ideas. Include examples that explain the main ideas, but do so using
understandable abbreviations.

Think of all notes as potential study guides. In fact, if you only take notes without actively working on them
after the initial note-taking session, the likelihood of the notes helping you is slim. Research on this topic
concludes that without active engagement after taking notes, most students forget 60-75 percent of material
over which they took the notes--within two days! That sort of defeats the purpose, don't you think? This
information about memory loss was first brought to light by 19th-century German psychologist Hermann
Ebbinghaus. Fortunately, you do have the power to thwart what is sometimes called the Ebbinghaus
Forgetting Curve by reinforcing what you learned through review at intervals shortly after you take in the
material and frequently thereafter.

If you are a musician, you'll understand this phenomenon well. When you first attempt a difficult piece of
music, you may not remember the chords and notes well at all, but after frequent practice and review, you
generate a certain muscle memory and cognitive recall that allows you to play the music more easily.

Note-taking may not be the most glamorous aspect of your higher-education journey, but it is a study practice
you will carry throughout college and into your professional life. Setting yourself up for successful note-taking
is almost as important as the actual taking of notes, and what you do after your note-taking session is equally
significant. Well-written notes help you organize your thoughts, enhance your memory, and participate in class
discussion, and they prepare you to respond successfully on exams. With all that riding on your notes, it would
behoove you to learn how to take notes properly and continue to improve your note-taking skills.

 ANALYSIS QUESTION

  Do you currently have a preferred way to take notes? When did you start using it? Has it been effective?
  What other strategy might work for you?

Preparing to Take Notes

Preparing to take notes means more than just getting out your laptop or making sure you bring pen and
paper to class. You'll do a much better job with your notes if you understand why we take notes, have a strong
grasp on your preferred note-taking system, determine your specific priorities depending on your situation,
and engage in some version of efficient shorthand.

Like handwriting and fingerprints, we all have unique and fiercely independent note-taking habits. These
understandably and reasonably vary from one situation to the next, but you can only improve your skills by
learning more about ways to take effective notes and trying different methods to find a good fit.

The very best notes are the ones you take in an organized manner that encourages frequent review and use as
you progress through a topic or course of study. For this reason, you need to develop a way to organize all
your notes for each class so they remain together and organized. As old-fashioned as it sounds, a clunky three-
ring binder is an excellent organizational container for class notes. You can easily add to previous notes, insert
handouts you may receive in class, and maintain a running collection of materials for each separate course. If
the idea of carrying around a heavy binder has you rolling your eyes, then transfer that same structure into
your computer files. If you don't organize your many documents into some semblance of order on your
computer, you will waste significant time searching for improperly named or saved files.

You may be interested in relatively new research on what is the more effective note-taking strategy:
handwriting versus typing directly into a computer. While individuals have strong personal opinions on this
subject, most researchers agree that the format of student notes is less important than what students do with
112 4 · Reading and Note-Taking

       the notes they take afterwards. Both handwriting notes and using a computer for note-taking have pros and
       cons.

         Figure 4.8 The best notes are the ones you take in an organized manner. Frequent review and further annotation are important to
         build a deep and useful understanding of the material. (Credit: English106 / Flickr / Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC-BY 2.0))

      Managing Note-Taking Systems

       Whichever of the many note-taking systems you choose (and new ones seem to come out almost daily), the
       very best one is the one that you will use consistently. The skill and art of note-taking is not automatic for
       anyone; it takes a great deal of practice, patience, and continuous attention to detail. Add to that the fact that
       you may need to master multiple note-taking techniques for different classes, and you have some work to do.
       Unless you are specifically directed by your instructor, you are free to combine the best parts of different
       systems if you are most comfortable with that hybrid system.
       Just to keep yourself organized, all your notes should start off with an identifier, including at the very least the
       date, the course name, the topic of the lecture/presentation, and any other information you think will help you
       when you return to use the notes for further study, test preparation, or assignment completion. Additional,
       optional information may be the number of note-taking sessions about this topic or reminders to cross-
       reference class handouts, textbook pages, or other course materials. It's also always a good idea to leave some
       blank space in your notes so you can insert additions and questions you may have as you review the material
       later.

        GET CONNECTED

         Staying organized is a challenge when you are juggling multiple assigned readings and lecture notes, but
         keeping track of what you have read and heard in lecture improves your ability to study the material and
         retain it. These resources can provide you with opportunities to sharpen your reading and note-taking
         game.
         Evernote (https://openstax.org/l/evernote) provides students with the opportunity to keep track of tasks
         and assignment due dates. Users can also connect to Google Calendar, share notes with others, and
         annotate documents. The app allows for you to access your notes on multiple devices.

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                       4.4 · Helpful Note-Taking Strategies 113

  The Learning Center (https://openstax.org/l/enhancingyourmemory), University of North Carolina at Chapel
  Hill provides background information on an array of studying and learning techniques, beyond those listed
  above. For any that appeal to you or seem to apply to your fields of study, consult other material specifically
  focused on them.

Note-Taking Strategies

You may have a standard way you take all your notes for all your classes. When you were in high school, this
one-size-fits-all approach may have worked. Now that you're in college, reading and studying more advanced
topics, your general method may still work some of the time, but you should have some different strategies in
place if you find that your method isn't working as well with college content. You probably will need to adopt
different note-taking strategies for different subjects. The strategies in this section represent various ways to
take notes in such a way that you are able to study after the initial note-taking session.

Cornell Method

One of the most recognizable note-taking systems is called the Cornell Method, a relatively simple way to take
effective notes devised by Cornell University education professor Dr. Walter Pauk in the 1940s. In this system,
you take a standard piece of note paper and divide it into three sections by drawing a horizontal line across
your paper about one to two inches from the bottom of the page (the summary area) and then drawing a
vertical line to separate the rest of the page above this bottom area, making the left side about two inches (the
recall column) and leaving the biggest area to the right of your vertical line (the notes column). You may want
to make one page and then copy as many pages as you think you'll need for any particular class, but one
advantage of this system is that you can generate the sections quickly. Because you have divided up your
page, you may end up using more paper than you would if you were writing on the entire page, but the point
is not to keep your notes to as few pages as possible. The Cornell Method provides you with a well-organized
set of notes that will help you study and review your notes as you move through the course. If you are taking
notes on your computer, you can still use the Cornell Method in Word or Excel on your own or by using a
template someone else created.
114 4 · Reading and Note-Taking

                                      Figure 4.9 The Cornell Method provides a straightforward, organized, and flexible approach.

       Now that you have the note-taking format generated, the beauty of the Cornell Method is its organized
       simplicity. Just write on one side of the page (the right-hand notes column)--this will help later when you are
       reviewing and revising your notes. During your note-taking session, use the notes column to record
       information over the main points and concepts of the lecture; try to put the ideas into your own words, which
       will help you to not transcribe the speaker's words verbatim. Skip lines between each idea in this column.
       Practice the shortcut abbreviations covered in the next section and avoid writing in complete sentences. Don't
       make your notes too cryptic, but you can use bullet points or phrases equally well to convey meaning--we do
       it all the time in conversation. If you know you will need to expand the notes you are taking in class but don't

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                       4.4 · Helpful Note-Taking Strategies 115

have time, you can put reminders directly in the notes by adding and underlining the word expand by the
ideas you need to develop more fully.
As soon as possible after your note-taking session, preferably within eight hours but no more than twenty-four
hours, read over your notes column and fill in any details you missed in class, including the places where you
indicated you wanted to expand your notes. Then in the recall column, write any key ideas from the
corresponding notes column--you can't stuff this smaller recall column as if you're explaining or defining key
ideas. Just add the one- or two-word main ideas; these words in the recall column serve as cues to help you
remember the detailed information you recorded in the notes column.
Once you are satisfied with your notes and recall columns, summarize this page of notes in two or three
sentences using the summary area at the bottom of the sheet. This is an excellent time to get with another
classmate or a group of students who all heard the same lecture to make sure you all understood the key
points. Now, before you move onto something else, cover the large notes column, and quiz yourself over the
key ideas you recorded in the recall column. Repeat this step often as you go along, not just immediately
before an exam, and you will help your memory make the connections between your notes, your textbook
reading, your in-class work, and assignments that you need to succeed on any quizzes and exams.

Figure 4.10 This sample set of notes in the Cornell Method is designed to make sense of a large amount of information. The process
of organizing the notes can help you retain the information more effectively than less consistent methods.

The main advantage of the Cornell Method is that you are setting yourself up to have organized, workable
notes. The neat format helps you move into study-mode without needing to re-copy less organized notes or
making sense of a large mass of information you aren't sure how to process because you can't remember key
ideas or what you meant. If you write notes in your classes without any sort of system and later come across
something like "Napoleon--short" in the middle of a glob of notes, what can you do at this point? Is that
important? Did it connect with something relevant from the lecture? How would you possibly know? You are
your best advocate for setting yourself up for success in college.
116 4 · Reading and Note-Taking

      Outlining

       Other note organizing systems may help you in different disciplines. You can take notes in a formal outline if
       you prefer, using Roman numerals for each new topic, moving down a line to capital letters indented a few
       spaces to the right for concepts related to the previous topic, then adding details to support the concepts
       indented a few more spaces over and denoted by an Arabic numeral. You can continue to add to a formal
       outline by following these rules.
       You don't absolutely have to use the formal numerals and letter, but you have to then be careful to indent so
       you can tell when you move from a higher level topic to the related concepts and then to the supporting
       information. The main benefit of an outline is how organized it is. You have to be on your toes when you are
       taking notes in class to ensure you keep up the organizational format of the outline, which can be tricky if the
       lecture or presentation is moving quickly or covering many diverse topics.
       The following formal outline example shows the basic pattern:

        I. Dogs (main topic-usually general)
              A. German Shepherd (concept related to main topic)
                    1. Protection (supporting info about the concept)
                    2. Assertive
                    3. Loyal
              B. Weimaraner (concept related to main topic)
                    1. Family-friendly (supporting info about the concept)
                    2. Active
                    3. Healthy

       II. Cats (main topic)
             Siamese

       You would just continue on with this sort of numbering and indenting format to show the connections
       between main ideas, concepts, and supporting details. Whatever details you do not capture in your note-
       taking session, you can add after the lecture as you review your outline.

      Chart or Table

       Similar to creating an outline, you can develop a chart to compare and contrast main ideas in a note-taking
       session. Divide your paper into four or five columns with headings that include either the main topics covered
       in the lecture or categories such as How?, What?, When used?, Advantages/Pros, Disadvantages/Cons, or other
       divisions of the information. You write your notes into the appropriate columns as that information comes to
       light in the presentation. The table below provides an example of a table that can help you organize topics in a
       science course.

                                                      Structure Types Functions in Body Additional Notes

                             Carbohydrates

                             Lipids

                             Proteins

                             Nucleic Acid

                                Table 4.3 Example of a Chart to Organize Ideas and Categories

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                       4.4 · Helpful Note-Taking Strategies 117

This format helps you pull out the salient ideas and establishes an organized set of notes to study later. (If you
haven't noticed that this reviewing later idea is a constant across all note-taking systems, you should take note
of that.) Notes by themselves that you never reference again are little more than scribblings. That would be a
bit like compiling an extensive grocery list so you stay on budget when you shop, work all week on it, and then
just throw it away before you get to the store. You may be able to recall a few items, but likely won't be as
efficient as you could be if you had the notes to reference. Just as you cannot read all the many books, articles,
and documents you need to peruse for your college classes, you cannot remember the most important ideas
of all the notes you will take as part of your courses, so you must review.

Concept Mapping and Visual Note-Taking

One final note-taking method that appeals to learners who prefer a visual representation of notes is called
mapping or sometimes mind mapping or concept mapping, although each of these names can have slightly
different uses. Variations of this method abound, so you may want to look for more versions online, but the
basic principles are that you are making connections between main ideas through a graphic depiction; some
can get rather elaborate with colors and shapes, but a simple version may be more useful at least to begin.
Main ideas can be circled or placed in a box with supporting concepts radiating off these ideas shown with a
connecting line and possibly details of the support further radiating off the concepts. You can present your
main ideas vertically or horizontally, but turning your paper long-ways, or in landscape mode, may prove
helpful as you add more main ideas.

Figure 4.11 Concept mapping, sometimes referred to as mind mapping, can be an effective and very personalized approach to
capturing information. (Credit: ArtistIvanChew / Flickr / Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC-BY 2.0))

You may be interested in trying visual note-taking or adding pictures to your notes for clarity. Sometimes when
you can't come up with the exact wording to explain something or you're trying to add information for
118 4 · Reading and Note-Taking

complex ideas in your notes, sketching a rough image of the idea can help you remember. According to
educator Sherrill Knezel in an article entitled "The Power of Visual Note-taking," this strategy is effective
because "When students use images and text in note-taking, it gives them two different ways to pull up the
information, doubling their chances of recall." Don't shy away from this creative approach to note-taking just
because you believe you aren't an artist; the images don't need to be perfect. You may want to watch Rachel
Smith's TEDx Talk called "Drawing in Class" (https://openstax.org/l/drawinginclass) to learn more about visual
note-taking.

You can play with different types of note-taking suggestions and find the method(s) you like best, but once you
find what works for you, stick with it. You will become more efficient with the method the more you use it, and
your note-taking, review, and test prep will become, if not easier, certainly more organized, which can decrease
your anxiety.

Practicing Decipherable Shorthand

Most college students don't take a class in shorthand, once the domain of secretaries and executive assistants,
but maybe they should. That almost-lost art in the age of computers could come in very handy during intense
note-taking sessions. Elaborate shorthand systems do exist, but you would be better served in your college
note-taking adventures to hone a more familiar, personalized form of shorthand to help you write more in a
shorter amount of time. Seemingly insignificant shortcuts can add up to ease the stress note-taking can
induce--especially if you ever encounter an "I'm not going to repeat this" kind of presenter! Become familiar
with these useful abbreviations:

      Shortcut symbol                                   Meaning

w/, w/o, w/in                    with, without, within

&                                and

#                                number

b/c                              because

X,                               incorrect, correct

Diff                             different, difference

etc.                             and so on

ASAP                             as soon as possible

US, UK                           United States, United Kingdom

info                             information

Measurements: ft, in, k, m foot, inch, thousand, million

¶                                paragraph or new paragraph

Math symbols: =, +, >, <, ÷ equal, plus, greater, less, divided by

Table 4.4

Access for free at openstax.org
                         4.4 · Helpful Note-Taking Strategies 119

        Shortcut symbol                                Meaning
  WWI, WWII              World Wars I and II
  impt                   important
  ?, !, **               denote something is very significant; don't over use

Table 4.4

See the table above for examples of common shorthand symbols and abbreviations. Do you have any other
shortcuts or symbols that you use in your notes? Ask your parents if they remember any that you may be able
to learn.

Annotating Notes After the Initial Note-Taking Session

Annotating notes after the initial note-taking session may be one of the most valuable study skills you can
master. Whether you are highlighting, underlining, or adding additional notes, you are reinforcing the material
in your mind and memory.

Admit it--who can resist highlighting markers? Gone are the days when yellow was the star of the show, and
you had to be very careful not to press too firmly for fear of obliterating the words you were attempting to
emphasize. Students now have a veritable rainbow of highlighting options and can color-code notes and text
passages to their hearts' content.

The only reason to highlight anything is to draw attention to it, so you can easily pick out that ever-so-
important information later for further study or reflection. One problem many students have is not knowing
when to stop. If what you need to recall from the passage is a particularly apt and succinct definition of the
term important to your discipline, highlighting the entire paragraph is less effective than highlighting just the
actual term. And if you don't rein in this tendency to color long passages (possibly in multiple colors) you can
end up with a whole page of highlighted text. Ironically, that is no different from a page that is not highlighted
at all, so you have wasted your time. Your mantra for highlighting text should be less is more. Always read
your text selection first before you start highlighting anything. You need to know what the overall message is
before you start placing emphasis in the text with highlighting.

Another way to annotate notes after initial note-taking is underlining significant words or passages. Albeit not
quite as much fun as its colorful cousin highlighting, underlining provides precision to your emphasis.

Some people think of annotations as only using a colored highlighter to mark certain words or phrases for
emphasis. Actually, annotations can refer to anything you do with a text to enhance it for your particular use
(either a printed text, handwritten notes, or other sort of document you are using to learn concepts). The
annotations may include highlighting passages or vocabulary, defining those unfamiliar terms once you look
them up, writing questions in the margin of a book, underlining or circling key terms, or otherwise marking a
text for future reference. You can also annotate some electronic texts.

Realistically, you may end up doing all of these types of annotations at different times. We know that repetition
in studying and reviewing is critical to learning, so you may come back to the same passage and annotate it
separately. These various markings can be invaluable to you as a study guide and as a way to see the evolution
of your learning about a topic. If you regularly begin a reading session writing down any questions you may
have about the topic of that chapter or section and also write out answers to those questions at the end of the
reading selection, you will have a good start to what that chapter covered when you eventually need to study
for an exam. At that point, you likely will not have time to reread the entire selection especially if it is a long
reading selection, but with strong annotations in conjunction with your class notes, you won't need to do that.
120 4 · Reading and Note-Taking

       With experience in reading discipline-specific texts and writing essays or taking exams in that field, you will
       know better what sort of questions to ask in your annotations.

         Figure 4.12 Annotations may include highlighting important topics, defining unfamiliar terms, writing questions in, underlining or
         circling key terms, or otherwise marking a text for future reference. Whichever approach you choose, try not to overdo it; neat,
         organized, and efficient notes are more effective than crowded or overdone notes.
         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                       4.4 · Helpful Note-Taking Strategies 121

Figure 4.13 While these notes may be meaningful to the person who took them, they are neither organized nor consistent. For
example, note that some of the more commonly used terms, like "we" and "unfinished," are defined, but less common ones --
"consecrate" and "hallow" -- are not.

What you have to keep in the front of your mind while you are annotating, especially if you are going to
conduct multiple annotation sessions, is to not overdo whatever method you use. Be judicious about what you
annotate and how you do it on the page, which means you must be neat about it. Otherwise, you end up with
a mess of either color or symbols combined with some cryptic notes that probably took you quite a long time
to create, but won't be worth as much to you as a study aid as they could be. This is simply a waste of time and
effort.
122 4 · Reading and Note-Taking

       You cannot eat up every smidgen of white space on the page writing out questions or summaries and still
       have a way to read the original text. If you are lucky enough to have a blank page next to the beginning of the
       chapter or section you are annotating, use this, but keep in mind that when you start writing notes, you aren't
       exactly sure how much space you'll need. Use a decipherable shorthand and write only what you need to
       convey the meaning in very small print. If you are annotating your own notes, you can make a habit of using
       only one side of the paper in class, so that if you need to add more notes later, you could use the other side.
       You can also add a blank page to your notes before beginning the next class date in your notebook so you'll
       end up with extra paper for annotations when you study.

       Professional resources may come with annotations that can be helpful to you as you work through the various
       documentation requirements you'll encounter in college as well. Purdue University's Online Writing Lab (OWL
       (https://openstax.org/l/mlaformatting)) provides an annotated sample for how to format a college paper
       according to guidelines in the Modern Language Association (MLA) manual that you can see, along with other
       annotations.

      Providing Needed Additional Explanations to Notes

       Consider this scenario: Marlon was totally organized and ready to take notes in a designated course notebook
       at the beginning of every philosophy class session. He always dated his page and indicated what the topic of
       discussion was. He had various colored highlighters ready to denote the different note purposes he had
       defined: vocabulary in pink, confusing concepts in green, and note sections that would need additional
       explanations later in yellow. He also used his own shorthand and an impressive array of symbols to indicate
       questions (red question mark), highly probable test material (he used a tiny bomb exploding here), additional
       reading suggestions, and specific topics he would ask his instructor before the next class. Doing everything so
       precisely, Marlon's methods seemed like a perfect example of how to take notes for success. Inevitably though,
       by the end of the hour-and-a-half class session, Marlon was frantically switching between writing tools, near to
       tears, and scouring his notes as waves of yellow teased him with uncertainty. What went wrong?

       As with many of us who try diligently to do everything we know how to do for success or what we think we
       know because we read books and articles on success in between our course work, Marlon is suffering from
       trying to do too much simultaneously. It's an honest mistake we can make when we are trying to save a little
       time or think we can multitask and kill two birds with one stone.

       Unfortunately, this particular error in judgment can add to your stress level exponentially if you don't step back
       and see it for what it is. Marlon attempted to take notes in class as well as annotate his notes to get them
       ready for his test preparation. It was too much to do at one time, but even if he could have done all those
       things during class, he's missing one critical point about note-taking.

       As much as we may want to hurry and get it over with, note-taking in class is just the beginning. Your
       instructor likely gave you a pre-class assignment to read or complete before coming to that session. The
       intention of that preparatory lesson is for you to come in with some level of familiarity for the topic under
       consideration and questions of your own. Once you're in class, you may also need to participate in a group
       discussion, work with your classmates, or perform some other sort of lesson-directed activity that would
       necessarily take you away from taking notes. Does that mean you should ignore taking notes for that day?
       Most likely not. You may just need to indicate in your notes that you worked on a project or whatever other in-
       class event you experienced that date.

       Very rarely in a college classroom will you engage in an activity that is not directly related to what you are
       studying in that course. Even if you enjoyed every minute of the class session and it was an unusual format for
       that course, you still need to take some notes. Maybe your first note could be to ask yourself why you think the
       instructor used that unique teaching strategy for the class that day. Was it effective? Was it worth using the
       whole class time? How will that experience enhance what you are learning in that course?

       If you use an ereader or ebooks to read texts for class or read articles from the Internet on your laptop or

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                            4.4 · Helpful Note-Taking Strategies 123

   tablet, you can still take effective notes. Depending on the features of your device, you have many choices.
   Almost all electronic reading platforms allow readers to highlight and underline text. Some devices allow you
   to add a written text in addition to marking a word or passage that you can collect at the end of your note-
   taking session. Look into the specific tools for your device and learn how to use the features that allow you to
   take notes electronically. You can also find apps on devices to help with taking notes, some of which you may
   automatically have installed when you buy the product. Microsoft's OneNote, Google Keep, and the Notes
   feature on phones are relatively easy to use, and you may already have free access to those.

   Taking Notes on Non-Text Items (i.e., Tables, Maps, Figures, etc.)

   You may also encounter situations as you study and read textbooks, primary sources, and other resources for
   your classes that are not actually texts. You can still take notes on maps, charts, graphs, images, and tables,
   and your approach to these non-text features is similar to when you prepare to take notes over a passage of
   text. For example, if you are looking at the following map, you may immediately come up with several
   questions. Or it may initially appear overwhelming. Start by asking yourself these questions:
   What is the main point of this map?
· Who is the intended audience?
· Where is it?
· What time period does it depict?
· What does the map's legend (the explanation of symbols) include?
· What other information do I need to make sense of this map?

    Figure 4.14 A map showing the "Order of Napoleon's Battle of Waterloo". Graphics, charts, graphs, and other visual items are also
    important to annotate. Not only do they often convey important information, but they may appear on exams or in other situations
124 4 · Reading and Note-Taking

         where you'll need to use or demonstrate knowledge. (Credit: "Lpankonin" / Wikipedia Commons / Attribution 3.0 Generic (CC BY 3.0))

       You may want to make an extra copy of a graphic or table before you add annotations if you are dealing with a
       lot of information. Making sense of all the elements will take time, and you don't want to add to the confusion.

      Returning to Your Notes

       Later, as soon as possible after the class, you can go back to your notes and add in missing parts. Just as you
       may generate questions as you're reading new material, you may leave a class session or lecture or activities
       with many questions. Write those down in a place where they won't get lost in all your other notes.

       The exact timing of when you get back to the notes you take in class or while you are reading an assignment
       will vary depending on how many other classes you have or what other obligations you have in your daily
       schedule. A good starting place that is also easy to remember is to make every effort to review your notes
       within 24 hours of first taking them. Longer than that and you are likely to have forgotten some key features
       you need to include; must less time than that, and you may not think you need to review the information you
       so recently wrote down, and you may postpone the task too long.

       Use your phone or computer to set reminders for all your note review sessions so that it becomes a habit and
       you keep on top of the schedule.

       Your personal notes play a significant role in your test preparation. They should enhance how you understand
       the lessons, textbooks, lab sessions, and assignments. All the time and effort you put into first taking the notes
       and then annotating and organizing the notes will be for naught if you do not formulate an effective and
       efficient way to use them before sectional exams or comprehensive tests.

       The whole cycle of reading, note-taking in class, reviewing and enhancing your notes, and preparing for exams
       is part of a continuum you ideally will carry into your professional life. Don't try to take short cuts; recognize
       each step in the cycle as a building block. Learning doesn't end, which shouldn't fill you with dread; it should
       help you recognize that all this work you're doing in the classroom and during your own study and review
       sessions is ongoing and cumulative. Practicing effective strategies now will help you be a stronger
       professional.

        ACTIVITY

         What resources can you find about reading and note-taking that will actually help you with these crucial
         skills? How do you go about deciding what resources are valuable for improving your reading and note-
         taking skills?

         The selection and relative value of study guides and books about note-taking vary dramatically. Ask your
         instructors for recommendations and see what the library has available on this topic. The following list is
         not comprehensive, but will give you a starting point for books and articles on note-taking in college.

           · College Rules!: How to Study, Survive, and Succeed in College, by Sherri Nist-Olejnik and Jodi Patrick
               Holschuh. More than just note-taking, this book covers many aspects of transitioning into the rigors of
               college life and studying.

           · Effective Note-taking, by Fiona McPherson. This small volume has suggestions for using your limited
               time wisely before, during, and after note-taking sessions.

           · How to Study in College, by Walter Pauk. This is the book that introduced Pauk's note-taking
               suggestions we now call the Cornell Method. It is a bit dated (from the 1940s), but still contains some
               valuable information.

           · Learn to Listen, Listen to Learn 2: Academic Listening and Note-taking, by Roni S. Lebauer. The
               main point of this book is to help students get the most from college lectures by watching for clues to

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                  4.4 · Helpful Note-Taking Strategies 125

   lecture organization and adapting this information into strong notes.
· Study Skills: Do I Really Need this Stuff? by Steve Piscitelli. Written in a consistently down-to-earth

   manner, this book will help you with the foundations of strong study skills, including time management,
   effective note-taking, and seeing the big picture.
· "What Reading Does for the Mind", by Anne Cunningham and Keith Stanovich, 1998,
   https://www.aft.org/sites/default/files/periodicals/cunningham.pdf (https://openstax.org/l/
   periodicalscunningham)
· How to Read a Book: The Classic Guide to Intelligent Reading, by Mortimer J. Adler and Charles Van
   Doren, 1940.
· Short- and Long-Term Effects of a Novel on Connectivity in the Brain, by Gregory S. Berns, Kristina
   Blaine, Michael J. Prietula, and Brandon E. Pye. https://doi.org/10.1089/brain.2013.0166
   (https://openstax.org/l/connectivityinthebrain)
126 4 · Family & Friends Matter

    Family & Friends Matter

After a challenging start to her first semester, Ana has made a few good friends and is feeling more like she
belongs in college. She has been hanging out with people who are committed to their education and who
study all the time. Ana has benefited from these regular study sessions and her grades have reflected the work
that she has done. Her study group creates handwritten notes, flashcards, and elaborate mind maps that they
use each time they meet.

Ana's roommate, Jasmine, a member of the rugby team, has not been as focused on her studies and is at risk
of failing a few classes, especially the one that both of them have--General Psychology. She has shared with
Ana that she is afraid she will fail, which will jeopardize her athletic scholarship. In an effort to help her, Ana
has invited Jasmine to meet with her study group, but because Jasmine is a student athlete, she has little time
to do more than go to practice, attend classes, and travel for games. Jasmine has not attended any of the
sessions.

While Ana is eating lunch with Jasmine one day, she asks Ana if she could have her notes and all the study
materials Ana created with her study group, including the notes cards and elaborate mind maps that the
group drew out. Jasmine has a big game over the weekend and wants to take the materials with her as she
doesn't have time to copy all of them. Jasmine is feeling desperate as she needs to make a high grade on the
next test, or she will definitely fail the course. Ana is torn--she wants to help her roommate, but she also
needs the materials to study herself, and she feels as if telling her "No" would not be good for their long-term
relationship.

Let's Think About It

Ana has several options. Think through the consequences of each one, and choose the best option or create
your own option.

  · Ana gives her roommate the notes and materials for the weekend, and hopes that she has studied
      enough to do well herself.

  · Ana gives some of the materials that she knows the best (and doesn't need to study) for the weekend, and
      keeps the rest for herself to study more.

  · Ana keeps the materials for herself, but offers to teach the material to her in person before she leaves and
      over a video conferencing service the evenings she is on the road.

Let's Talk About It

Ana could have told Jasmine "No" and dealt with the consequences of the decision for the rest of the semester.
However, as you read above, Ana did want to find a way to help her roommate. Here are some suggestions for
communicating with others about the dilemma that Ana is facing:

  · "I would like to help you as I know you have struggled in this course, but because these study materials
      are part of my study group's sessions and we are not finished studying, I don't feel right giving them all to
      you. Is there another option that we can both feel good about?"

  · "I have invited you to study sessions before, but you have not had time because of your schedule. I have
      time to get you up to speed on some of the material before you leave, but if you can start to join us after
      you get back, you may find that it is much more effective than trying to learn the content in a short period
      of time."

  · "Teaching you what I have learned so far will benefit us both-and I have time to do some of that over the
      next few days. Would that help you feel more comfortable when you study over the weekend?"

Whatever choice you would make in this situation, it is always best to communicate clearly your needs, your
concerns, and even your uncertainties.

Access for free at openstax.org
           4 · Summary 127

    Summary

Reading and note-taking are part of the foundation of college studying and learning. The expectation in
college is that you read considerable amounts of text for each subject with the goal of learning more about the
subjects. You may encounter reading situations, such as professional journal articles and long textbook
chapters, that are more difficult to understand than texts you have read previously. As you progress through
your college courses, you can employ reading strategies to help you complete your college reading
assignments. Likewise, you will take notes in college that need to be complete so you can study and recall the
information you learn in lectures and lab sessions. With so much significant information that you need to
collect, study, and recall for your college courses, you need to be deliberate in your reading and note-taking.

Honing these fundamental skills can only help you succeed in college and beyond because you will need to be
able to take in and recall a vast amount of information. To that end, consider what else about reading and
note-taking you would like to learn or practice. Choose one of the following to explore further this term:

  · Develop more curiosity about what you are reading by creating questions about what you will learn or
      how you will use the information. Look for articles, blog posts, podcasts, books, and films about what you
      are learning to help you develop more knowledge.

  · Explore the best reading strategy for your most challenging courses. Choose one of them, use it, and
      determine how well it worked.

  · Practice revising reading and lecture notes as part of organizing your study materials and developing a
      deeper understanding of the content. Check the results of this reorganization the next time you take a
      quiz or test.

    Checking In: Your College Readiness Checklist

Winter

                                                                       9th Grade

                   Prep for finals. This may be your first experience with final exams, so create a study plan and
                   prepare early. It's important to learn how to be a good student, to try your best, and to
                   establish good study routines for high school and beyond.

           Document your accomplishments. Get in the habit of doing this at the end of every semester.
           Add awards, activities, books read, and service hours to your college binder.

           Learn the difference between honors, AP, dual credit, and IB courses. These higher-level
           courses will challenge you, but they're not all the same. Find out which your school offers and
           which (if any) would make sense for you to take. You might even earn college credit from some
           of them!

           Ask for help when you need it. Having trouble with assignments or in classes? Don't be afraid
           to ask your teacher for help, attend afterschool office hours, get an outside tutor, or form a
           study group.

Table 4.5
128 4 · Checking In: Your College Readiness Checklist

                                                              10th Grade

           Download (and take) practice SATs and ACTs. Students usually prefer one test over the other,
           so download free practice tests and find study tips online.

           Use the Net Price Calculator (https://bigfuture.collegeboard.org/pay-for-college/
           calculate-your-cost/net-price-calculator) to understand college costs. Your net price is the
           "sticker price" for tuition and fees at a college -- less grants, scholarships, and tax incentives
           you and your family may qualify for. This number may help you narrow your college list.

           Identify potential majors and careers. In your college binder, write down what interests and
           motivates you. Then go to a career search site like O*NET OnLine (http://www.onetonline.org/)
           to see what careers connect with those interests. It's a great way to think about future courses
           and activities.

           Use your summer to pursue your goals and interests. If you're thinking of participating in an
           academic or research program, start looking for them now. These programs fill up fast and are
           a great addition to your resume and college application. Otherwise, think of service
           opportunities, summer classes, or jobs that will develop your interests.

Table 4.6

                                                              11th Grade

           Sign up for an ACT that offers the TIR. This report lists the questions you get right/wrong --
           and it's offered with the December, April, and June tests. This add-on costs $30, and the answers
           can help you make a plan to raise your score.

           Document all your extracurriculars in your college binder. You'll have documented the
           obvious extracurriculars you've participated in -- like sports and clubs -- but don't forget
           hobbies, home responsibilities (e.g., taking care of siblings, working in the family business), or
           being an unpaid volunteer.

           Look at a school's Common Data Set to help you submit a strong application. To learn
           more about how many students applied to a school (and how many were accepted and
           eventually attended), the factors they consider in an application, average test scores and GPAs,
           and more, Google "[school name] Common Data Set" and look through the report.

           Demonstrate your interest in colleges. From emailing admission reps to visiting campus to
           interacting with a college's emails to applying Early Decision, you can show your interest in
           many ways.

Table 4.7

Access for free at openstax.org
           4 · Checking In: Your College Readiness Checklist 129

                                                              12th Grade

           Finalize your Regular Decision (RD) applications. Many RD applications are due at the
           beginning of the new year, and with the holidays and finals coming up, you don't want to be
           overwhelmed or rushing at the last minute. Get your applications done in early December (or
           over Thanksgiving Break). You'll be glad you did.

           Review your Student Aid Report. This report lists your Expected Family Contribution, your
           estimated eligibility for federal grants and student loans, and more. Read through the report
           with your parents to make sure it sounds right.

           Deferred? Boost your chances by following the school's instructions. Some schools will ask
           for a Letter of Continued Interest, some will ask for updated materials (test scores, transcripts,
           etc.), and some don't want you to do anything.

           See if you're eligible for college-specific scholarships. Once you apply to a school, you may
           be eligible to apply for their scholarships, too. Don't miss out on the opportunity!

Table 4.8
130 4 · Checking In: Your College Readiness Checklist
Access for free at openstax.org
5 · Introduction                                                                                                                    131

5
           Studying, Memory, and Test Taking

Figure 5.1 How we study is as important as what we study. The environment is a critical element of success. Depending on the
nature of the work, students may use different types of resources, devices, and methods. (Credit: CUBoulder / Flickr Public Domain
(CC-0))

Chapter Outline

  5.1 Deepening Your Learning
  5.2 Memory
  5.3 Studying
  5.4 Test Taking
  5.5 Developing Metacognition

      Introduction

 STUDENT STORY

  Michael has passed his first test in Calculus I and is feeling pretty confident about his study skills. While he
  has not always been a strong student, he has become more motivated, especially in his science and math
  classes, because he wants to go to graduate school in physical therapy.
  For his second test, Michael has looked through his class notes as well as the homework he completed as
  part of the units the class has covered so far. He understood all the lectures and had no difficulty with the
  homework because the professor provided videos that Michael watched and these helped him solve the
  problems.
  When he gets the test, Michael is familiar with all of the problems and feels pretty good about his grade.
  However, when he gets the graded test back, he is shocked to see that he has failed it.
  When he goes through the test to determine why, he sees that he misunderstood the problem or made
  small errors that led him to an incorrect answer. His confidence is rocked and now he questions whether he
132 5 · Studying, Memory, and Test Taking

         should change his major or drop the course as he is not sure if he can recover from this grade.
         What Do You Think?

           · If you were Michael, what would you do as your next step?
           · What would you have done to study for the test?
           · What opportunities does Michael have now to improve the situation?
           · How do you feel about difficult tests? Why do you feel this way?

     Student Survey

       How confident are you in preparing for and taking tests? Take this quick survey to figure it out, ranking
       questions on a scale of 1--4, 1 meaning "least like me" and 4 meaning "most like me." These questions will
       help you determine how the chapter concepts relate to you right now. As you are introduced to new concepts
       and practices, it can be informative to reflect on how your understanding changes over time.
        1. I set aside enough time to prepare for tests.
        2. If I don't set aside enough time, or if life gets in the way, I can usually cram and get positive results.
        3. I prefer to pull all-nighters. The adrenaline and urgency help me remember what I need come test time.
        4. I study my notes, highlight book passages, and use flash cards, but I still don't feel like I'm as successful as

             I should be on tests.
       You can also take the Chapter 5 Survey (https://openstax.org/l/collegeconcisesurvey04) anonymously online.

        STUDENT PROFILE

         "I didn't have to study much for tests in high school, but I learned really quick that you have to for college.
         One of the best strategies is to test yourself over the material. This will help you improve your retrieval
         strength and help you remember more when it comes to the test. I also learned about reviewing your
         graded tests. This will help you see where you went wrong and why. Being able to see your mistakes and
         correct them helps the storage and retrieval strength as well as building those dendrites. Getting a
         question wrong will only improve those things helping you remember the next time it comes up."
         --Lilli Branstetter, University of Central Arkansas

       Deep learning is the long-term goal of college students, especially when they start taking classes in their major
       or that directly connect to their career field. However, deep learning doesn't happen overnight. After you have
       read the texts and listened to the lectures, you will want to participate in activities that help you move your
       understanding from your short-term memory to your long-term memory. And there is only one way to learn
       deeply: through effective study practices and test taking in which you receive feedback on how well you have
       learned.

     About This Chapter

       By the time you finish this chapter, you should be able to do the following:
         · Describe the key components of deep learning.
         · Outline the importance of memory when studying and note some opportunities to strengthen memory.
         · Discuss specific ways to increase the effectiveness of studying.
         · Articulate test-taking strategies that minimize anxiety and maximize results.
         · Discuss the role that metacognition plays in the learning process.

       It makes sense that the better you are at studying and test taking, the better results you'll see in the form of

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            5.1 · Deepening Your Learning 133

high grades and long-term learning and knowledge acquisition. And the more experience you have using your
study and memorization skills and employing success strategies during exams, the better you'll get at it. But
you have to keep it up--maintaining these skills and learning better strategies as the content you study
becomes increasingly complex is crucial to your success. Once you transition into a work environment, you will
be able to use these same skills that helped you to be successful in college as you face the problem-solving
demands and expectations of your job. Earning high grades is one goal, and certainly a good one when you're
in college, but true learning means committing content to long-term memory.

 5.1 Deepening Your Learning

                                                                                                    Estimated completion time: 4 minutes.

Questions to Consider:

  · Why is deepening your learning important in college?
  · What are the steps to deepening your learning?

In the chapter that covers Reading and Note-taking, you were introduced to Bloom's Taxonomy and its role in
helping you plan your learning. As you may recall, college professors will expect learning at a higher level than
just being able to recall or identify key terms or concepts. To learn deeply, you will need to do more with the
content that you are learning besides reading or listening and taking good notes. This is a good first step, but
only a first step!

Beyond this step, deep learning requires that you will need to

  · Practice recalling the information (strengthening your memory),
  · Learn how to use the information at different levels (Bloom's Taxonomy),
  · Use a variety of effective study strategies based on the type of course, content, or test you have,
  · Evaluate your learning process by reviewing feedback that you get from your professors, and
  · Make changes to your learning processes to ensure that you have indeed learned deeply.

Let's revisit Bloom's Taxonomy to see how the different levels may show up in your learning process. The table
below presents the levels of Bloom's Taxonomy and show how it applies to the topic of note-taking methods. If
you start at the bottom of the table, you will see that as you move up the taxonomy, the tasks differ. In some
cases, they may get more difficult or more time intensive. However, if you only learn the definitions of these
note-taking strategies, then you may find it challenging to complete the tasks that are higher-level Bloom's.
The rest of the chapter provides you with information and strategies that can help you "move up Bloom's".

Bloom's    Topic: Note-Taking Methods
 Level

Create     Create an example of each of the following: outlining, Cornell Method, and mind
           mapping.

Evaluate   Determine which note-taking methods are best for a particular situation.

Analyze    Describe the pros and cons of note-taking methods.

Apply      Offer a specific note-taking strategy for a specific situation.

Table 5.1
134 5 · Studying, Memory, and Test Taking

      Bloom's                                             Topic: Note-Taking Methods
        Level  Describe the details of outlining, Cornell Method, and mind mapping.
               Define outlining, Cornell Method, and mind mapping.
  Understand

  Defining

Table 5.1

Many first-year college students study at the lowest levels of Bloom's Taxonomy by only using flashcards or
reviewing their notes so they are able to recognize key terms or ideas. They do not anticipate that they will be
asked to put the information in a new context or demonstrate a detailed understanding of the content.

This rest of this chapter provides extensive information about how to deepen your learning so that you know
the content well enough to answer any type of question on an assignment or test. This information will also
help you on the job when you need to learn new information to help your clients or you need to study for
career certifications. Either way, you will continue to learn and use learning strategies beyond graduation.

 5.2 Memory

                                           Estimated completion time: 32 minutes.

Questions to Consider:

  · How does working memory work, exactly?
  · How do short-term and long-term memory function?
  · What obstacles exist to remembering?
  · When and how should you memorize things?
  · In what situations is it best to memorize, and what do you memorize?
  · What can you do consistently to improve both your short- and long-term memory?

Memory is one of those cherished but mysterious elements in life. Everyone has memories, and some people
are very good at rapid recall, which is an enviable skill for test takers. We know that we seem to lose the
capacity to remember things as we age, and scientists continue to study how we remember some things but
not others and what memory means, but we don't know that much about memory, really.

Nelson Cowan is one researcher who is working to explain what we do know about memory. His article "What
Are the Differences between Long-Term, Short-Term, and Working Memory?" breaks down the different types
of memory and what happens when we recall thoughts and ideas. When we remember something, we actually
do quite a lot of thinking.1

We go through three basic steps when we remember ideas or images: we encode, store, and retrieve that
information. Encoding is how we first perceive information through our senses, such as when we smell a lovely
flower or a putrid trash bin. Both make an impression on our minds through our sense of smell and probably
our vision. Our brains encode, or label, this content in short-term memory in case we want to think about it
again.

If the information is important and we have frequent exposure to it, the brain will store it for us in case we
need to use it in the future in our aptly named long-term memory. Later, the brain will allow us to recall or

1 NCBI. "What are the differences between long-term, short-term, and working memory?" https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC2657600/

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                         5.2 · Memory 135

retrieve that image, feeling, or information so we can do something with it. This is what we call remembering.

                   Figure 5.2

ANALYSIS QUESTION

Take a few minutes to list ways you create memories on a daily basis. Do you think about how you make
memories? Do you do anything that helps you keep track of your memories?

Foundations of Memory

William Sumrall et al. in the International Journal of Humanities and Social Science explain the foundation of
memory by noting: "Memory is a term applied to numerous biological devices by which living organisms
acquire, retain, and make use of skills and knowledge. It is present in all forms of higher order animals. The
most evolutionary forms of memory have taken place in human beings. Despite much research and
exploration, a complete understanding of human memory does not exist."2

Working Memory

Working memory is a type of short-term memory, but we use it when we are actively performing a task. For
example, nursing student Marilyn needs to use her knowledge of chemical reactions to suggest appropriate
prescriptions in various medical case studies. She does not have to recall every single fact she learned in years
of chemistry classes, but she does need to have a working memory of certain chemicals and how they work
with others. To ensure she can make these connections, Marilyn will have to review and study the relevant
chemical details for the types of drug interactions she will recommend in the case studies.

In working memory, you have access to whatever information you have stored in your memory that helps you
complete the task you are performing. For instance, when you begin to study an assignment, you certainly
need to read the directions, but you must also remember that in class your professor reduced the number of
problem sets the written instructions indicated you needed to finish. This was an oral addition to the written
assignment. The change to the instructions is what you bring up in working memory when you complete the
assignment.

Short-Term Memory

Short-term memory is a very handy thing. It helps us remember where we set our keys or where we left off on
a project the day before. Think about all the aids we employ to help us with short-term memory: you may hang
your keys in a particular place each evening so you know exactly where they are supposed to be. When you go
grocery shopping, do you ever choose a product because you recall an advertising jingle? You see the box of
cereal and you remember the song on the TV commercial. If that memory causes you to buy that product, the
advertising worked. We help our memory along all the time, which is perfectly fine. In fact, we can modify
these everyday examples of memory assistance for purposes of studying and test taking. The key is a
deliberate use of strategies that are not so elaborate that they are too difficult to remember in our short-term
memory.

2 Sumrall, William, et. al. "A Review of Memory Theory." International Journal of Humanities and Social Science, 2016. Vol. 6. No. 5.
136 5 · Studying, Memory, and Test Taking

ACTIVITY

Consider this list of items. Look at the list for no more than 30 seconds. Then, cover up the list and use the
spaces below to complete an activity.

          Baseball Picture frame Tissue                                 Paper clip

          Bread                            Pair of dice  Fingernail polish Spoon

          Marble Leaf                                    Doll           Scissors

          Cup                              Jar of sand   Deck of cards  Ring

          Blanket Ice                                    Marker         String

Without looking at the list, write down as many items as you can remember.

Now, look back at your list and make sure that you give yourself credit for any that you got right. Any items
that you misremembered, meaning they were not in the original list, you won't count in your total. TOTAL
ITEMS REMEMBERED _______________________.

There were 20 total items. Did you remember between 5 and 9 items? If you did, then you have a typical
short-term memory and you just participated in an experiment, of sorts, to prove it.

Harvard psychology professor George A. Miller in 1956 claimed humans can recall about five to nine bits of
information in our short-term memory at any given time. Other research has come after this claim, but this
concept is a popular one. Miller's article is entitled "The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two" and is
easily accessible online if you're interested in learning more about this seminar report.3

Considering the vast amount of knowledge available to us, five to nine bits isn't very much to work with. To
combat this limitation, we clump information together, making connections to help us stretch our capacity to
remember. Many factors play into how much we can remember and how we do it, including the subject matter,
how familiar we are with the ideas, and how interested we are in the topic, but we certainly cannot remember
absolutely everything, for a test or any other task we face. As such, we have to use effective strategies, like
those we cover later in this chapter, to get the most out of our memories.

 ACTIVITY

  Now, let's revisit the items above. Go back to them and see if you can organize them in a way that you
  would have about five groups of items. See below for an example of how to group them.

  Row 1: Items found in a kitchen
  Row 2: Items that a child would play with
  Row 3: Items of nature
  Row 4: Items in a desk drawer/school supplies

3 Miller, George A. "The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two: Some Limits on Our capacity for Processing Information."
Psychological Review, 1956.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          5.2 · Memory 137

Row 5: Items found in a bedroom

Cup       Spoon                  Ice           Bread

Baseball  Marble                 Pair of dice  Doll        Deck of cards

Jar of sand Leaf

Marker    String                 Scissors      Paper clip

Ring      Picture frame Fingernail polish Tissue           Blanket

  Now that you have grouped items into categories, also known as chunking, you can work on remembering
  the categories and the items that fit into those categories, which will result in remembering more items.
  Check it out below by covering up the list of items again and writing down what you can remember.

  Now, look back at your list and make sure that you give yourself credit for any that you got right. Any items
  that you misremembered, meaning they were not in the original list, you won't count in your total. TOTAL
  ITEMS REMEMBERED _______________________. Did you increase how many items you could remember?

Long-Term Memory

Long-term memory is exactly what it sounds like. These are things you recall from the past, such as the smell
of your elementary school cafeteria or how to pop a wheelie on a bicycle. Our brain keeps a vast array of
information, images, and sensory experiences in long-term memory. Whatever it is we are trying to keep in
our memories, whether a beautiful song or a list of chemistry vocabulary terms, must first come into our
brains in short-term memory. If we want these fleeting ideas to transfer into long-term memory, we have to do
some work, such as causing frequent exposure to the information over time (such as studying the terms every
day for a period of time or the repetition you performed to memorize multiplication tables or spelling rules)
and some relevant manipulation of the information.

According to Alison Preston of the University of Texas at Austin's Center for Learning and Memory, "A short-
term memory's conversion to a long-term memory requires changes within the brain . . . and result[s] in
changes to neurons (nerve cells) or sets of neurons. . . . For example, new synapses--the connections between
neurons through which they exchange information--can form to allow for communication between new
networks of neurons. Alternatively, existing synapses can be strengthened to allow for increased sensitivity in
the communication between two neurons."4

When you work to convert your thoughts into memories, you are literally changing your mind. Much of this
brain work begins in the part of the brain called the hippocampus. Preston continues, "Initially, the
hippocampus works in concert with sensory-processing regions distributed in the neocortex (the outermost
layer of the brain) to form the new memories. Within the neocortex, representations of the elements that
constitute an event in our life are distributed across multiple brain regions according to their content. . . .When
a memory is first formed, the hippocampus rapidly combines this distributed information into a single
memory, thus acting as an index of representations in the sensory-processing regions. As time passes, cellular
and molecular changes allow for the strengthening of direct connections among the neocortical regions,
enabling access to the memory independent of the hippocampus."

4 Preston, Alison. "Ask the Experts: How do short-term memories become long-term memories?" Scientific American, Dec. 2017.
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-do-short-term-memories-become-l/
138 5 · Studying, Memory, and Test Taking

       We learn the lyrics of a favorite song by singing and/or playing the song over and over. That alone may not be
       enough to get that song into the coveted long-term memory area of our brain, but if we have an emotional
       connection to the song, such as a painful breakup or a life-changing event that occurred while we were
       listening to the song, this may help. Think of ways to make your study session memorable and create
       connections with the information you need to study. That way, you have a better chance of keeping your study
       material in your memory so you can access it whenever you need it.

        ANALYSIS QUESTION

         What are some ways you convert short-term memories into long-term memories?

         Do your memorization strategies differ for specific courses (e.g., how you remember for math or history)?

     Obstacles to Remembering

       If remembering things for exams or for learning new disciplines were easy, no one would have problems with
       it, but students face several significant obstacles to remembering, including a persistent lack of sleep and an
       unrealistic reliance on cramming. Life is busy and stressful, so you have to keep practicing strategies to help
       you study and remember successfully, but you also must be mindful of obstacles to remembering.

      Lack of Sleep

       Sleep and college don't always go well together. You have so much to do! All that reading, all those papers, all
       those extra hours in the science lab or tutoring center or library! And then we have the social and emotional
       aspects of going to school, which may not be the most critical aspect of your life as you pursue more
       education but are a significant part of who you are. When you consider everything you need to attend to in
       college, you probably won't be surprised that sleep is often the first thing we give up as we search for more
       time to accomplish everything we're trying to do. That seems reasonable--just wake up an hour earlier or stay
       up a little later. But you may want to reconsider picking away at your precious sleep time.

       Sleep benefits all of your bodily functions, and your brain needs sleep time to dream and rest through the
       night. You probably can recall times when you had to do something without adequate sleep. We say things like
       "I just can't wake up" and "I'm walking around half asleep."

       In fact, you may actually be doing just that. Lack of sleep impairs judgment, focus, and our overall mood. Do
       you know anyone who is always grumpy in the morning? A fascinating medical study from the University of
       California Los Angeles (UCLA) claims that sleep deprivation is as dangerous as being drunk, both in what it
       does to our bodies and in the harm we may cause to ourselves and others in driving and performing various
       daily tasks.5 6

       If you can't focus well because you didn't get enough sleep, then you likely won't be able to remember
       whatever it is you need to recall for any sort of studying or test-taking situation. Most exams in a college
       setting go beyond simple memorization, but you still have a lot to remember for exams. For example, when
       Saanvi sits down to take an exam on introductory biology, she needs to recall all the subject-specific
       vocabulary she read in the textbook's opening chapters, the general connections she made between biological
       studies and other scientific fields, and any biology details introduced in the unit for which she is taking the
       exam.

       Trying to make these mental connections on too little sleep will take a large mental toll because Saanvi has to
       concentrate even harder than she would with adequate sleep. She isn't merely tired; her brain is not refreshed

         5 Nir, Yuval, et. al. "Selective neuronal lapses precede human cognitive lapses following sleep deprivation," Nature Medicine
         volume23, pages 1474-1480 (2017).
         6 UCLA Health. "Drowsy Driving." https://www.uclahealth.org/sleepcenter/drowsy-driving

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                         5.2 · Memory 139

and primed to conduct difficult tasks. Although not an exact comparison, think about when you overtax a
computer by opening too many programs simultaneously. Sometimes the programs are sluggish or slow to
respond, making it difficult to work efficiently; sometimes the computer shuts down completely and you have
to reboot the entire system. Your body is a bit like that on too little sleep.

On the flip side, though, your brain on adequate sleep is amazing, and sleep can actually assist you in making
connections, remembering difficult concepts, and studying for exams. The exact reasons for this is still a
serious research project for scientists, but the results all point to a solid connection between sleep and
cognitive performance.

If you're interested in learning more about this research, the American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM) is a
good place to start. One article is entitled "College Students: Getting Enough Sleep Is Vital to Academic
Success."

 ANALYSIS QUESTION

  How long do you sleep every night on average? Do you see a change in your ability to function when you
  haven't had enough sleep? What could you do to limit the number of nights with too little sleep?

Downside of Cramming

At least once in their college careers, most students will experience the well-known pastime called cramming.
Consider the following scenario: Shelley has lots of classes, works part-time at a popular restaurant, and is just
amazingly busy, so she puts off serious study sessions day after day. She isn't worried because she has set
aside time she would have spent sleeping to cram just before the exam. That's the idea anyway. Originally, she
planned to stay up a little late and study for four hours from 10 p.m. to 2 a.m. and still get several hours of
refreshing sleep. But it's Dolphin Week or Beat State Day or whatever else comes up, and her study session
doesn't start until midnight--she'll pull an all-nighter (to be more precise, this is actually an all-really-early-
morning-er, but it doesn't quite have the same ring to it). So, two hours after her original start time, she tries to
cram all the lessons, problems, and information from the last two weeks of lessons into this one session.
Shelley falls asleep around 3 a.m. with her notes and books still on her bed. After her late night, she doesn't
sleep well and goes into the morning exam tired.

Shelley does okay but not great on the exam, and she is not pleased with her results. More and more research
is showing that the stress Shelley has put on her body doing this, combined with the way our brains work,
makes cramming a seriously poor choice for learning.

One sleep researcher, Dr. Susan Redline from Boston, says, "Sleep deficiency can affect mood and the ability to
make memories and learn, but it also affects metabolism, appetite, blood pressure, levels of inflammation in
the body and perhaps even the immune response."7

Your brain simply refuses to cooperate with cramming--it sounds like a good idea, but it doesn't work.

Cramming causes stress, which can lead to paralyzing test anxiety; it erroneously supposes you can remember
and understand something fully after only minimal exposure; and it overloads your brain, which, however
amazing it is, can only focus on one concept at a time and a limited number of concepts all together for
learning and retention.

Leading neuroscientist John Medina claims that the brain begins to wander at about 10 minutes, at which
point you need a new stimulus to spark interest. That doesn't mean you can't focus for longer than 10 minutes;
you just have to switch gears a lot to keep your brain engaged. Have you ever heard a speaker drone on about

7 Redline, Susan https://abcnews.go.com/Health/Sleep/health-hazards-linked-lack-sleep/story?id=16524313
140 5 · Studying, Memory, and Test Taking

       one concept for, say, 30 minutes without somehow changing pace to engage the listeners? It doesn't take
       much to re-engage--pausing to ask the listeners questions or moving to a different location in the room will
       do it--but without these subtle attention markers, listeners start thinking of something else. The same thing
       happens to you if you try to cram all reading, problem-solving, and note reviewing into one long session; your
       brain will wander.

     Determining When/What to Memorize

       In the realm of learning and studying, some conditions warrant memorization as the most effective way to
       work with information. For instance, if you are expected to have a working knowledge of conversational
       French or Spanish, you will have to memorize some words. Simply knowing a long list of terms isn't going to
       help you order food in a café or ask for directions in a foreign country because you also need to understand
       the other language's grammar and have some sort of context for what needs to be said from your vocabulary
       list. But you cannot say the words in a different language if you cannot remember your vocabulary. From this
       scenario, you can assume that memorization is a good fit for some parts of language acquisition.
       If you approach all your studying as memorization, you will find your course tests difficult at best. Most college
       courses will ask you to apply, analyze, evaluate, and create with the information you are learning, which is
       discussed earlier in the chapter. Merely being able to memorize so that you can recognize or recall information
       will not get you far in your college classes.
       A worthwhile book on memory, thinking, and learning is a short study called Make It Stick: The Science of
       Successful Learning by Peter Brown, Henry Roediger, and Mark McDaniel. The authors conclude, after
       extensive research, that our attempts to speed up learning and make studying easier are not good ideas.
       Studying is hard work, and it should be. For learning to stick, we need to work hard to pull the information out
       of our memory and use it by continually pushing ourselves to accomplish increasingly difficult tasks.

     5.3 Studying

                                                                                                          Estimated completion time: 27 minutes.

       Questions to Consider:
         · How do you prepare yourself and your environment for successful studying?
         · What study strategies will be most beneficial to you?
         · What are learning preferences and strategies and how can you leverage those to your advantage?

     Preparing to Study

       Studying is hard work, but you can still learn some techniques to help you be a more effective learner. Two
       major and interrelated techniques involve avoiding distractions to the best of your ability and creating a study
       environment that works to help you concentrate.

      Avoiding Distractions

       We have always had distractions--video games, television shows, movies, music, friends--even housecleaning
       can distract us from doing something else we need to do, like study for an exam. That may seem extreme, but
       sometimes vacuuming is the preferred activity to buckling down and working through calculus problems! Cell
       phones, tablets, and portable computers that literally bring a world of possibilities to us anywhere have
       brought distraction to an entirely new level. When was the last time you were with a large group of people
       when you didn't see at least a few people on devices?

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                        5.3 · Studying 141

Figure 5.3 Video games are a common distraction, but we need to be aware that even tedious activities like cleaning can be a
distraction from studying. (Credit: Footy.com Images / Flickr Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC-BY 2.0))

When you study, your biggest challenge may be to block out all the competing noise. And letting go of that
connection to our friends and the larger world, even for a short amount of time, can be difficult. Perhaps the
least stressful way to allow yourself a distraction-free environment is to make the study session a definite
amount of time: long enough to get a significant amount of studying accomplished but short enough to hold
your attention.
You can increase that attention time with practice and focus. Pretend it is a professional appointment or
meeting during which you cannot check e-mail or texts or otherwise engage with your portable devices. We
have all become very attached to the ability to check in--anonymously on social media or with family and
friends via text, chat, and calls. If you set a specific amount of time to study without interruptions, you can
convince your wandering mind that you will soon be able to return to your link to the outside world. Start
small and set an alarm--a 30-minute period to review notes, then a brief break, then another 45-minute study
session to quiz yourself on the material, and so on.
When you prepare for your optimal study session, remember to do these things:

  · Put your phone out of sight--in another room or at least some place where you will not see or hear it
      vibrate or ring. Just flipping it over is not enough.

  · Turn off the television or music (more on that in the next section).
  · Unless you are deliberately working with a study group, study somewhere alone if possible, or at least far

      enough away from others to not hear them talking.
If you live with lots of other people or don't have access to much privacy, see if you can negotiate some space
alone to study. Ask others to leave one part of the house or an area in one room as a quiet zone during certain
hours. Ask politely for a specific block of time; most people will respect your educational goals and be willing
to accommodate you. If you're trying to work out quiet zones with small children in the house, the bathtub
with a pillow can make a fine study oasis.

Study Environment

You may not always be in the mood or inspired to study. And if you have a long deadline, maybe you can blow
off a study session on occasion, but you shouldn't get into the habit of ignoring a strong study routine. Jane
Austen once wrote in a letter, "I am not at all in a humor for writing; I must write on till I am." Sometimes just
starting is the hard part; go ahead and begin. Don't wait around for your study muse; start working, and she'll
show up.
Sometimes you just need to plop down and study whenever and wherever you can manage--in the car waiting
142 5 · Studying, Memory, and Test Taking

       for someone, on the bus, at the Little League field as you cheer on your shortstop. And that's okay if this is the
       exception. For long-term success in studying, though, you need a better study setting that will help you get the
       most out of your limited study time. Whatever your space limitations, carve out a place that you can dedicate
       to reading, writing, note-taking, and reviewing. This doesn't need to be elaborate and expensive--all you truly
       need is a flat surface large enough to hold either your computer or writing paper, book or notes, pens/pencils/
       markers, and subject-specific materials you may need (e.g., stand-alone calculators, drawing tools, and
       notepads). Your space should be cool or warm enough for you to be comfortable as you study. What do you
       have now that you consider your study space? Is it set up for your optimal success?

                            Figure 5.4 Which is before, and which is after? (Credit: Ali West / Flickr / Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC-BY 2.0))

       If it is at all possible, try to make this area exclusive to your study sessions and something you can leave set up
       all the time and a place out of the way of family or roommate traffic. For example, Martina thought setting up
       her study station on the dining room table was a good idea at first. The view was calming, and the table was
       big enough to spread out and could even hold all her materials to study architectural drawings, her favorite
       subject. But then she needed the table for a small family dinner party, so she had to find a cubbyhole to hide
       away her supplies with some needing to go into a closet in the next room. Now she was spread out over
       multiple study spaces. And the family TV was in an adjacent room, not visible from the table but certainly an
       auditory distraction. Martina ultimately decided to forgo her view and create a smaller station in an unused
       bedroom so she could leave her supplies out and have a quieter area. You may have to try out numerous
       places to determine what works best for you. In fact, if you have a few comfortable places to study, such as the
       library, a coffee shop, and your room, you will increase your ability to recall the information you are studying
       because these different environments will help you encode the information you are studying in multiple ways.
       The belief that you must study in the same place and in the same way is a myth: Varying your study spaces and
       your study strategies can help you encode, store, and retrieve the information more effectively.
       Wherever you study, try to make it a welcoming place you want to be in--not an uncomfortable environment
       that makes you want to just do the minimum you must complete and leave. You should include the basics: a
       good chair, a work surface, and whatever materials, books, notes, and other supplies you need for the subject
       you are studying.
       You don't need an elaborate setting, but you may want to consider including a few effective additions if you
       have the space:

         · small bulletin board for often-used formulas
         · encouraging quotes or pictures of your goal
         · whiteboard for brainstorming
         · sticky notes for reminders in texts and notes
         · file holder for most-used documents
         · bookshelf for reference books

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                        5.3 · Studying 143

 ACTIVITY

  Describe every element in your ideal study environment and explain why it's there as well as how it will
  make more efficient use of your time, limit distractions, or in some other way strengthen your ability to
  study.

  After you have described your ideal study environment, think about how you can adapt that environment if
  you cannot be in your favorite place to study. How do you make your own space in the library, a student
  lounge, or a dedicated space on campus for student studying?

Debunking Study Myths

MYTH #1: You can multitask while studying.

How many times do you eat in the car? Watch TV while you write out a grocery list? Listen to music while you
cook dinner? What about type an e-mail while you're on the phone with someone else and jot down notes
about the call? The common term for this attempt to do more than one thing at a time is multitasking, and
almost everyone does it at some point. On some days, you simply cannot accomplish all that you want to get
done, so you double up. The problem is, multitasking doesn't really work. Of course, it exists, and we do it. For
instance, we walk and chew gum or drive and talk, but we are not really thinking about two or more distinct
things or doing multiple processes simultaneously. You are far more likely to miss important details, and far
less likely to retain information, if you try to multitask when studying.

MYTH #2: Highlighting main points of a text is useful on its own.

Another myth of studying that seems to have a firm hold is that the idea of highlighting text--in and of
itself--is the best way to review study material. It is one way, and you can get some benefit from it, but don't
trick yourself into spending too much time on this surface activity and consider your study session complete.

Annotating texts or notes is a first-step type of study practice. If you allow it to take up all your time, you may
think you are fully prepared for an exam because you put in the time. Actually, you need much more time
reviewing and retrieving your lessons and ideas from the text or class lecture as well as quizzing yourself to
accomplish your goal of learning so you can perform well on the exam. Highlighting is a task you can do rather
easily, and it makes you feel good because you are actively engaging with your text, but true learning needs
more steps.

MYTH #3: Studying effectively is effortless.

There is nothing effortless, or even pleasant at times, about studying. This is why so many students don't put
in the time necessary to learn complex material: it takes time, effort, and, in some cases, a little drudgery. This
is not to say that the outcome, learning--and maybe making an A--is not pleasant and rewarding. It is just
that when done right, learning takes focus, deliberate strategies, and time. Think about a superstar athlete
who puts in countless hours of drills and conditioning so that she makes her work on the field look easy. If you
can also enjoy the studying, the skill development, and the knowledge building, then you will most likely be
more motivated to do the work.
144 5 · Studying, Memory, and Test Taking

                         Figure 5.5 Study and learning myths persist in many people, even those who have achieved success in college.

        ANALYSIS QUESTION

         When are you most liable to multitask? How could you be more aware of this practice and try to eliminate it,
         especially when it comes to studying? How can you make your initial text highlighting more time efficient so
         you can include other study practices?

     Study Strategies

       Everyone wishes they had a better memory or a stronger way to use memorization. You can make the most of
       the memory you have by making some conscious decisions about how you study and prepare for exams.
       Incorporate these ideas into your study sessions:
       Practicing effective memorization is when you use a trick, technique, or strategy to recall something--for
       another class, an exam, or even to bring up an acquaintance's name in a social situation. Really whatever
       works for you to recall information is a good tool to have. You can create your own quizzes and tests to go over
       material from class. You can use mnemonics to jog your memory. You can work in groups to develop unique
       ways to remember complex information. Whatever methods you choose to enhance your memory, keep in
       mind that repetition is one of the most effective tools in any memory strategy. Do whatever you do over and
       over for the best results.

      Using Mnemonics

       Mnemonics (pronounced new-monics) are a way to remember things using reminders that are linked to the
       content you are trying to remember. Did you learn the points of the compass by remembering NEWS (north,
       east, west, and south)? Or the notes on the music staff as FACE or EGBDF (every good boy does fine)? These are
       mnemonics, specifically acronyms, or words created out of the first letters of the terms you are trying to
       recall. When you're first learning something and you aren't familiar with the foundational concepts, these help
       you bring up the information quickly, especially for multistep processes or lists. After you've worked in that
       discipline for a while, you likely don't need the mnemonics, but you probably won't forget them either.

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                        5.3 · Studying 145

                                                       Figure 5.6 Familiar Mnemonics You May Find Useful

There are a variety of mnemonics that work well for college students, but use them with caution as they are
good for learning basic information and not complex material. In addition to acronyms, here are a few that
college students have used to help them recall.

  · Acrostic sentences. These are sentences formed from the first letter of each item you are trying to
      remember. They work best for remembering steps in a process. For example, "Please Excuse My Dear Aunt
      Sally" is an acrostic sentence for the steps in the order of operations when solving an equation. Each word
      starts with a letter that corresponds to another word in the steps: Parentheses, Exponents, Multiplication,
      Division, Addition, and Subtraction.

  · Chunking. Grouping items together is another way to improve recall by organizing them by a
      characteristic they have in common. For example, you may need to remember the countries in Africa and
      could organize them by relative size, location (north, south, etc.), or letter they begin with.

  · Memory palace. This mnemonic device is more complicated than most because it requires a few steps to
      create, but many students have found that this strategy works well for them in classes where they must
      recall a large amount of content. The memory palace, also called a Roman Room or the loci method,
      requires you to think of a physical space, real or imagined, in which you can "place" items you need to
      recall within that location. For example, if you are thinking of your own bedroom as the space and you
      need to remember the parts of speech, you may place "verb" in front of the door to your room as you will
      need to use an action to open it up. Then, your bed may be where you place "noun" because it is where
     you add actions such as sleep, read, and daydream. The mirror on your wall may be where you place the
     term "adjective" because you look into it every day to see what you look like: sad, happy, sleepy.

 ANALYSIS QUESTION

  Do you have other mnemonics that help you remember difficult material? What are they? How have they
  helped you with remembering important things?

Practicing Concept Association

When you study, you're going to make connections to other things--that's a good thing. It shows a highly
intelligent ability to make sense of the world when you can associate like and even somewhat unlike
components. If, for instance, you were reading Martin Luther King Jr.'s "Letter from a Birmingham Jail," and you
146 5 · Studying, Memory, and Test Taking

       read the line that he had been in Birmingham, you may remember a trip you took with your family last
       summer through Alabama and that you passed by and visited the civil rights museum in Birmingham. This
       may remind you of the different displays you saw and the discussions you had with your family about what
       had happened concerning civil rights in the 1950s, '60s, and '70s in the United States.

       This is a good connection to make, but if your assignment is to critique the literary aspects of King's long
       epistle, you need to be able to come back to the actual words of the letter and see what trends you can see in
       his writing and why he may have used his actual words to convey the powerful message. The connection is
       fine, but you can't get lost in going down rabbit holes that may or may not be what you're supposed to be
       doing at the time. Make a folder for this assignment where you can put things such as a short summary of
       your trip to Alabama. You may eventually include notes from this summary in your analysis. You may include
       something from a website that shows you information about that time period. Additionally, you could include
       items about Martin Luther King Jr.'s life and death and his work for civil rights. All of these elements may help
       you understand the significance of this one letter, but you need to be cognizant of what you're doing at the
       time and remember it is not usually a good idea to just try to keep it all in your head. The best idea is to have a
       way to access this information easily, either electronically or in hard copy, so that if you are able to use it, you
       can find it easily and quickly.

      Generating Idea Clusters

       Like mnemonics, idea clusters are nothing more than ways to help your brain come up with ways to recall
       specific information by connecting it to other knowledge you already have. For example, Andrea is an avid
       knitter and remembers how to create complicated stitches by associating them with nursery rhymes she read
       as a child. A delicate stitch that requires concentration because it makes the yarn look like part of it is hiding
       brings to mind Red Riding Hood, and connecting it to that character helps Andrea recall the exact order of
       steps necessary to execute the design. You can do the same thing with song lyrics, lines from movies, or
       favorite stories where you draw a connection to the well-known phrase or song and the task you need to
       complete.

        APPLICATION

         Choose one of the following, and create an idea cluster to group and organize:

           · Example A: aviation jobs in North America
           · Example B: the use of analytics in sports to determine team rosters
           · Example C: how social media affects political campaigns

         Start the idea cluster with the topic circled in the middle of the page. For Example A, you might make one
         cluster off the main circle for specific positions; you could add another cluster for salary ranges and another
         for geographic regions.

      Three Effective Study Strategies

       There are more than three study strategies, but focusing on the most effective strategies will make an
       enormous difference in how well you will be able to demonstrate learning (also known as "acing your tests").
       Here is a brief overview of each of the three strategies:

         · Spacing--This has to do with when you study. Hint: Don't cram; study over a period of days, preferably
             with "breaks" in between.

         · Interleaving--This has to do with what you study. Hint: Don't study just one type of content, topic, chapter,
             or unit at a time; instead, mix up the content when you study.

         · Practice testing--This has to do with how you study. Hint: Don't just reread content. You must quiz or test

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          5.3 · Studying 147

      your ability to retrieve the information from your brain.

Spacing

We all know that cramming is not an effective study strategy, but do we know why? Research on memory
suggests that giving yourself time in between study sessions actually helps you forget the information. And
forgetting, which sounds like it would be something you don't want to do, is actually good for your ability to
remember information long-term. That's because every time you forget something, you need to relearn it,
leading to gains in your overall understanding and "storage" of the material. The table below demonstrates
how spacing works. Assume you are going to spend about four hours studying for a sociology exam.
Cramming would have you spending most of those four hours the night before the exam. With spacing, on the
other hand, you would study a little bit each day.

                      Spacing

           Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday            Friday Saturday

Cramming                            Study for 1  Study for 3   Sociology
                                    hour         hours         Test

Spacing    Study for  Study for 30  Study for 1  Study for 90  Sociology
           1 hour     minutes       hour         minutes       Test

Table 5.2

Interleaving

One particular studying technique is called interleaving, which calls for students to mix up the content that is
being studied. This means not just spending the entire study session on one sort of problem and then moving
on to a different sort of problem at a later time.

If you take the schedule we used for the spacing example above, we can add the interleaving concepts to it.
Notice that interleaving includes revisiting material from a previous chapter or unit or revisiting different types
of problems or question sets. The benefit is that your brain is "mixing up" the information, which can
sometimes lead to short-term forgetting but can lead to long-term memory and learning.
148 5 · Studying, Memory, and Test Taking

                                                    Interleaving

    Sunday  Monday                         Tuesday  Wednesday        Thursday             Friday

Read                             Practice test for  Take online      Reorganize and       TEST in
Sociology,                       Sociology,         quizzes for      create concept maps  sociology,
Chapters 1                       Chapters 1 and 3   Chapters 2 and   from notes           Chapters 1-3
and 3                                               3
Reorganize                       Take Ch 1 online                    Review items missed
reading                          quiz               Reorganize       on online quizzes
notes                                               notes
                                 Create Chapter 2                    Take practice test
                                 concept map        Create practice  and review
                                                    test             challenge areas

Table 5.3

Practice Testing

You can do a practice "test" in two ways. One is to test yourself as you are reading or taking in information.
This is a great way to add a little variety to your studying. You can ask yourself what a paragraph or text
section means as you read. To do this, read a passage in a text, cover up the material, and ask yourself, "What
was the main idea of this section?" Recite aloud or write down your answer, and then check it against the
original information.

Another, more involved, way to practice test is to create flashcards or an actual test by writing a test. This takes
more time, but there are online programs such as Quizlet that make it a little easier. Practice testing is an
effective study strategy because it helps you practice retrieving information, which is what you want to be able
to do when you are taking the real test.

One of the best ways to learn something is to teach it to someone else, so ask a friend or family member if you
can explain something to them, and teach them the lesson. You may find you know more about the subject
than you thought or you may realize quickly that you need to do more studying. Why does teaching someone
else rank as one of the most effective ways to learn something? It is a form of practice testing that requires
you to demonstrate you know something in front of someone else! No one wants to look like they don't know
what they are talking about, even if your audience is another classmate.

Recognizing Strengths/Weaknesses of Preferred Study Approaches

Most people don't learn to ride a bicycle by reading a manual; they learn by watching others, listening to
instructions, and getting up on the seat and learning to balance--sometimes with training wheels or a proud
parent holding on, but ultimately without any other support. They may fall over and feel insecure, but usually,
they learn to make the machine go. Most of us employ multiple methods of study all the time. You usually only
run into trouble if you stubbornly rely on just one way to learn or study and the material you're studying or the
task you want to accomplish doesn't lend itself to that preference. You can practice specific strategies to help
you learn in your preferred learning approach. Can you think of a time when the way you usually study a
situation didn't work?

When deciding on a study approach, consider what you know about the material and the type of knowledge it
involves. Is it a group of concepts related to problem-solving methods, such as those you'd find in a physics
class? Or is it a literary analysis of a novel? Consider as many elements as possible about the material -- and
the way the material will be assessed -- to help choose a study approach.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                        5.3 · Studying 149

You should also consider your instructor's preferred method of teaching and learning. Watch the way they
teach lessons or convey necessary course information to the class. Do they almost always augment lessons
with video clips to provide examples or create a memorable narrative? Do they like to show you how
something works by demonstrating and working with their hands--for instance, assembling a piece of
equipment by taking it apart and putting it back together again? Echoing their teaching approach may help
your studying approach. That doesn't mean you have to change your entire learning approach to match your
instructors' methods. Many instructors understand that their students will have different ways of learning and
try to present information in multiple ways.

 THE REAL DEAL

  "Something I wished I knew before going to college is how to properly set aside time dedicated towards
  studying. If you learn how to manage the material you are studying by breaking it down into manageable
  chunks, you can avoid last-minute cramming and be put in stressful situations during the test.
  Procrastination is one of your worst enemies when it comes to studying and proper time management not
  only can assist you when it comes to ensuring you are properly prepared for a test but also allows you free
  up your time to relax on weekends, so you are not having to work on school all week long. I have learned
  that studying effectively is more than just memorizing the material. It is important to actively engage with
  the material, whether that is in the form of practice problems, creating flashcards, or studying in a group.
  This allows me to retain the information I am learning so it's not just dumped, and I may use it again in the
  future. If you are struggling with studying and taking tests, remember that everyone learns differently and
  what works best for one person may be different for you. Do not be afraid to experiment with different
  study methods or reaching out to college resources, like tutors. Also, make sure to maintain your mental
  health by getting plenty of sleep, eating well, and taking plenty of study breaks."

  --Ethan Meyer, senior

Practicing Active Continuous Improvement for All Preferences

You can certainly learn through specific approaches or according to specific preferences, but you will also need
to adapt to different situations, skills, and subject areas. Don't limit yourself to thinking you can only learn one
way or another. That mindset induces anxiety when you encounter a learning situation that doesn't match your
preference. What if your instructor only uses a spoken lecture to teach concepts in your chemistry class, and
you consider yourself a visual learner? Or what if the only method presented to you for learning mathematical
computations is to see videos of others working problems, and you're more hands-on? You may have to
concentrate in a different way or devise other strategies to learn, but you can do it. In fact, you should
sometimes work on the styles/preferences that you feel are your least favorite; it will actually strengthen your
overall ability to learn and retain information.8

Dr. Stephen Covey, famous leadership coach and businessman, called this attention to knowing and honing all
your skill sets, not just your favorites, sharpening the saw. He advised that people should be aware of their
strengths but should always hone their weaknesses by saying, "We must never become too busy sawing to
take time to sharpen the saw."9 For instance, in the chemistry lecture example, you may need to take good
notes from the spoken lecture and then review those notes as you sketch out any complex ideas or formulas. If
the math videos are not enough for you to grasp difficult problems, you may ask for or find your own
problems for additional practice covering that particular mathematical concept to solve on your own.

8 Newton, Phillip M., & Miah, Mahallad. "Evidence-Based Higher Education--Is the Learning Style `Myth' Important?" Frontiers in
Psychology 8:444 (2017) DOI: 10. 3389/FPSYG. 2017.00444.
9 Covey, Stephen. The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People ® https://www.franklincovey.com/the-7-habits.html
150 5 · Studying, Memory, and Test Taking

5.4 Test Taking

                                           Estimated completion time: 23 minutes.

Questions to Consider:

  · What are the differences between test prep and taking the actual test?
  · How can you take a whole person approach to test taking?
  · What can you do on test day to increase your confidence and success?
  · What should you know about test anxiety?

Once you are practicing good study habits, you'll be better prepared for actual test taking. Since studying and
test taking are both part of learning, honing your skills in one will help you in the other.

Probably the most obvious differences between your preparation for an exam and the actual test itself is your
level of urgency and the time constraints. A slight elevation in your stress level can actually be okay for
testing--it keeps you focused and on your game when you need to bring up all the information, thinking, and
studying to show what you've learned. Properly executed, test preparation mixed in with a bit of stress can
significantly improve your actual test-taking experience.

Preparation vs. Actual Test

You can replicate the effective sense of urgency an actual test produces by including timed writing into your
study sessions. You don't need all of your study time to exactly replicate the test, but you would be well served
to find out the format of the exam in advance and practice the skills you'll need to use for the various test
components. Consider this scenario: On one early exam in history, Stuart learned the prof was going to include
several short-answer essay questions--one for each year of the time period covered. Stuart set up practice
times to write for about 15 to 20 minutes on significant events from his notes because he estimated that
would be about how much time he could devote out of the hour-long testing session to write one or two
required short-answer questions. He would write a prompt from his notes, set a timer, and start writing. If
you're ready and you have practiced and know the material, 20 minutes is adequate to prepare, draft, and
revise a short response, but you don't have a lot of extra time.

Likewise, in a math exam, you will need to know what kinds of problems you will have to solve and to what
extent you'll need to show your computational work on the exam. If you are able to incorporate this sort of
timed problem-solving into your study time, you'll be more prepared and confident when you actually come to
the exam. Making yourself adhere to a timed session during your study can only help. It puts a sense of
urgency on you, and it will help you to find out what types of problems you need to practice more than ones
that perhaps you're more comfortable solving.

Leveraging Study Habits for Test Prep

In your mind, you probably know what you need to do to be prepared for tests. Occasionally, something may
surprise you--emphasis on a concept you considered unimportant or a different presentation of a familiar
problem. But those should be exceptions. You can use all of your well-honed study habits to get ready for
exams. Figure 5.7 is a checklist for study and test success for your consideration:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                     5.4 · Test Taking 151

                                                               Figure 5.7 Checklist for Academic Success

Read this list with each separate class in mind, and check off the items you already do. Give yourself one point
for every item you checked. If you always take the success steps--congratulations! They are not a guarantee,
but doing the steps mindfully will give you a nice head start. If you do fewer than five of the steps--you have
some work to do. But recognition is a good place to start, and you can incorporate these steps starting now.
As strange as this may sound, you can find some interesting research articles online about using the taste or
smell of peppermint to increase memory, recall, and focus. Read more at: https://naturalsociety.com/mint-
scent-improve-brain-cognition-memory (https://openstax.org/l/cognition-memory). While sucking on a
peppermint disk won't replace studying, why not experiment with this relatively easy idea that seems to be
gaining some scientific traction?

Whole Person Approach to Testing

Just because you are facing a major exam in your engineering class (or math or science or English class)
152 5 · Studying, Memory, and Test Taking

       doesn't mean everything else in your life comes to a stop. Perhaps that's somewhat annoying, but that's reality.
       Allergies still flare up, children still need to eat, and you still need to sleep. You must see your academic life as
       one segment of who you are--it's an important segment, but just one aspect of who you are as a whole
       person. Consider this example: Neela tries to turn off everything else when she has exams coming up in her
       nursing program, which is pretty often. She ignores her health, puts off her family, tries to reschedule
       competing work tasks, and focuses all her energy on the pending exam. On the surface, that sounds like a
       reasonable approach, but if she becomes really sick by ignoring a minor head cold, or if she misses an
       important school deadline for one of her children, Neela risks making matters worse by attempting to
       compartmentalize so strictly. Taking care of her own health by eating and sleeping properly; asking for help in
       other aspects of her busy life, such as attending to the needs of her children; and seeing the big picture of how
       it all fits together would be a better approach. Pretending otherwise may work sporadically, but it is not
       sustainable for the long run.

       A whole person approach to testing takes a lot of organization, scheduling, and attention to detail, but the life-
       long benefits make the effort worthwhile.

      Establishing Realistic Expectations for Test Situations

       Would you expect to make a perfect pastry if you've never learned how to bake? Or paint a masterpiece if
       you've never tried to work with paints and brushes? Probably not. But often we expect ourselves to perform at
       much higher levels of achievement than that for which we've actually prepared. If you become very upset and
       stressed if you make any score lower than the highest, you probably need to reevaluate your own expectations
       for test situations. Striving to always do your best is an admirable goal. Realistically knowing that your current
       best may not achieve the highest academic ratings can help you plot your progress.

       Realistic continuous improvement is a better plan, because people who repeatedly attempt challenges for
       which they have not adequately prepared and understandably fail (or at least do not achieve the desired
       highest ranking) often start moving toward the goal in frustration. They simply quit. This doesn't mean you
       settle for mediocre grades or refrain from your challenges. It means you become increasingly aware of
       yourself and your current state and potential future. Know yourself, know your strengths and weaknesses, and
       be honest with yourself about your expectations.

      Understanding Accommodations and Responsibilities

       As with so many parts of life, some people take exams in stride and do just fine. Others may need more time
       or change of location or format to succeed in test-taking situations. With adequate notice, most faculty will
       provide students with reasonable accommodations to assist students in succeeding in test situations. If you
       feel that you would benefit from receiving these sorts of accommodations, first speak with your instructor. You
       may also need to talk to a student services advisor for specific requirements for accommodations at your
       institution.

       If you need accommodations, you are responsible for understanding what your specific needs are and
       communicating your needs with your instructors. Before exams in class, you may be allowed to have someone
       else take notes for you, receive your books in audio form, engage an interpreter, or have adaptive devices in
       the classroom to help you participate. Testing accommodations may allow for additional time on the test, the
       use of a scribe to record exam answers, the use of a computer instead of handwriting answers, as well as
       other means to make the test situation successful. Talk to your instructors prior to the day of the test if you
       have questions about testing accommodations.

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                     5.4 · Test Taking 153

Figure 5.8 Part of preparing for a test is understanding the testing environment, which materials will be required, and which will be
prohibited. For example, if you are not allowed to have your phone with you during a test, you may need to leave it in a secure place.
Any approved accommodations you need should be indicated to the instructor ahead of time. (Credit: Universiti Malaysia Sarawak
Malaysia / flickr Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC-BY 2.0))

Prioritizing Time Surrounding Test Situations

Keep in mind that you don't have any more or less time than anyone else, so you can't make time for an
activity. You can only use the time everyone gets wisely and realistically. Exams in college classes are
important, but they are not the only significant events you have in your classes. In fact, everything leading up
to the exam, the exam itself, and the post-exam activities are all one large continuum. Think of the exam as an
event with multiple phases, more like a long-distance run instead of a 50-yard dash. Step back and look at the
big picture of this timeline. Draw it out on paper. What needs to happen between now and the exam so you
feel comfortable, confident, and ready?
If your instructor conducts some sort of pre-exam summary or prep session, make sure to attend. These can
be invaluable. If this instructor does not provide that sort of formal exam prep, create your own with a group
of classmates or on your own. Consider everything you know about the exam, from written instructions to
notes you took in class, including any experiential notes you may have from previous exams, such as the
possibility of bonus points for answering an extra question that requires some time management on your
part. You can read more about time management in Managing Your Time and Priorities.

 GET CONNECTED

  Which apps can help you study for a test, increase your memory, and even help you overcome test anxiety?
  Personal (https://openstax.org/l/personalzen) Zen is a free online gaming app clinically proven to reduce
  stress and anxiety. The games retrain your brain to think more positively, reducing stress to help you focus
  on the experiences around you.
  Games like solitaire, hangman, and Simon Says all build on your memory, keeping it sharp and active. There
  are loads of fun, free online memory games you can use to make time wasting a little less wasteful. For
  more than 250 options, visit the Memory Improvement Tips (https://openstax.org/l/onlinememorygames)
  website.
  Study Hall (https://openstax.org/l/studyhall) might be able to help you dig into a research topic or find
  additional content to help you if you're struggling with a course. Their library of free lectures and content is
  created by expert instructors across a number of course areas.

Test Day

Once you get to the exam session, try your best to focus on nothing but the exam. This can be very difficult
154 5 · Studying, Memory, and Test Taking

       with all the distractions in our lives. But if you have done all the groundwork to attend the classes, completed
       the assignments, and scheduled your exam prep time, you are ready to focus intently for the comparatively
       short time most exams last.

       Arriving to class:

       Don't let yourself be sidetracked right at the end. Beyond the preparation we've discussed, give yourself some
       more advantages on the actual test day:

         · Get to the testing location a few minutes early so you can settle into your place and take a few relaxing
             breaths.

         · Don't let other classmates interrupt your calmness at this point.
         · Just get to your designated place, take out whatever supplies and materials you are allowed to have, and

             calm your mind.

       Taking the test:

       Once the instructor begins the test:

         · Listen carefully for any last-minute oral directions that may have changed some detail on the exam, such
             as the timing or the content of the questions.

         · As soon as you receive the exam sheet or packet, make a quick scan over the entire test.
         · Don't spend a lot of time on this initial glance, but make sure you are familiar with the layout and what you

             need to do.
         · Using this first review, decide how you will allocate your available time for each section.
         · You can even jot down how many minutes you can allow for the different sections or questions.

       Then for each section, if the exam is divided this way, be sure you read the section directions very carefully
       so you don't miss an important detail. For example, instructors often offer options--so you may have four
       short-answer questions from which to choose, but you only need to answer two of them. If you had not read
       the directions for that section, you may have thought you needed to provide answers to all four prompts.
       Working on extra questions for which you likely will receive no credit would be a waste of your limited exam
       time. The extra time you spend at the beginning is like an investment in your overall results.

       Answer every required question on the exam. Even if you don't complete each one, you may receive some
       credit for partial answers. Whether or not you can receive partial credit would be an excellent question to ask
       before the exam during the preparation time. If you are taking an exam that contains multiple-choice
       questions, go through and answer the questions about which you are the most confident first.

       Read the entire question carefully even if you think you know what the stem (the introduction of the
       choices) says, and read all the choices. Skip really difficult questions or ones where your brain goes blank.
       Then you can go back and concentrate on those skipped ones later after you have answered the majority of
       the questions confidently. Sometimes a later question will trigger an idea in your mind that will help you
       answer the skipped questions.

       And, in a similar fashion to spending a few minutes right at the beginning of the test time to read the
       directions carefully and identify the test elements, allow yourself a few minutes at the end of the exam
       session to review your answers. Depending on what sort of exam it is, you can use this time to check your
       math computations, review an essay for grammatical and content errors, or answer the difficult multiple-
       choice questions you skipped earlier. Finally, make sure you have completed the entire test: check the backs
       of pages, and verify that you have a corresponding answer section for every question section on the exam. It
       can be easy to skip a section with the idea you will come back to it but then forget to return there, which can
       have a significant impact on your test results.

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                     5.4 · Test Taking 155

After the Test

As you leave the exam room, the last thing you may want to think about is that particular test. You probably
have numerous other assignments, projects, and life obligations to attend to, especially if you pushed some of
those off to study for this completed exam. Give yourself some space from this exam, but only for the duration
of the time when your instructor is grading your exam. Once you have your results, study them--whether you
did really well (Go, you!) or not as well as you had hoped (Keep your spirits up!). Both scenarios hold valuable
information if you will use it.
Consider this example: Thandie had a habit of going all-out for exams before she took them, and she did
pretty well usually, but once the instructor passed back the graded tests, she would look at the letter grade,
glance half-heartedly at the instructor's comments, and toss the exam away, ready to move on to the next
chapter, section, or concept. A better plan would be to learn from her exam results and analyze both what she
did well and where she struggled. After a particularly unimpressive exam outing in her statistics class, Thandie
took her crumpled-up exam to the campus tutoring center, where the tutor reviewed the test with her section
by section. Together they discovered that Thandie did particularly well on the computational sections, which
she admitted were her favorites, and not well at all on the short-answer essay questions that she did not
expect to find in a stats class, which in her experience had been more geared toward the mathematical side of
solving statistical problems.
Going forward in this class, Thandie should practice writing out her explanations of how to compute the
problems and talk to her instructor about ways to hone this skill. This tutoring session also proved to Thandie
the benefit of holding on to important class papers--either electronically or in hard copy, depending on the
class setup--for future reference. For some classes, you probably don't need to keep every scrap of paper (or
file) associated with your notes, exams, assignments, and projects, but for others, especially for those in your
major, those early class materials may come in very handy in your more difficult later undergraduate courses
or even in grad school when you need a quick refresher on the basic concepts.

Test Anxiety

Figure 5.9 Test anxiety can be a common occurrence, but you can use strategies to manage it. (Credit: CUBoulder / flickr Attribution
2.0 Generic (CC-BY 2.0))

Test anxiety is very real. You may know this firsthand. Almost everyone gets a little nervous before a major
exam, in the same way most people get slightly anxious meeting a new potential date or undertaking an
unfamiliar activity. We second-guess whether we're ready for this leap, if we prepared adequately, or if we
should postpone this potentially awkward situation. And in most situations, testing included, that reasonable
level of nervous anticipation can be a good thing--enhancing your focus and providing you with a bit of
156 5 · Studying, Memory, and Test Taking

       bravado to get you through a difficult time.

       Test anxiety, however, can cause us to doubt ourselves so severely that we underperform or overcompensate
       to the point that we do not do well on the exam. Don't despair; you can still succeed if you suffer from test
       anxiety. The first step is to understand what it is and what it is not, and then to practice some simple strategies
       to cope with your anxious feelings relative to test taking. Whatever you do, don't use the label test anxiety to
       keep you from your dreams of completing your education and pursuing whatever career you have your eyes
       on. You are bigger than any anxiety.

      Understanding Test Anxiety

       If someone tries to tell you that test anxiety is all in your head, they're sort of right. Our thinking is a key
       element of anxiety of any sort. On the other hand, test anxiety can manifest itself in other parts of our bodies
       as well. You may feel queasy or light-headed if you are experiencing test anxiety. Your palms may sweat, or
       you may become suddenly very hot or very cold for no apparent reason. At its worst, test anxiety can cause its
       sufferers to experience several unpleasant conditions including nausea, diarrhea, and shortness of breath.
       Some people may feel as though they may throw up, faint, or have a heart attack, none of which would make
       going into a testing situation a pleasant idea. You can learn more about symptoms of test anxiety from the
       Anxiety and Depression Association of America that conducts research on this topic.10

       Back to our minds for a minute. We think constantly, and if we have important events coming up, such as
       exams, but other significant events as well, we tend to think about them seemingly all the time. Almost as if we
       have a movie reel looping in our heads, we can anticipate everything that may happen during these
       events--both sensational results and catastrophic endings. What if you oversleep on the test day? What if
       you're hit by a bus on the way to campus? What if you get stung by a mysterious insect and have to save the
       world on the very day of your exam?

       How about the other way? You win the lottery! Your screenplay is accepted by a major publisher! You get a
       multimillion-dollar record deal! It could happen. Typically, though, life falls somewhere in between those two
       extremes, unless you live in an action movie. Our minds, however, (perhaps influenced by some of those action
       movies or spy novels we've seen and read) often gravitate to those black-and-white, all-or-nothing results.
       Hence, we can become very nervous when we think about taking an exam because if we do really poorly, we
       think, we may have to face consequences as dire as dropping out of school or never graduating. Usually, this
       isn't going to happen, but we can literally make ourselves sick with anxiety if we dwell on those slight
       possibilities. You actually may encounter a few tests in your academic careers that are so important that you
       have to alter your other life plans temporarily, but truly, this is the exception, not the rule. Don't let the most
       extreme and severe result take over your thoughts. Prepare well and do your best, see where you land, and
       then go from there.

      Using Strategies to Manage Test Anxiety

       You have to work hard to control test anxiety so it does not take an unhealthy hold on you every time you face
       a test situation, which for many of you will last well into your careers. One of the best ways to control test
       anxiety is to be prepared for the exam. You can control that part. You can also learn effective relaxation
       techniques including controlled breathing, visualization, and meditation. Some of these practices work well
       even in the moment: at your test site, take a deep breath, close your eyes, and smile--just bringing positive
       thoughts into your mind can help you meet the challenges of taking an exam without anxiety taking over.

       The tests in the corporate world or in other career fields may not look exactly like the ones you encounter in
       college, but professionals of all sorts take tests routinely. Again, being prepared helps reduce or eliminate this
       anxiety in all these situations. Think of a presentation or an explanation you have provided well numerous
       times--you likely are not going to feel anxious about this same presentation if asked to provide it again. That's

         10 Reteguiz, Jo-Ann. "Relationship between anxiety and standardized patient test performance in the medicine clerkship." Journal of
         general internal medicine vol. 21,5 (2006): 415-8. doi:10.1111/j.1525-1497.2006.00419.

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                              5.5 · Developing Metacognition 157

because you are prepared and know what to expect. Try to replicate this feeling of preparation and confidence
in your test-taking situations.

Many professions require participants to take frequent licensing exams to prove they are staying current in
their rapidly changing work environments, including nursing, engineering, education, and architecture, as well
as many other occupations. You have tools to take control of your thinking about tests. Better to face it head-
on and let test anxiety know who's in charge!

 5.5 Developing Metacognition

                                                                                                    Estimated completion time: 8 minutes.

Questions to Consider:

  · What is metacognition?
  · What contributes to poor metacognition?
  · What can you do to improve your metacognition and in turn your learning?

Consider this scenario: Marcus has studied for his chemistry test by rereading the chapters and looking at his
notes. He has spent several hours the night before doing this and feels ready for the test. The concepts are not
particularly difficult, but there is a lot to recall. When he takes the test, he feels pretty confident that he has
earned at least an 80% (B). He isn't able to answer all the questions--and knows he could have studied
longer--but he feels comfortable with his performance. When he gets the test back, he is surprised to learn he
has earned a 54% (F). He has now realized that he didn't really understand the material well enough to answer
the types of questions his professor included. What happened to Marcus and what can he do differently next
time?

Deep learning, as described earlier in the chapter, is the goal you should be striving for in most if not all of
your college classes. The learning process starts with taking in information--through reading, listening, or
doing--organizing it in your brain for quick recall or use, and then demonstrating, usually through a test or
assignment, that you know the information. However, learning doesn't end there. As you learn and
demonstrate your knowledge, you will receive feedback to help you adjust your learning strategies or reflect
the level of learning that has occurred.

Feedback can include the following:

  · A grade on a test in which you can see what questions you got right and what you got wrong.
  · Written feedback from an instructor or peer about what you have done well and what can be improved.
  · Immediate feedback on a skill (such as playing a note on an instrument) that indicates you did it correctly

      or not.
  · The ease or difficulty at which you can recall or explain information that you are learning.

This feedback is what you need to help you develop metacognition, which is the awareness of your own
learning processes. When you have good metacognition, you can determine what you know and don't know.
You are also able to adjust your learning strategies to improve. Without this feedback, whether it is formal
(e.g., a test grade) or informal (you stumble over defining terms), you will have more difficulty improving your
awareness.

In Marcus' case, he had poor metacognition because his study strategy, rereading the text and his notes and
studying the night before, did not provide him with feedback on what he knew well and what he didn't. In fact,
what Marcus did produced fluency illusion, which is the belief that you know something better than you really
do. This fluency illusion occurred because he reread the material and that made him confident that he knew
the content. However, Marcus had poor metacognition. Now that Marcus has more feedback from his test, he
158 5 · Studying, Memory, and Test Taking

       can use that information to help him determine why he failed to learn the content well enough for the test.
       Here are the steps for improving your metacognition so that you can adjust your thinking and study strategies
       for maximum benefit:

         · Choose a study strategy or a combination of them such as the ones described in this chapter, but be sure
             to include testing yourself (e.g., practice tests, teaching someone else, trying to rewrite notes from
             memory).

         · As you study, track what you are able to recall easily and what you still struggle with and focus on those
             areas.

         · Take the test, complete the assignment, or perform the skill.
         · Review the feedback you receive and examine it for what went well and what didn't.
         · Make adjustments to your study strategies before the next assessment.
       This feedback loop in which you use that information to make changes is essential to learning. If you don't
       look at the grade or feedback and hope to "work harder" next time, you likely won't be using the specific,
       effective, efficient learning strategies that could make a difference in the outcome and your grade.

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                           5 · Family & Friends Matter 159

    Family & Friends Matter

Michael's recently failed test in calculus has rocked his confidence, especially since he has begun to doubt his
abilities. While Michael was a good student--As and Bs--in high school, he was initially concerned that he was
not ready for the academic expectations of college. This grade made this concern more real.

When Michael was in high school, his parents expected that he would never fail any assignment or any course.
On the few occasions that he brought home a C or D on an assignment, they would ground him until he raised
his grades. He believed he would not be ready for college if he did less than quality work. One time, his
parents had a meeting with his high school biology teacher about his progress. They have been involved and
concerned about his grades because they wanted the best from and for him.

Now that Michael is away from home and doesn't need to share his grades, he feels uncertain about how to
deal with this experience. He knows that his parents cannot contact his professors about his grades, so he
doesn't feel obligated to tell them everything just yet, especially because he has the opportunity to raise his
grade in calculus. However, he wants to be honest about what has happened, especially if he cannot raise his
grade before the end of the semester and needs to drop the course. He doesn't want to surprise them with the
information.

Let's Think About It

Michael has several options. Think through the consequences of each one, and choose the best option or
create your own option.

  · Michael chooses not to share this failing grade with his family, so they are not aware of any of his
      struggles.

  · Michael shares his failing grade although he thinks it will cause undue stress with his family, and he will
      have to hear a lecture about not being ready for college.

  · Michael talks with his professor and a tutor about a plan to improve his studying and grades, and shares
      with his family what happened and how he plans to make changes.

Let's Talk About It

Michael is not obligated to share his grades with his family unless he feels some obligation or has made a clear
commitment to keeping them updated on his progress. Some families make a pact that they will continue to
provide support when they see each term's transcripts. Here are some suggestions for communicating with
others about the dilemma that Michael is facing:

  · "I wanted to let you know that I failed a test in my calculus class recently. I don't want you to be
      alarmed--many in the class messed up on the first test--but I don't want you to be surprised if I have to
      spend more time bringing this grade up. I have a plan and feel confident I can improve."

  · "I recently struggled on a test because I was overconfident and slacked off. I realize that now and have
      talked with the professor about what to do differently. He assured me that it was normal and not an
      indication that I won't be successful."

  · "Most of my classes are going well and my grades are good, but I did have a test that I failed. I was
      surprised, but I realized that I had not prepared appropriately and since then I have met with a tutor and
      have started studying for the next test now. I even went to see my professor to check my understanding
      and he confirmed I was studying better."

Whatever choice you would make in this situation, it is always best to communicate clearly your needs, your
concerns, and even your uncertainties.

    Summary

Deepening your learning happens when you study effectively and prepare adequately for taking tests.
160 5 · Summary

Learning how to do these well can only help you be more successful. Additionally, this chapter discusses the
role that metacognition plays in helping you improve your learning processes. This chapter has provided a
variety of tools, strategies, tips and information about how to develop skills that will be most effective for your
experience. You can help yourself by taking these guidelines seriously and tracking your progress. If one
strategy works better for you in some classes and another is more suited to a different course, keep that in
mind when you begin to study. Use all the resources available to you, and you'll be well on your way to success
in college.
Studying and test taking skills often need to evolve to meet the needs of college expectations. Even if you have
solid skills your first year, you will need to continue to develop, hone, and add to them. To that end, consider
what else about developing your memory, honing your study strategies, practicing good test-taking skills, or
improving your metacognition you would like to learn or practice. Choose one of the following to explore
further this term:

  · Develop a study plan that includes when, where, and how to study.
  · Incorporate spacing, interleaving, and practice testing as study strategies.
  · Eliminate test anxiety by implementing strategies to reduce stress.
  · Monitor self-awareness of how well you are learning and what needs to change.

Access for free at openstax.org
6 · Introduction                                                                                                                       161

6
           Building Relationships

Figure 6.1 Success in college and in later careers will require you to develop and maintain healthy and productive relationships with
people in various roles and from a wide array of backgrounds. (Credit: AXIS Dance / Flickr Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC-BY 2.0))

Chapter Outline

  6.1 The Benefits of Healthy Relationships
  6.2 Building Relationships in College
  6.3 Working in Groups

      Introduction

 STUDENT STORY

  Michael has been assigned a group project in his sociology course. He doesn't know his classmates very
  well and has to present a project at the end of the semester that is worth 30% of his grade.
  At the end of class, Michael creates a group chat for his classmates and they decide to meet the next day to
  go over the assignment. Although Michael reminds them, only Kayla shows up, and she is confused as to
  what they are supposed to do. Michael spends an hour walking her through the assignment and asking her
  what parts she wants to do, but never hears from the others.
  When he attends class again, he approaches the group members who missed to see what happened. They
  both shrug their shoulders and promise they will be there next time and agree to take on significant
  portions of the assignment.
  A week later, Michael arranges a meeting for everyone through their group chat to share their progress.
  This time, only Tyler shows up and has completed half of his part.
  As the deadline looms, Michael is frustrated and concerned as to how to proceed.
  What Do You Think?
162 6 · Building Relationships

           · If you were Michael, what would you have thought when you first were assigned the project?
           · What steps would you have taken before the group was to meet?
           · How would you have handled the communication and meetings?
           · How do you feel about group projects? Why do you feel this way?

     Student Survey

       How confident are you in building relationships and working with others in college? Take this quick survey to
       figure it out, ranking questions on a scale of 1--4, 1 meaning "least like me" and 4 meaning "most like me."
       These questions will help you determine how the chapter concepts relate to you right now. As you are
       introduced to new concepts and practices, it can be informative to reflect on how your understanding changes
       over time.
        1. I set healthy boundaries when developing relationships.
        2. I have gotten to know at least one professor well.
        3. I have developed relationships with my peers in college.
        4. I can work productively in groups.
       You can also take the Chapter 6 survey (https://openstax.org/l/collegeconcisesurvey05) anonymously online.

        STUDENT PROFILE

         "For the vast majority of my life, I thought being an Asian-American--who went through the Palo Alto
         School District--meant that I was supposed to excel in academics. But, in reality, I did the opposite. I
         struggled through college, both in classes and in seeking experiences for my future. At first, I thought I was
         unique in not living up to expectations. But as I met more people from all different backgrounds, I realized
         my challenges were not unique.
         I began capturing videos of students sharing their educational issues. Like me, many of my peers lack the
         study skills required to achieve our academic goals. The more I researched and developed videos
         documenting this lack of skill, the more I realized that student identities are often lost as they learn
         according to a traditional pedagogy. I began documenting students' narratives and the specific strategies
         they used to overcome difficulty. Once we can celebrate a diverse student body and showcase their
         strengths and identities as well as the skills necessary to excel academically, my hope is that students of all
         backgrounds can begin to feel that they belong."
         --Henry Fan, Foothill College and San Jose State University

     About This Chapter

       By the time you finish this chapter, you should be able to do the following:
         · Determine the key components of healthy relationships
         · Discuss steps for managing conflict in relationships.
         · Develop a plan to maximize your relationships in college.
         · Identify the steps for working effectively in a group.

       Good relationships can mean the difference between an enjoyable college experience and a difficult one. Many
       students report within their first year that they have experienced loneliness or homesickness whether they live
       on campus or in another state or country or commute back and forth to college. The good news is that these
       states are temporary. With time, students who say they are lonely meet more people, get involved in study
       groups, and get to know their classmates and roommates better. The students who feel homesick or just miss

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                             6.1 · The Benefits of Healthy Relationships 163

their family, friends, and pets (yes, pets) also report that once the term gets busier with events, meetings, class
work, and studying, they find that the homesickness goes away.
This is not to say that quality relationships don't take time or work to develop. In fact, you will want to be
mindful of what you can do to start relationships and improve them to create a more enjoyable college
experience. This chapter offers specific suggestions that can help you get the most out of living and working
with others.

 6.1 The Benefits of Healthy Relationships

                                                                                                  Estimated completion time: 21 minutes.

Questions to Consider:
  · How does self-care benefit relationships?
  · Why is community so important to healthy relationships?
  · What can I do to start developing relationships?

Relationships are key to happy and healthy lives. According to Dr. Robert Waldinger, director of the Harvard
Study of Adult Development, people with the best health outcomes were people who "leaned into
relationships, with family, with friends, with community."1

Figure 6.2 Healthy relationships involve trust, respect, and support. (Credit: Garry Knight / Flickr / Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC-BY 2.0))

Relationships come in many forms: classmates, family, friends, partners, coworkers, team members, and
neighbors. Think of a relationship where you have mutual respect and trust, supporting each other in tough
times, celebrating the good times, and communicating with ease and honesty. This is a healthy relationship.
Do you have someone in mind? On the other hand, if communication is often tense or strained, confidences
are broken, or you don't feel listened to, appreciated, or valued, these are signs of an unhealthy relationship.
Unhealthy relationships can have both immediate and longer-term health impacts. If you are unhappy in a
relationship, try to improve the relationship, or end it. Do not stay in a relationship for the wrong reasons, such
as fear of being alone or guilt.
If a partner tries to force you to do something sexually, harms you physically, or is verbally abusive, you are in
a particularly unhealthy or dangerous relationship. Even if you believe the person loves you, it does not make
up for the harm they are doing to you. End the relationship.
Take a moment to assess the health of your relationships. Who are the people who make you smile, who boost

1 https://www.cnbc.com/2018/03/20/this-harvard-study-reveals-how-you-can-be-happier-and-more-
successful.html#:~:text=%E2%80%9COur%20study%20has%20shown%20that,said%20in%20the%20TED%20Talk.
164 6 · Building Relationships

       your confidence, who truly listen when you need to talk, and who want only the best for you? Investing in
       these relationships is likely to make you happier and healthier. Relationships are two-way streets. How
       committed are you to your relationships? How much effort do you put into nurturing your relationships?

     Self-Care

       Healthy relationships start with healthy individuals. Self-care is learning to take good care of yourself and to
       prioritize your own needs. Self-care involves any activity that nurtures and refuels you, such as taking a walk in
       the woods, going to a yoga class, attending a sporting event, reading a good book, or spending time with
       friends. When you are feeling calm and nourished, you are going to look forward to your day, and despite how
       busy it is, you will prioritize time with friends and family. If you don't take care of and learn to love yourself,
       you will never be able to bring your best self to any relationship.

       An important dynamic you bring to any relationship is how you feel about yourself. Self-esteem is about loving
       yourself and being happy for who you are. Building healthy self-esteem impacts how you see yourself, which
       can drastically improve your relationships. While low self-esteem won't keep us from romantic love, it can act
       as a barrier to a healthy relationship. If you do not believe you are good enough, how can you expect your
       partner to think so?

       When you feel secure in yourself, this allows you and your partner to feel more secure about the relationship.
       If you have insecurities, it may show in your relationship as jealousy, defensiveness, or tension that leads to
       unnecessary arguments. Healthy self-esteem goes hand in hand with self-confidence, and feeling confident
       about yourself will translate into a stronger and more satisfying relationship. If you are experiencing low self-
       esteem, you may give your partner too much credit or stay in a relationship that is not healthy for you. If you
       find yourself changing your personality for someone else, that is never a sign of a healthy relationship.

       You can reverse negative self-talk and build your self-esteem. If you catch yourself thinking you are unlovable,
       unattractive, or not good enough, it's important to start talking to yourself in a positive way and to celebrate
       all that is uniquely you.

       Self-care includes self-forgiveness. We all make mistakes. A misstep isn't the end of the world. Pick yourself up,
       put things in perspective, acknowledge any lessons to be learned, focus on all that makes you special, and
       move forward. Be kind to yourself.

     The Importance of Community

       The Nicoya Peninsula in Costa Rica is home to some of the highest number of centenarians (people who are
       100 years old or older) in the world. Costa Ricans in general report a high level of life satisfaction. Dan
       Buettner, author of the Blue Zones study of the longest living populations in the world, explains that Costa Rica
       "is a place where religion, family, and social interaction are the main values, unlike trying to get ahead, or
       financial security, or status. Their cities are set up so they're bumping into each other all day long. They walk to
       the markets, where they have conversations with people."2

       In many families in Costa Rica, multiple generations live together under the same roof or nearby where they
       can be involved in each other's lives. Neighbors are like extended family, and people often stop in for a visit
       and go out of their way to help one another.

       While this isn't the way many of us live in the United States, the lessons from the Blue Zone study underscore
       the importance of community and the health benefits of connecting to and staying close to a community.

       What communities do you belong to? Is your dorm a community? Is a sports team? Is a club or people you
       volunteer with? When you start seeing the social circles you connect to as communities and prioritize your
       time to develop more closeness with those communities, you will experience many physical, mental, and
       emotional health benefits.

         2 https://www.bluezones.com/2017/10/costa-rica-singapore-two-happiest-places-earth/

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                             6.1 · The Benefits of Healthy Relationships 165

Figure 6.3 Joining clubs in college can be an outstanding way to join and build communities. (Credit: SupportPDX, Cerritos College /
Flickr / Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC-BY 2.0))

According to an analysis of research on college students (Joe Cuseo, The Most Potent, Research-Based
Principles of College Success), college students who have a higher sense of belonging and are more involved
in their college community are more successful. Additionally, college students who are involved in
extracurricular, volunteer, and part-time work experiences outside the classroom (less than 20 hours per week)
earn higher grades than students who do not get involved in any out-of-class activities at all.

 APPLICATION

  Make a list of the communities you belong to. Your list should include formal communities--for example,
  sports teams, fraternities or sororities, and membership in clubs and other organizations. Your list should
  also include informal communities--for example, your neighbors or the people you always see at your
  favorite exercise class.
  Next to each community, write how being a member of this community benefits you and how your
  involvement benefits the community. Now, make a new list of your personal interests and passions. How
  well do these align with the communities you already belong to? Are there new communities that would be
  a good fit for you?
  If you are struggling to identify communities you already belong to, think about your passions, causes you
  care about, and ways you love to spend your time. Find a group or club that aligns with your interests. If
  you can't find one that already exists, start a new club!

Research has shown that friends provide a sense of meaning or purpose in our lives, and that having a healthy
social life is important to staying physically healthy. In a meta-analysis of the research results from 148 studies
of over 300,000 participants, researchers found that social relationships are important in improving our
lifespan. Social support has been linked to lower blood pressure and better immune system functioning. The
meta-analysis also showed that social support operates on a continuum: the greater the extent of the
relationships, the lower the health risks.3

3 Holt-Lunstad, PLoS Medicine, https://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/article?id=10.1371/journal.pmed.1000316
166 6 · Building Relationships

According to a 2018 report from the American College Health Association, in a 12-month period, 63 percent of
college students have felt very lonely.4 If you are feeling lonely or having a hard time making friends, know
that the majority of people around you have also felt this way. Joining a group or a club of people who share
your interests and passions is one of the best ways to make great friends and stay connected.

 ACTIVITY

Lisa Nunn's (2021) book College Belonging: How First-Year and First-Generation College Students Navigate
Campus Life suggests that students experience belonging in three areas: academic belonging, social
belonging, and campus-community belonging. Think about how you can take steps to feel as though you
belong in each of these three categories and write down what you can do.

 Realm of                       Description                                Steps You Can Take
Belonging                                                                    to Enhance Your
                                                                                 Belonging

Academic   Feeling confident in your classes, asking and answering questions 1.
belonging
           in class, engaging with professors within and outside of class  2.

Social     Finding friends with shared interests, participating in events and 1.

belonging organizations, talking to new people                             2.

Campus- Feeling generally accepted by the institution, feeling supported 1.
community and helped by the programs and people on campus who work to 2.

                    see that you succeed

Taking the First Step in a Relationship

Consider this scenario: John is a first-year student who has moved several hundred miles away from home to
attend college. He is, by self-admission, shy and has difficulty making friends. When he steps into his first class
for the term, he meets Praya, a second-year student who says "Hello" when he sits down next to her. She
seems outgoing and engaged as she greets others in the class as if she has known them for a long time. He
feels out of place.

"Hi, Haley. How was your internship over the summer?" Praya asks one student. She asks another student,
"Breylin, how do we always have a class together?"

John sinks down in his seat, afraid she is going to ask him questions as well. He pulls out his phone and looks
through social media to keep her from bothering him. As other students enter the class, some quiet and
others talkative, John wonders if he will have to interact with them. Even though he has not met many people
yet-and certainly has not had any deep conversations with anyone-he feels anxious about having to get to
know strangers and feels most comfortable keeping to himself at least for now.

John's story is not unusual. As you read in the previous section, many first-year college students have difficulty
developing relationships in the first few weeks and months of college. The issue is often exacerbated by the

4 American College Health Association. (2018). Fall 2018 reference group executive summary https://www.acha.org/documents/
ncha/NCHA-II_Fall_2018_Reference_Group_Executive_Summary.pdf

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                             6.1 · The Benefits of Healthy Relationships 167

constant notifications and vibrations that come from phones, which pull us out of conversations with others.

One way to improve your relationship-building skills is to learn the art of small talk, which is the first step in
getting to know someone more deeply. Because we often turn to our phones or other distractions when faced
with interacting with strangers - or even people we know well - it is no surprise that we haven't quite
developed solid communication skills. If you want to get more involved in campus organizations, feel more
comfortable in your classes, and eliminate general awkwardness in most social situations, then practice small
talk skills.

What can you "small talk" about? Here are some topics that could get you started.

  · The weather-"Wow, the cooler temperatures were a surprise this morning. Are you ready for the snow?"
  · The latest sporting event-"How about our Bears? I can't believe they won in the final seconds of the game."
  · Plans for the weekend-"Did you hear about that Halloween party in the park? Have you thought about

      going?"
  · The current trend on social media-"Did you see that challenge on TikTok?"
  · Majors-"What are you majoring in?" or "Are you a marketing major?"
  · Careers-"What kind of job are you anticipating after graduation?"
  · Schedule-"What are you taking this term? Anything you recommend?"
  · Organizations-"I have been thinking about joining an organization. What are you participating in?"
  · Recreation-"I got to play a new video game last weekend. Are you a gamer?"
  · The class-"I struggled with that homework last night. Was it hard for you?"

Of course, tried-and-true compliments work as well as long as you keep them neutral. Admiring someone's
clothing ("Great hoodie! Where did you get that?") or course resources ("Nice laptop. Do you like using it?") are
safe bets. If you are not sure if you should ask the question or bring up the topic because you are concerned it
may be controversial or not taken in the right way, then go with your instinct and choose something from the
list above. Once you get to know people better, you can have deeper and more meaningful conversations.

One last note about "small talk." If you struggle with being friendly with others or coming up with something
to say in those uncomfortable moments, then commit to practicing your small talk skills. Look for times during
the day to try them out such as before class starts, when you are waiting in line, or when you attend an event
and don't know many people. With practice, it gets easier to talk to people you don't know well. And, who
knows? You may find someone who can become a friend.

 GET CONNECTED

  Which apps and websites help you get more comfortable developing relationships?

    · Do you want to meet people who have similar interests? Meetup (https://openstax.org/l/meetup)
        provides you the opportunity to create interest groups based on your location. You can use the app to
        create online or in-person groups.

    · Do you want to learn how to start conversations and have fun doing it? Apps such as Real Talk, Make
        Talk, and Holsom can make starting conversations enjoyable. Learn what kinds of questions to ask that
        can get people talking and talking and talking.

    · How about training in conflict management? Colorado State's Conflict Resolution for College Students
        (https://openstax.org/l/conflictmanagement) provides an in-depth course that explores common
        reasons for conflict and common experiences that college students may encounter and need to
        manage.
168 6 · Building Relationships

6.2 Building Relationships in College

                                       Estimated completion time: 18 minutes.

Questions to Consider:

  · What role will faculty play in my college experience?
  · What other kinds of relationships do I need to develop?

Figure 6.4 provides an overview of the types of relationships you will develop in college. If you are aged 18- or
19-years old (often referred to as traditional college student age), you may look forward to expanding your
relationship types beyond family and friends and authority figures to classmates (those who are in your
classes), peers (those who are in college or near your age and have similar goals and activities), mentors (those
who can help you develop skills or goals), and authority figures (those who direct and evaluate your work). If
you are older than the traditional college student, you may also find that your circle of friends and colleagues
will expand in some areas-and may even contract in others, at least while you are earning a degree.

Some people, such as professors, may fill multiple roles at different times in your college career. For example, a
professor of your first-year seminar may be seen as an authority figure who dictates the learning objectives,
creates assignments, and evaluates you. That same professor may become a mentor when you take them
again your junior year as you are working on your major or participating in undergraduate research with
them. Finally, your professor can become a friend after you graduate, especially if you have developed a bond
with them that transcends the work you did together.

                                                        Figure 6.4 You and Your Relationships During College

Because professors are an important part of the college experience, we will talk first about them and how to
develop good relationships with them.

What Professors Do

Professors are more than just teachers. This may be a surprise if you think about your experiences with high
school teachers where they have their own classroom and a set of responsibilities including leading their
classes that they must do between set hours each day of the week. College professors, by contrast, have much
more flexibility and autonomy in their schedules, their workload, and their responsibilities outside of class.
Because of these differences, you will want to view them in light of their additional roles and activities. See the
table for a breakdown of common responsibilities professors have.

Access for free at openstax.org
                  6.2 · Building Relationships in College 169

       Role or                                        Why It Is Helpful for You to Know
 Responsibility
                  This is an obvious role, but it may be helpful to know that professors may be more
Teaching          focused on providing you with the latest knowledge in their field rather than the most
                  innovative learning activity. You will be responsible for learning the material.
Researching
                  Many professors conduct original research as part of their job responsibilities. In some
Writing and       cases, they may focus most of their time on research. This may be helpful to know
Presenting        because you may want to consider participating in research with a professor as part of
                  your college experience.
Mentoring
Students          When professors do research, they often write articles and present their findings. This
                  means that they may also expect that their students write and present frequently and
Participating in  proficiently in their classes.
Shared
Governance        Professors may serve informally or formally as mentors to students at any time during
                  your college career. This may be helpful to know as you identify people in your
Participating in  network who can serve as supporters of your success.
state, regional,
national, or      Another key component of a professor's job is to serve on committees at the
international     institution and participate in shared governance. Shared governance is the use of
organizations     processes and structures to allow faculty, staff, and students to have a say in decision
related to their  making on campus. Professors often spend considerable time in committee meetings
discipline        reviewing data, evaluating policies and programs, and creating solutions to campus
Working other     problems.
positions or in
business and      Professors often have roles and responsibilities beyond the work they do at your
industry          institution. They may serve on a board or participate in an organization dedicated to
                  sharing their research or working on a national issue. Knowing that your professors
                  have connections and influence beyond the work they do to teach their students can
                  provide more insight into why their schedules are often busy.

                  Adjunct professors, or faculty who teach part-time, may have limited office hours to
                  meet with students because they teach classes at other institutions or hold jobs
                  outside of academia.

Developing Relationships with Professors

Because your relationship with your professors is often the most visible and critical one to your learning and
success in college, it is important that you take time to get to know your professors or at least remember their
names, recognize them when you see them outside of class, and work diligently to meet their expectations. No
one expects you to be best friends with them by the end of the semester, but you do want to view them
differently than you may have viewed your high school teachers-as experts in their fields, partners in your
learning, and mentors as you move through your degree. Here are a few ways that you can initiate and
develop a relationship with your professors:
170 6 · Building Relationships

         · Get to know your professors. This means to learn their names and something about them. They may
             share a few personal stories or you may be able to view their resume (often called a CV or curriculum
             vitae), which will list their education and publications. It also means showing up early or staying after class
             to participate in small talk or stopping by their office hours to talk or schedule a time with them to connect
             virtually..

         · Demonstrate interest. You don't have to love the course, topic, or professor to demonstrate curiosity and
             focus in class. Nod when you agree or understand something or smile at your professor when they make a
             joke. You may find that pretending to be interested at first leads to genuine interest.

         · Participate in class. One of the best ways to develop a positive relationship with your professor is to ask
             and answer questions in class. Engaging in a class discussion demonstrates interest in the topic and can
             go a long way in helping you stand out. If you don't feel comfortable speaking up in class, schedule a
             meeting outside of class to discuss key ideas.

         · Ask about expectations and assignments. A great strategy that is underutilized is meeting with a
             professor before a test or assignment to ask about the expectations or to get clarification. In some cases,
             your professor may provide feedback on a draft or suggestions for studying.

         · Speak up when you stumble or fail. Contrary to some college students' beliefs, professors want to talk to
             you when you fail a test or get a low grade because you misunderstood or procrastinated. Speak up when
             this happens even if you know well what contributed to your setback. Professors like to see that students
             are invested in their learning and improving.

         · Say "thank you." If a professor gives you an extension on your paper or you just enjoyed the class, feel
             free to show some gratitude. Saying "Thank you for helping me conquer my math anxiety" or "I learned so
             much this semester" can go a long way toward building a relationship. And professors never get tired of
             students who are truly appreciative of their work.

       As you read earlier in this section, professors have many different responsibilities in addition to teaching;
       however, they find joy and purpose in developing relationships with students who are engaged in their
       learning. While you don't have to be on a first-name basis with all your professors by the time you graduate,
       you should consider identifying a few who have sparked your interest in their courses or research to get to
       know them better. It would be a shame to graduate and not be able to recall one professor you had!

        THE REAL DEAL

         "Building a positive relationship with your professor is one of the most important parts of higher education,
         and a little bit goes a long way. Professors have many students at once and you likely won't have more than
         a handful, so do learn their names! When something comes up that affects your attendance or projects,
         contact them ASAP. Communication is key, and they will not take your academic shortcomings personally.
         Exceptions are made more often for students who show that they care about learning, and not just "getting
         by" with passing grades. Refer to your syllabus throughout semesters to keep from asking any questions
         they've already answered, and don't be afraid to talk to them outside of class time. Utilize office hours if you
         have questions that would make a waste of class time, especially if what you need is unhelpful for
         classmates to hear; this time is made in their schedules with reason, and class time is slim and most
         valuable in the grand scheme of the course. College professors not only make great recommendation
         sources for things like transfer and even employment applications, but they also love having students in
         mind to whom they can offer new opportunities they come across with networks we could not possibly
         have yet. With some thought and effort for those who work so hard to make strong education possible for
         us, you can open new doors together. Professors recognize who makes the effort, and they remember!"

         --Parker Blue, first-year

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                    6.2 · Building Relationships in College 171

Managing Conflict with a Professor

Now that you know how to develop a meaningful connection with your professors, let's address how to deal
with some common issues that can arise and how to communicate clearly and professionally. While college is
often portrayed as freedom, exploration, and fun, there may be a time (or multiple times) that is stressful or
discouraging. These times can occur when you are not happy with an assignment, classmate, discussion topic,
a response to something you did or did not do, feedback on your work, or a grade. Any time you find yourself
worried, upset, or angry about an event or experience with a professor, take these steps so that you can
resolve the issue quickly and positively.

Step 1. Take a deep breath and write down what happened. Do this before you speak to your professor.
Both activities, breathing and writing, will help you calm down and focus. It will also help you gather your
thoughts.

Step 2. Make an appointment with your professor. Don't try to resolve the issue before, during, or after
class as those are not ideal times to talk about an important issue unless it is the only availability you and the
professor have. Explain why you want to meet to help the professor prepare. This is especially helpful if you
have received a low grade as your professor may want to review the assignment or test beforehand.

Step 3. Explain the issue as clearly as possible. This is where the written account may help. Focus on what
you experienced, heard, or read. Here is an example of a statement about a classmate's rude behavior that a
professor would want to know: "When I spoke up in class about the need for more resources for immigrants,
my classmate said under his breath `They should just go back to where they belong. I don't know why you
care.'"

Step 4. Share how you felt about the event. It is important to acknowledge your emotions, but you don't
have to dwell on them. They will, however, provide some context as to why you feel the issue needs to be
resolved. Here is an example: "I was surprised when Jarod said that when I was speaking and it made me mad
that he would interrupt me with such a statement."

Step 5. Provide a potential solution or ask for assistance resolving the issue. The phrases "Can you help
me understand...?" and "Can you help me resolve this issue?" are both good ways to frame this part of the
process when speaking to your professor. Be prepared to listen, take notes, and make a list of steps you can
take.

A special word about resolving issues with grades, especially final grades. Your professors are human and may
make mistakes as they grade and return your work. While it may be a rare occurrence, it is worth discussing
what to do if this happens. Here are a few suggestions to help you resolve questions about grades.

  · Reach out as soon as you notice a grade that is lower than expected. Don't wait until the end of the term
      to question a grade from months earlier.

  · If it is a grade on an assignment or test during the term, request a meeting in person or carefully ask in an
      email if you can get additional information about what you did or didn't do that contributed to the grade.

  · If it is a final grade, reach out in person, by phone, or email, but be sure to follow these guidelines:
      Provide your name; student identification number (if needed); the course name, number, and day/time
          if you are leaving a message or emailing about the grade.
      Ask if there has been a calculation error if the grade is lower than you expected.
      Do not beg, whine, or threaten if the grade is lower than you wanted, but what you earned. If you did
          not complete assignments on time, follow directions, or submit quality work, then your professor is not
          obligated to give you a higher grade.

As with all your relationships in college, think about them in terms of building your network that will help you
throughout college and after graduation. While you cannot avoid conflict-or bad experiences-you can manage
how you respond to them and how you work with others, especially professors, to resolve issues.
172 6 · Building Relationships

        ACTIVITY

         Directions: Emailing a professor about a failing or low grade can be difficult. Consider the two emails below
         and determine their strengths and weaknesses. Then, write your own email that includes the best
         strategies that are discussed in the section titled Managing Conflict with a Professor.
         Email 1
         TO: ajames@college.edu
         FROM: rjenkins@college.edu
         SUBJ: (no subject)
         Hey! Why did you give me an F in your course? I thought I would get a C because I turned everything in. Can
         you email me back and explain?
         Rob
         Email 2
         TO: ajames@college.edu
         FROM: rjenkins@college.edu
         SUBJ: Question about Final Grade: R Jenkins Student ID 0325
         Prof. James,
         I am in your CSCI 1401 Computer Science course on MWF at 9:00 and noticed that my final grade was a 79,
         but I had it calculated as an 82 after you graded the last project. Can you let me know if this is an error or if
         I calculated incorrectly? If it is easier to talk by phone or in person, let me know and I will provide some
         times and my phone number.
         Rob Jenkins
         Your Email
         Write an email to a professor in which you ask about a grade that is lower than you expected.

     Developing Relationships with Others

       In addition to developing relationships with professors, you will encounter a variety of people in different roles
       that are part of a fulfilling experience. Don't overlook the opportunity to create deep, meaningful relationships
       with others as they will be part of your network for support during college. Here are some categories of people
       you will want to create intentional relationships with and what they can do to help you succeed in college.

         · Classmates. It seems obvious that you want to develop relationships with people in your classes, but
             many students overlook their fellow colleagues as potential friends or support networks. Classmates can
             help you learn the material when they serve as tutors or study buddies, and they can be an emotional
             support when you suffer a setback in a course.

         · Roommates. If you live on campus or away from home in off-campus housing, you may have a
             roommate. A roommate can also become a good friend who can make you feel more at home while you
             are away from your family.

         · Peers. Your peers are people who are other students who populate the college campus. You will
             encounter them when you join organizations, attend events, or use certain services on campus such as
             tutoring. Many colleges employ fellow college students on campus to manage a residential hall, serve

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                    6.2 · Building Relationships in College 173

      food in the cafeteria, and hand out sports equipment at the gym. Your peers also run organizations such
      as clubs, professional-interest meetings, and Greek fraternities and sororities. Developing relationships
      with your peers can help you expand your network and create connections with people who you may find
      helpful when you launch your career.
  · Mentors. Many colleges provide opportunities for students to participate in mentorship programs. Your
      institution may have formal and informal programs that you can participate in to be mentored by a peer, a
      faculty or staff member, or even an alumnus in a career field that interests you. Mentors can provide you
      with advice and support as you work on your college and career goals.
  · Advisors. While there are many different roles on a college campus that could be included in this list,
      advisors deserve a special place because they are crucial to your success; they are also the first place to go
      when a student has an issue. Some advisors spend considerable time with students to help them choose a
      major and create a schedule each semester that will enable them to graduate. Others serve as a sounding
      board for students who are struggling in a class and deciding whether or not to drop. Developing a
      relationship with your advisor has obvious benefits: They get to know what your goals are and can help
      you refine them. They also are very knowledgeable about how to navigate the processes of completing a
      degree.

Figure 6.5 Even if you choose your own roommate, managing the relationship can be challenging and involve compromise. You'll
need to figure out when you study, which items you share, and how close a friendship you'll have. (Credit: Residorm Mugla
Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC-BY 2.0))

Developing quality relationships takes time, effort, and intentionality, but the rewards are many. Consider
expanding your network each semester you are in college so that you have a rich, diverse group of people
whom you know and can count on to help you reach your goals.

 ANALYSIS QUESTION

  Are there any relationships from the list above that will be easier for you to develop? Are there any that will
  be harder to develop? What do you think will be your biggest challenge in creating a network while you are
  in college? What can you do to create a network that includes a variety of different people in it?

Addressing Family Matters

A discussion about relationships while you are in college would not be complete without mentioning family
(and even friends). For many students, the support they receive from family is key to their feelings of stability
and support. However, there may be times that you experience tension or confusion with your family.
174 6 · Building Relationships

       Pressures arise from differences in experience or perspective, the financial aspects of college, and simply
       undergoing an evolution in your relationship. You may notice that your emotionally-supportive family is
       unable to help you navigate the college experience or give advice about what you should do. Other students
       may experience conflict when they choose a major or career pathway that goes against the wishes or
       expectations of family members. Finally, college students with children (or younger family members they care
       for) often feel overwhelmed when balancing their responsibilities; they may at the same time experience guilt
       or disappointment due to time spent away from the kids. Here are some times in which you may find that
       dealing with family can be difficult.

         · When you leave the family to attend college. Moving out can challenge a family if they expect or wish
             that you were still part of their day-to-day activities.

         · During holidays and breaks. Adapting to the schedule of the family can be challenging after your
             freedom to come and go (and go to bed and get up) when you want to.

         · When you experience a failure or setback. Letting your family know you failed a test or a course or
             didn't get accepted in a program may concern them.

         · When you decide on a college major. Choosing a major they are not familiar with or they worry won't
             lead to a specific job after college can contribute to their anxiety about your success.

         · When you decide to continue your education beyond your undergraduate degree. Deciding to take
             on more debt or take longer to be "done" with your education can cause worry about your future.

         · When you choose a career pathway. Choosing a career that they are not familiar with or do not approve
             of can cause stress in your relationship.

         · When you choose to participate in another experience rather than return home. Choosing a different
             experience (such as studying abroad) instead of going back home could make them feel left out of your
             life.

         · If you decide to stop out, drop out, or transfer. Making a major decision that can have emotional and
             financial implications can upset your family if they have a firm belief in what you should do.

       While it may seem obvious, it is worth stating this clearly: Your life is your life and the choices you make should
       be the ones you want to make. This may be difficult to do if your family is relying on you or you are relying on
       them for financial or emotional support. Honest conversations about what you want to do with your life and
       how you want to get there are always good first steps in managing any potential conflict. You may also want to
       keep in mind a few of these opportunities for you to help them understand your experience:

         · Keep the lines of communication open. Clear communication about what you are studying, what you
             like and don't like, and how you are changing can head off surprises should you find that what you
             thought you wanted to study and what you thought you wanted to do with your life changes. If you
             experience a setback or a failure, be honest about it and demonstrate how you will get back on track.

         · Share with them some of your experiences. While you don't have to recreate the lecture that blew your
             mind, you can share what you are learning or doing that is exciting you and developing your curiosity or
             purpose.

         · Assure them of the support you are receiving from your network. Most families worry when they are
             unsure of how you are making major life decisions. Let them know what resources, offices, and people are
             providing advice and support as you move through college. If you change your major after talking with
             your advisor and reviewing what you need to do to still graduate on time, let your family know!

         · Let go of your expectations. In some cases, your family may just not understand because they haven't
             gone to college or they have not experienced what you have. You may just need to let go of the
             expectation that they will be able to provide the type of support that you want or need.

         · Create boundaries. If you feel as though your family is overstepping their role in your life decisions, set
             clear, firm boundaries about what help or advice you will and will not accept. Creating boundaries is part
             of every healthy relationship and parents and family members should be no different. If you have to
             decide that you cannot discuss your career plans with your family because the conversation devolves into

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         6.3 · Working in Groups 175

      shouting, then you must create boundaries to protect your mental health.

 6.3 Working in Groups

                                                                                                  Estimated completion time: 18 minutes.

Questions to Consider:
  · What are the benefits of working in groups?
  · What can I do to work effectively in a group?

Benefits of Working in Groups

When a professor assigns group work, most students initially cringe because they have had poor experiences
collaborating on a project. Many of them have tales of group members who didn't contribute equally or who
disappeared altogether. It is no wonder that a popular meme includes a photo of a casket being lowered into
the ground with the words "When I die, I want my group members to lower me into my grave so they can let
me down one last time." We can laugh at this extreme reaction, but there is some truth in feeling
apprehension about being disappointed by others. This section makes the case that if you know more about
how group dynamics can and should work and how to communicate effectively during the process of
completing a group project, you are more likely to have a positive - or successful - experience.

Figure 6.6 Group work will be an important and sometimes high-stakes aspect of many classes and perhaps entire programs.
Understanding group work requirements and dynamics, particularly in different learning environments, is important for success.
(Credit: Residorm Mugla Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC-BY 2.0))

Why do professors assign group projects if they are often fraught with challenges? Perhaps it is because group
projects are probably the most "real world" experience you will do in college. Very rarely will you be asked to
create a report, present to a client, develop a new product or treatment, or fix a problem without working with
others and depending on them to do their parts in a timely and professional manner. The more practice you
have developing your own skills as a group member and troubleshooting when things don't go smoothly, the
more nimble you will be when you have to collaborate in your job.
If you approach working in groups by anticipating the challenges and developing strategies to minimize their
negative impact, you will be able to weather the stresses more successfully. Table 6.1 provides some common
challenges that you may experience working in a group and reviews the strategies you can use to minimize or
eliminate the challenges.
176 6 · Building Relationships

Challenges of Group Work                                         Strategies for Improving Group Work

Your grade may be dependent on the          Divide the assignment into parts, assign everyone a role that
quality of others' work.                    plays upon their strengths, and communicate expectations
                                            on quality.

You have to wait for others to complete     Create clear due dates for your group and monitor everyone's
their work before you can finish the        progress on the project components.
assignment.

You have to trust that others will fulfill  Create a group Code of Ethics or Shared Expectations
their commitment to do their part of the    document that outlines what each group member agrees to
assignment.                                 do.

Group members don't show up or do not       Develop guidelines regarding missed meetings or lack of
respond to communication.                   communication and implement consequences.

Table 6.1 Challenges of and Strategies for Improving Group Work

Understanding Group Dynamics

One way to improve your work in groups is to learn more about group dynamics and stages. Bruce Tuckman5
(1965) developed a model of group development. His initial four phases are forming, storming, norming and
performing. In the forming phase, group members learn more about the task they must complete as well as
getting to know each other. For the most part, members act and think individually and may be polite or quiet
when trying to make decisions about what needs to be done. Group conflict arises in the storming phase
when roles are assigned and a leader emerges. Some members may not voice their concerns and suffer from
internal (and unexpressed) conflict while others may openly argue about what needs to be done. Groups may
skip this phase altogether if communication is clear and roles are assigned to interest and strengths. The next
phase is norming, or when group members work collectively to help each other achieve their goal. Members
are aware of how their part fits into the whole and are mindful of supporting each other. The last phase is
performing and is marked by members' competence and confidence to complete goals.

Some groups revert to previous phases when there is unresolved conflict or when communication breaks
down. The goal of group work is not to have a conflict-free experience, but to learn how to negotiate
challenges, concerns, and changes during the process. When group members set common goals, create clear
expectations, and communicate regularly, they are less likely to experience insurmountable obstacles.

                                                     Figure 6.7 Tuckman's (1965) Model of Group Development

5 Tuckman, Bruce W (1965). "Developmental sequence in small groups". Psychological Bulletin. 63 (6): 384-399. doi:10.1037/
h0022100. PMID 14314073.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          6.3 · Working in Groups 177

Setting Up Your Group for Success

Review Assignment

If we use the Tuckman (1965) model, we can anticipate the steps for creating a successful group. First, review
the assignment and ensure that everyone understands the scope of the work, especially the expectations of
the final product. Take some time to discuss what the parts of the assignment are and what the expected
outcome should be. Will you be writing a paper? Will you be presenting original research? Will you need special
equipment, technology, or software to complete the project? Get clarity on the assignment before you get too
far into the work.

Choose Roles

Next, your group should determine roles. You may want to first determine the leader, or you may decide to
share leadership between two members or choose a "second in command" should the leader not be able to
fulfill the duties. Then, you will need to set roles and responsibilities for everyone else in the group. Be sure to
discuss each other's strengths, weaknesses, and interests. Different types of group projects call for different
roles, so you may need to pick and choose what is appropriate for your project. Table 6.2 provides examples of
roles and responsibilities that you may consider when assigning roles.

Role                                                    Responsibilities

Leader        Ensures that everyone in the group works towards the objectives of the assignment and
              stays on task.

Recorder/     Takes notes and shares them with the group. Keeps track of the work that is completed.
Secretary

Critic/       Provides feedback and evaluation on work. May also play "devil's advocate" when
Evaluator     discussing ideas.

Specialist    Uses strengths to take charge of one aspect of the project. Is responsible for coordinating
              with other specialists or the leader to meet group goals.

Task Leader/  Ensures that deadlines are met. Reorganizes work or renegotiates timelines if needed.
Timekeeper

Energizer     Keeps the group's energy high to complete the work.

Completer/    Checks the work against the assignment or evaluation rubric to make sure all parts are
Finisher      completed correctly. May also serve as a proofreader/editor.

Table 6.2 Roles and Responsibilities for Group Members

Create a Communication Plan

When you have assigned roles and responsibilities, your group should create a communication plan. Because
college students have different schedules and obligations, you will find that a strong communication plan can
make working together easier. You may find that you need to work asynchronously, or not at the same time,
and clear communication expectations will help your group both in person and online run smoothly. Here are
some questions to guide your communication plan:

  · How will the group communicate primarily?
178 6 · Building Relationships

         · What will be the back-up communication strategy?
         · What will you do if a group member doesn't respond to or acknowledge messages?
       If group members do not want to share personal phone numbers, then consider using email or a shared drive
       folder to message each other.

      Write a Group Contract

       To ensure that all members uphold their responsibilities, create a contract that lists all the expectations for the
       group. You can use a template or create your own based on the group members' roles, dynamics, and
       assignment requirements. A group contract can be helpful in managing conflict and directing group members
       should someone not do their part. Here are the components you will want to consider and an example below
       of a contract:
        1. Assignment reminders. Include a description of the goal or project and the final deadline.
        2. General expectations or guiding principles. Provide a list of general expectations or principles that will

             guide a successful group. For example, you may determine that acting respectfully, communicating
             honestly, and giving full effort are important group principles.
        3. Specific expectations or tasks. List expectations about communicating, delegating, meeting, completing
             tasks, and managing conflict.
        4. Group members' signatures. Include signatures or initials of the group members to underscore the
             importance of the contract.

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                    6.3 · Working in Groups 179

             Figure 6.8 Sample Group Work Contract

APPLICATION

You have been assigned a group project in which you and three classmates must research the topic For-
Profit Prisons over the next two weeks. For the assignment, your group must find 4 academic journals, two
of which argue for and two which argue against for-profit prisons as necessary for managing the criminal
population, and read them carefully. Using the 4 academic journals, your group will be writing a 3-page
summary of the pro and con sides of the topic and creating a 6-slide presentation that shares the key
highlights of each source. Create a contract for your group by assigning roles, developing a communication
plan, and writing down key milestones to complete your assignment on time.

Roles: What roles will each of you play in the group? Consider the tasks that must be completed to
180 6 · Building Relationships

determine what roles you need.

 Group     Role                       Responsibilities
Member

Ex: Group  Researcher                 Search the topic in the library database. Find 4 articles (2 pro and 2 con).
Member 1                              Assign each member an article to read.

Communication Plan: How will the group communicate throughout the project? Consider creating a
back-up plan.

Communication Plan                                     Expectations

Ex: We will use Group Me for          Each member will respond via Group Me when asked
scheduling meeting times and to       questions about meeting times or updates on their part of the
provide updates                       project.

Key Milestones: How will you plan out the work and keep everyone on track? Be sure to include time
to proofread, edit, and practice for the presentation.

                                Task  Person Responsible             Deadline

Ex: Choose articles to use for the project Researcher     No later than February 12

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         6.3 · Working in Groups 181

Managing Conflict in Groups

Conflict during group work does not have to be inevitable. With proper planning, clear roles and
responsibilities, and a communication plan, your group can minimize a majority of issues that can arise.
However, it is important to recognize what kinds of conflict can derail group work and review what steps you
can take to get back on course. Here are a few examples of common conflicts:

  · No leader. When no leader emerges, it may be difficult to move forward. If this happens, each member
      may need to take a specific task and assume responsibility for that task. Group members who are not
      comfortable being the leader may also feel more comfortable with co-leaders.

  · Too many leaders. Many people with good ideas can derail a group project. If there are too many people
      vying to influence the group's direction, ask all group members to speak openly about the conflict. The
      group may want to vote on who should assume the leadership positions or what direction the group
      should take if there are more than one good option.

  · Aggressiveness or hostility. A group member who tries to take over the project or is openly hostile
      during the process can make the experience miserable for everyone involved. The leader should take
      action immediately when the issue arises by clearly naming the behavior, avoiding emotional language,
      asking the reasons behind the anger, and communicating a plan to move forward with the project. This
      may mean assigning the member to a specific and limited role, or, in extreme situations, removing (or
      asking to remove) the member from the group.

  · Lack of communication. A group member who never responds to messages or who communicates
      inconsistently can make completing a group project very difficult. The leader should go back to the group
      contract and reach out to the member, preferably in writing, and describe the missing communication, the
      tasks that have not been completed, and what the group will be doing to move forward without the group
      member. Even if the group member never reads or responds to the message, the group will have evidence
      that they attempted to reach out.

  · Overpromising and underperforming. A group member that takes on tasks, promises to do them well
      and on time, and consistently misses the mark should be talked with about the lack of work. A group
      member may need to take on their responsibilities to meet the deadline.

  · Low work quality. If a member is not completing quality work, the group leader should step in to work
      with the other members to revise or edit the work, but the group should communicate with the member
      as to what has changed and why.

Most conflict occurs when there is a lack of communication about what is expected. Providing your group
members with examples of how to deliver bad or difficult news (e.g., "I am not able to meet my deadline" or "I
think I need help with my tasks") can help your members feel more comfortable when it does occur. Be sure to
treat others respectfully and with kindness even if you are justifiably frustrated by your group members'
actions or inactions.

 APPLICATION

  Your classmate Garth shows up for the in-person meetings, but has yet to complete any of his parts for the
  project. The rest of your group cannot move forward without his finished work, and you are getting nervous
  that your classmate's unfinished work will keep you from successfully completing the project on time. Write
  Garth a clear and kind message in which you explain what has happened from your observation, what you
  need from your classmate, when you need their work, and the consequence of their not completing their
182 6 · Building Relationships

         work by the deadline.
            Dear Garth,

     Completing the Project

       The project is complete when all the steps have been taken to submit or present it successfully, but that is not
       the end of the group work. You will want to also debrief on what worked and what could have been improved.
       Consider calling a brief meeting to review the process of completing the project or to review your graded work.
       Ask your group members what they felt were the group's strengths and weaknesses. Use the debriefing to
       think about how to make changes to the process the next time you work in a group. Spend some time
       reflecting on what skills you still need to improve and how you can make the most of future group work.

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                           6 · Family & Friends Matter 183

    Family & Friends Matter

Michael's group project seems to be destined to fail. The group members have been sporadic in attending
meetings, communicating in the group text, and completing their work. If the project was not worth a third of
their overall grade, Michael would have given up weeks ago. However, he really wants to do a good job,
because he knows he needs to develop better communication skills and because his professor is part of the
graduate admissions committee for physical therapy and her recommendation would be important.

The professor has communicated how she expects the groups to handle the workload and conflict. She wants
them to resolve any issues that arise, and she does not want to be consulted on disputes that can be easily
remedied by the group. She believes that these real-world experiences of working with others will help them
develop project-planning and communication skills that are far more valuable than the grade they may earn.

The presentation and final paper are due in a week, and Michael is the only one who has kept to the agreed-
upon schedule. He has heard nothing from his classmates about where they are in the process and when they
will be able to hand over their parts. Unfortunately, Michael cannot finish his parts--writing the conclusion and
finalizing the slides--without knowing what they found in their research. He is not sure what to do.

Let's Think About It

Michael has several options. Think through the consequences of each one, and choose the best option or
create your own option.

  · Michael does all the work himself and tells his professor in a private message that none of his group
      members contributed and do not deserve a grade for the project.

  · Michael sends a message to all his group members telling them that he will be doing all the work himself
      as an individual project and if they want to continue as a group, they can fill in his part themselves.

  · Michael offers to help fill in parts that need to be completed, waits patiently until a few days before the
      assignment is due, and completes as much as he can--his parts and others' parts--without sharing with
      his professor the reality of the situation.

Let's Talk About It

Michael has a few communication challenges: his professor wants the groups to work out any conflict and his
group is not communicating with him. While Michael may be limited in his ability to affect the outcome of the
group presentation, he can communicate clearly with his group members. Here are some suggestions for
communicating with others about the dilemma that Michael is facing:

  · "I realize that we are all really busy, but I want to reiterate what we agreed to do. At the very least, please
      communicate what you have done and what you need help with, so that we all can do our parts to
      complete this project."

  · "I am feeling stressed about the lack of communication, and am concerned it will keep us from working
      effectively. Because I am leading our group work, I am proposing that those who do not meet the
      deadlines for having their part completed will be replaced by someone who can get the part done."

  · "By next Thursday, if the group members who have not completed their parts do not update or share their
      work, I will be filling in those parts myself so that we can submit this work on time."

Whatever choice you would make in this situation, it is always best to communicate clearly your needs, your
concerns, and even your uncertainties.

    Summary

Developing healthy relationships and expanding your network of support are both important tasks for you to
do in college. Without these relationships, your experience may be lackluster at best and lonely and difficult at
worst. The first step to creating meaningful connections is to be healthy yourself and acknowledging the
184 6 · Checking In: Your College Readiness Checklist

importance of community. There are also some ways you can jumpstart a relationship by improving your
"small talk" skills. You will develop many relationships with different people while you are in college, but one of
the most important is with your professors. Be sure to find ways to connect with them in and out of class. You
will also want to be mindful of connecting with classmates, peers, mentors, and advisors as they will all be
important to your network for success and support. Finally, there is no better way to really get to know others
than when you work with them to complete a goal or a project. While group work strikes fear in some
students, it doesn't have to be a conflict-ridden endeavor. Consider what you can do to anticipate challenges
and make the process as smooth as possible.
To make the most of the relationships that you will develop or strengthen, consider what else about
relationships and working with others that you would like to improve. Choose one of the following to explore
further this term:

  · Create a self-care routine that you incorporate into your weekly tasks. Read, watch, or listen to articles,
      books, videos, and podcasts about self-awareness, self-reflection, mindfulness, and stress reduction.
      These resources can help you build your self-care toolkit.

  · Find ways to connect to your community through organizations, clubs, events, and volunteer
      opportunities. Work on developing a solid sense of belonging academically, socially, and campuswide.

  · Get to know at least one professor this term and begin to build your support network of classmates,
      peers, mentors, and advisors. Commit to reaching out to people to begin developing relationships.

  · Talk with your family and friends about what kinds of support you would like from them while you are in
      college. Be clear about your needs.

  · Create a system for managing group work that includes assigning roles, setting goals, and developing
      communication expectations.

    Checking In: Your College Readiness Checklist

Spring

                                                                       9th Grade

                   Maximize spring break trips. Pop by a college campus (or two) along the way or at your
                   destination. Even if you can't take a formal tour (or if students are on break and the campus is
                   quiet), you can still get a feel for the environment and what college life might look like there.

                   Create a resume. Not only will your resume be useful for completing college applications, but
                   it'll also help your teachers write you great letters of recommendation. Take some time each
                   semester to update it.

                   Think about next year's schedule. Look through your school's course catalog for class options
                   and talk with your school counselor about how to challenge yourself the next three years while
                   also exploring your interests.

                   Talk with your parents about paying for college. College isn't cheap, but that doesn't mean
                   it's unattainable. Talk with your parents about how much college might cost, the financial
                   resources available to you, and how you might contribute to your education.

Table 6.3

Access for free at openstax.org
           6 · Checking In: Your College Readiness Checklist 185

                                                              10th Grade

           Sign up to take the ACT and SAT. Register early for the SAT and ACT, if you're thinking about
           taking them this spring/summer. Not only will you be able to map out your study plan early, but
           you also have a better shot at getting a close testing location.

           Sign up for college mailing lists. You may get inundated with college mail, but take some time
           to read through the emails and brochures you receive. Some colleges use demonstrated
           interest when making admission decisions, so reading their emails and clicking the links could
           give your application a slight boost.

           Prep for AP exams. If you're in an AP class and you want to try to earn college credit for it, AP
           exams are usually in early May. Visit the College Board's website for links to free study
           resources.

           Think about leadership positions for next year. Colleges love to see students show
           continued, deepening involvement in an activity. Consider taking on a leadership role in one of
           your extracurricular activities or at your school next year.

Table 6.4

                                                              11th Grade

           Look for personal statement prompts to be released. The Common App
           (https://www.commonapp.org/) and University of California
           (https://admission.universityofcalifornia.edu/index.html) system usually release their essay
           prompts in March (the Coalition App (https://www.coalitionforcollegeaccess.org/) and
           ApplyTexas (https://www.applytexas.org/) are often a little later in the spring). Consider writing
           down potential story ideas for each prompt -- one might turn into your essay!

           Create a Common App account. Chances are, you'll apply to some schools via the Common
           App. Create an account now and become familiar with the site -- you can even use it to do
           college research.

           Understand the difference between Early Decision, Early Action, and Regular and Rolling
           Decisions. Applying Early Action or Early Decision means you get a college's decision earlier
           than if you apply through Regular/Rolling Decision, but there are other implications. Learn what
           these terms mean so you can decide what strategy makes the most sense for you.

           Ask teachers for letters of recommendation. Consider asking two current teachers in core
           classes and one teacher in an elective class to write you a letter of recommendation. If you
           participate in extracurricular activities, you may also ask leaders in those organizations (e.g.,
           Scouts, Boys & Girls Club). When you ask them, give them your resume and a letter listing the
           schools/majors you're considering and anything else your recommender should know.

Table 6.5
186 6 · Checking In: Your College Readiness Checklist

                                                              12th Grade

           Update your calendar with important dates. Once you've accepted an offer of admission, put
           new important dates in your calendar, like college registration, housing selection, orientation,
           move-in, and the academic calendar.

           Keep applying for scholarships. Every scholarship dollar helps when it comes to paying for
           college, so keep applying. Many scholarships are available to enrolled high school and college
           students.

           Be prepared to respond to a request for FAFSA verification. An estimated 30% of FAFSA
           applications are randomly selected for verification. You'll need to gather related paperwork --
           like child support documentation and tax returns -- to complete the FAFSA Verification
           Worksheet.

           Attend admitted student events. Colleges you've been accepted to will often hold admitted
           student events on campus or as part of a "traveling roadshow." If you haven't toured a campus
           or want to learn more about a school, attend one of these events.

Table 6.6

Access for free at openstax.org
7 · Introduction                                                                                                                          187

7
           Maintaining Your Mental Health and Managing Stress

Figure 7.1 Spending time in nature is just one way to relieve stress, reconnect, and refocus. (Credit: GlacierNPS / Flickr Public Domain
(CC-0))

Chapter Outline

  7.1 Creating Your Best Self
  7.2 Your Overall Well-Being
  7.3 The Mind-Body Connection
  7.4 Mental Health Basics
  7.5 The Role of Social Media on Mental Health
  7.6 Physical Health Basics

      Introduction

 STUDENT STORY

  When JT entered college, he tried to have it "all." He needs to work full time to cover all of his college and
  living expenses, but he knows he also wants a "college experience," so he has gotten involved in a few
  organizations. Now, he is struggling with balancing all of the obligations. JT is stressed out and gets angry
  at the slightest inconvenience.
  JT notices that his irritability and frustration have gotten worse now that he is a few weeks from the end of
  the semester. The job is fine--and his supervisor is supportive of his pursuit of a degree--but, based on the
  number of assignments, JT's professors seem to think he has nothing else to do but study. One class has so
  much homework that JT has little time for any other class and his grades are starting to slip.
  JT wants to remain involved in the organizations because he enjoys the people, but he is starting to doubt
  that he can achieve all his goals and not be stressed all the time. JT also wants to continue pursuing a
  computer science major, but the workload in the classes and the fact he is working full time each week (and
  sometimes more) leaves him no time to sleep or take care of himself.
188 7 · Maintaining Your Mental Health and Managing Stress

         JT is not sure what to do, but he knows he cannot keep up the pace of work, classes, and organizations each
         semester--or something, most likely his mental and physical health--will pay the price.
         What Do You Think?

           · If you were JT, what would you have thought when you started experiencing stress from too much to
               do?

           · How would you have managed your stress in this situation?
           · What changes would you have made to improve your health?
           · How do you feel about managing your mental and physical health? Why do you feel this way?

     Student Survey

       How do you feel about your overall health and well-being? These questions will help you determine how the
       chapter concepts relate to you right now. As we are introduced to new concepts and practices, it can be
       informative to reflect on how your understanding changes over time. Take this quick survey to figure it out,
       ranking questions on a scale of 1--4, 1 meaning "least like me" and 4 meaning "most like me."
        1. I can manage my emotions most of the time.
        2. I can reduce stress when it is negatively affecting me.
        3. I feel comfortable seeking out help when needed.
        4. I get enough sleep.
       You can also take the Chapter 7 survey (https://openstax.org/l/collegeconcisesurvey06) anonymously online.

        STUDENT PROFILE

         "My freshman year of college, I started at a pretty big university. I had what some call "social anxiety" and
         even cried before getting out of the car on my first day. That year was a struggle for me, and I constantly
         had to fight with myself to step out of my comfort zone in order to succeed. I knew that if I made positive
         changes to my life then I would easily succeed in school. I joined a group of students who were a support
         system for me during my first year of college. Together we studied together and even worked out together.
         It helped me be more involved on my campus and less worried. Being connected with other students has
         taught me a lot of ways to cope with common problems many students face.
         My first advice would be first and foremost, always make sure you are being kind to yourself. It's not
         advisable to work 40 hours a week and also try to be a full time student. You need to set up a realistic home
         and school life so that way you are balanced with your assignments and other responsibilities. You need to
         give your body and your brain time to rest so you can absorb as much as you want to without restrictions. I
         found it useful to start working out to make sure that I'm dedicating the time I should be to myself and not
         working myself until exhaustion. Little things like exercise, yoga and meditation can do amazing things for
         your body as well as your mind. If you take care of your body, your body will take care of you."
         -Felicia Santiago, Delgado Community College

     About This Chapter

       This chapter explores the many ways your health and well-being may be impacted by the choices you make.
       The goal of this material is to help you do the following:

         · Understand how your mindset influences your emotions.
         · Identify strategies to manage your moods.

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                   7.1 · Creating Your Best Self 189

  · Describe differences between stress versus anxiety and sadness versus depression.
  · Understand the mind and body connection.
  · Identify ways to maintain and enhance your emotional health.
  · Understand mental health risks and warning signs.
  · Outline steps you can take to ask for help.
  · Describe actions you can take to improve your physical health.

As a first-year college student you will make many choices without parental oversight, including the way you
take care of your body and mind. Some choices put you on a path to health, and other choices can lead you
down a path toward illness. There is a strong connection between success in college and your ability to stay
healthy.

Health is more than a strong body that doesn't get sick. Health also includes your overall sense of well-being
(mental and emotional, for example) and healthy coping strategies to manage life stressors. Good health is
about making positive choices in all of these areas and avoiding destructive choices. It's about learning to be
smart, to set boundaries, to watch out for your safety, and to take care of the one body that will carry you
through life. While health and wellness are often interchanged, it is important to differentiate the two
concepts. Health is a state of physical, mental, and social well-being, while wellness is a process through which
people become aware of and make choices toward a healthy and fulfilling life.

In this chapter you will learn the skills you need to live a healthy lifestyle for both your mind and body. The first
step is to focus on who you are and how you can create your best self. This includes how to promote self-
efficacy (i.e., your belief in yourself) and create strategies that you can use to improve your resiliency (i.e., your
ability to recover from challenges and adapt to change) during your transition into college. Next we will discuss
the mind and body connection and how we need to consider managing both as a top priority every day.

We will address identifying your feelings and mood and build a vocabulary that helps you communicate with
others. Then we will move into the topic of stress versus anxiety and how to manage both. At this point,
prepared with identifying and managing your emotions with strategies you can use on your own, we will
discuss when and how to seek help including the steps you must take to establish your own support system.
Once you have a support system, we will then discuss the importance of managing your problems in a way
that holds you accountable for your actions and behaviors yet provides a framework for others to help you
effectively. We will then discuss the role of social media on your overall health and well-being and provide
suggestions for creating boundaries with the use of social media. Lastly, we will help you to gain a better
understanding of how to maintain physical health through good nutrition, maintaining physical activity, and
sleep.

 7.1 Creating Your Best Self

                                                                                                        Estimated Reading Time: 9 minutes.

Questions to Consider:

  · What skills do you need to promote self-efficacy?
  · What strategies can you use to improve your resiliency?

You are in college to fulfill an educational, personal, or professional goal. But it is just as important to work on
creating your best self in the process, as who you are and what you believe you can achieve are just as
important as the piece of paper you will receive at graduation. The first step in this process is identifying your
positive attributes, which will be the foundation of your self-confidence. The belief in your abilities is also
known as your self-efficacy. One way to increase your self-efficacy is to identify your strengths and values.
Think of strengths as characteristics about ourselves that make us feel good about who we are, things we are
190 7 · Maintaining Your Mental Health and Managing Stress

good at, and parts of our personalities that make us good friends or good members of our community. Values
are the things that matter to us the most. Typically, we do the best we can to live by our values; however,
sometimes we struggle. Identifying strengths and values is a great place to start when making big life
transitions. Being clear on what you view as your strengths and the values that are important to you will help
you with finding similar people to build your support network.

Let's get started. First, consider your strengths. In Table 7.1, we have listed several examples of strengths.
What are your strengths? What would your family say if we asked them about your strengths? What about
your friends or community, would they have other examples of your strengths? Answer these questions to
make a list of your own.

Next, let's consider your values. When finding your support network, friends, new clubs or organizations to
join, one way to start is to understand your values and then look for others that have similar values. Your
values have been shaped largely by your family, friends and the culture you grew up in.

Many of these values may be challenged as you go through college and grow as an independent person.
Understanding your current values and recognizing when they are being challenged may give you some
insights into why you value what you do and what changes you may be open to. Consider the values in the
table below and then list some of yours. Did you come to these through your family, your community?

Achievement Efficiency Hard Work                                          Positivity

Adventure                        Empathy                    Health        Security

Ambition                         Equality                   Honesty       Selflessness

Balance                          Excellence Honor                         Service

Belonging                        Exploration Humility                     Simplicity

Calm                             Fairness                   Independence  Spontaneity

Challenge                        Faith                      Intelligence  Stability

Commitment Family                                           Joy           Strength

Community                        Fitness                    Justice       Success

Competition Flexibility Love                                              Trustworthiness

Contribution Freedom                                        Loyalty       Understanding

Control                          Friends                    Making a Difference Uniqueness

Creativity                       Fun                        Merit

Curiosity                        Generosity Openness

Table 7.1

Access for free at openstax.org
                                   7.2 · Your Overall Well-Being 191

Dependability Growth  Originality

Diversity  Happiness Perfection

Table 7.1

Throughout life, your values will often be challenged by other individuals. Someone may challenge your
political views, or your religion, or your value in family. It is best to recognize your current values and then, as
they are challenged, you can have a clearer understanding of the person you want to be.

 ANALYSIS QUESTION

Take a few minutes to write down a list of your strengths and values. Once you have created a list, reflect on
it and consider what changes you would like to make. Are there strengths that you do not currently have
but want to work on over the next few years? Can you imagine how this list might continue to evolve during
college and even after you've graduated?

Although your journey through college is just starting, you will soon have to make critical decisions as to what
courses you want to take, you may have to choose a major you want to focus on, and you will be start to look
for your next step, life after college. One of the most asked questions you will face on this journey is where you
see yourself in the next three to five years. Use this time to draft your vision.

 7.2 Your Overall Well-Being

                                                                                                  Estimated completion time: 12 minutes.

Questions to Consider:

  · How can I shift my mindset to change how I feel?
  · How can I understand my emotions?

Day-to-day, you most likely experience situations that either align with your values or go against them; you
may undergo experiences that make you confident or unconfident. These situations may trigger strong
emotions or lead you to react in a manner that you may later regret. During transition periods, such as the
transition into college, you may be even more likely to have these experiences, particularly involving topics and
people you do not know well. When these situations happen, it is best to consider your thoughts, consult
available resources, and allow time to understand how to best navigate your emotions.

Understanding Your Mindset

Let's first talk about your mindset. Have you ever heard someone refer to "seeing the glass half full" or "seeing
the glass half empty?" This is another way of saying that, given a situation that could be interpreted multiple
ways, some see the positives (half full) while others see the negatives (half empty). It is natural to move in and
out of these frames of mind depending on the situation, your confidence level, the amount of stress you have
in your life at the time, and so on. Setbacks and mistakes will always occur, and it's okay and appropriate to feel
negatively about them. With experience and practice, you will learn how to move on from these negative
feelings and adapt your attitudes in order to promote success.

Let's consider the following example:
192 7 · Maintaining Your Mental Health and Managing Stress

             Negative reaction: "I forgot to complete an assignment and now I will fail the course because this is the
             second time I missed submitting my work on time."
       How does this feel? What emotions are you experiencing? What is your mood?
             Now let's reframe to a more positive reaction: "Yes, I will get a zero for that assignment. However, if I work
             hard on the final two assignments and get at least a B on my final exam, I could improve my final grade to
             at least a C+."
       How does this new thought feel in your body and mind? Is it different in a good way or not so good way? What
       emotions are you experiencing now? How has your mood changed?
       Most likely you feel differently in your body and in your mind when you consider each of these responses.
       When the thinking is that the course is lost, you may feel disappointed, frustrated, and uncertain regarding the
       future. However, in the more positive reframing of the situation, the mood may shift to one of calmness and
       even purpose, because there is a way forward.
       A key aspect of effective and positive attitudes is the awareness and ability to take responsibility for situations
       in which you contributed to the outcome. In the example above, the person did recognize that they were the
       ones who forgot to complete the assignment. Consider similar situations you've been in. Do you tend to put
       the responsibility for a missed assignment or a bad grade on yourself or your instructor? Do you tend to blame
       technology, unclear instructions, or too much work? While unfair situations can certainly occur, it is very
       important to recognize the role we play in them, and take ownership of mistakes and any extra work we need
       to undertake.
       The ability to reconsider situations and find positive ways forward is a critical skill in navigating not only your
       college experience, but throughout your life, career, and relationships. To do that effectively, you will also need
       to identify your feelings and emotions. Examining what you are feeling will help you to more easily navigate
       those emotions. By understanding your emotions and how to communicate with others about how you are
       feeling, you will decrease the chances of behaviors that may have negative consequences.
       Expanding your emotional vocabulary (see Figure 7.2) will allow you to be more specific in identifying the
       feelings you experience. Identifying your emotions will help you to find a solution or coping strategy more
       quickly. Using a tool such as this emotion wheel enables you to identify the emotion you may be experiencing.
       You may think that you are "angry"; however, after you look at the emotion wheel you may realize you are hurt
       or disappointed. Also, by identifying your emotions at a given time, you will be able to improve your mood and
       the relationship between your feelings and mood. Once you have a better understanding of the relationships
       between your feelings and mood, you'll be better equipped to overcome situations in which you have low
       moods versus when your moods are more positive.

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                             7.3 · The Mind-Body Connection 193

 Figure 7.2 Tools like emotion wheels, based on Robert Plutchik's original, more complex work, can help us understand our feelings.

 ACTIVITY

  Take a moment to consider how your feelings change your mood by completing the sentences below with
  the first thing that comes to your mind.
  I feel happy when...
  I feel angry when...
  I feel strong when...
  I feel love when...
  I feel proud when...
  I feel jealous when...

 7.3 The Mind-Body Connection

                                                                                                  Estimated completion time: 12 minutes.
Questions to Consider:

  · Are there ways I can control how I react in stressful situations?
194 7 · Maintaining Your Mental Health and Managing Stress

         · Is it possible to "feel" stressed in your body?

     Controlling Emotional Reactions

       As you begin to understand how feelings impact your mood, and how your mood can feel in your body, you
       can start to align your emotions with the physical reactions that your body experiences. Doing this will help
       you in knowing when you need to use coping skills to help you through stronger emotions. (Coping skills are
       discussed in the section on mental health.)
       Below is a conversation between a student and her professor.

             Paige shows up to class a few minutes late, interrupting her professor when she enters the room.
             Professor Marsh is returning the most recent essay assignments. When Paige sees her grade she
             jumps up and explodes, "What is this garbage?!"
             Surprised, Professor Marsh turns towards her. "I beg your pardon?"
             "This grade," Paige says, walking towards her teacher. "What is this?" Paige leans against the desk.
             Palms of her hands sweating. Face flushed.
             Standing this close, Professor Marsh can see the slight tremble in Paige's lip. "If you have a question
             about your paper, we can talk about it after class."
             "I wanna know now. What is this total piece of garbage?" Paige waves her paper in the air.
             "You're excused," the professor says, calmly and with no equivocation.
             This gets Paige's attention and that of the other students in the room. "What?"
             "You're excused," Professor Marsh juts her head towards the door. "Your behavior is completely
             inappropriate, so you need to leave."
             "I don't want to leave."
             "Fine. Then sit down and remain calm and respectful." And she does.
             When class ends, Paige comes up to Professor Marsh, wrinkled paper in hand, and sets it down. "I
             don't understand why I got this grade."
             "Well, let's go over my notes and see." Professor Marsh starts to read Paige's work, explaining her
             feedback.
             Shaking her head, Paige pushes off from the edge of the desk, smacks it with her fist, and says, "That's
             B.S.!. This is totally personal and this class sucks!"
             As the professor stands and gathers her things, Paige folds her arms across her chest. "Where are you
             going?"
             "I'm leaving. If you aren't interested in talking about your work, I'm not interested in staying." And so
             Professor Marsh leaves - concerned about Paige's attitude, lack of boundaries, and well-being.
       Have you experienced a situation when you've been so frustrated you wanted to scream? Would you have
       responded differently? Do you feel Paige was in control of her emotions? In this example, Paige's reaction was
       driven by her emotions. Physically she experienced sweaty palms, a flushed face, and a trembling lip.
       Psychologically she was angry and hostile. Behaviorally, she was waving her paper in the air and yelling at the

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                               7.3 · The Mind-Body Connection 195

professor.

Examples of Types of Reactions

Type of Reaction  Physical      Psychological  Behavioral

                  sweating, shaking feeling sad, hurt, angry crying, punching, yelling

Paige's reaction illustrates the various reactions you may experience with emotions including the physical,
psychological, and behavioral reactions. When experiencing these reactions it is best to take a step back and
not allow your emotions to take over. This situation could have been avoided if Paige took a moment to pause
and collect her thoughts. Reacting quickly often results in over-reacting; so, to prevent negative consequences,
a better approach is to take a breath and walk away. The same idea applies when you are not in person: Taking
substantial time before sending an email or text, reacting to a social media post, or responding to a comment
in a discussion forum can make a difference between a careful, constructive outcome and one that leads to
even deeper problems.

As you continue this journey of managing your emotions, you will find that you experience more situations in
which you feel in control of your emotions and less often experience emotion-driven behaviors and lack of
control.

Physical Responses and Well-Being

When you have felt really frustrated with a personal relationship or an upcoming test, have you ever
experienced a headache, stomachache or perhaps felt extremely tired? This is your brain and body working
together to let you know that they are stressed. The connection between our mind and body is powerful, and
both feed off of each other to influence how we feel and function every day. The amount of sleep we get, the
types of food we eat, what we do for exercise or what we don't do, all interrelate and lead to how we can
manage our emotions or not.

Developing coping skills will help you manage how you are feeling and calm your body and mind with the goal
of decreasing your stress level. Taking a pause versus reacting immediately, such as going on a walk,
connecting with a friend, or simply focusing on your breath during times of stress has the potential to slow
down your heart rate and calm your mind.

Although coping strategies help in these stressful situations, what you do every day to prepare your body to
manage these times matters just as much. You need to focus on taking care of your body and mind daily.
Again, the mind-body connection is so strong that what you eat, how much activity you do, and the amount of
time you sleep directly influences your ability to manage your day-to-day stressors.

Below are some simple suggestions to ensure you are making your mind and body your top priority. A more
comprehensive understanding of each of these behaviors is discussed later in the chapter.

  · A healthy diet will help you to be your best self and keep your mind and body functioning properly.
      Balance is critical: Try to have a serving of a protein source, a carbohydrate source, and a serving of a fruit
      and vegetable at each meal. Typically, you will find that your body and mind need fuel every 3-4 hours
      during the day. Knowing this, you can plan accordingly your meals and snacks. Lastly, don't forget to
      hydrate.

  · Being active for at least 60 minutes every day can be a goal for you if you find yourself spending most of
      your day sitting--in class, while studying, or as you complete assignments. Being physically active will help
      your body feel awake and make you stronger to handle stressful situations. Even simple activities such as
      taking a walk, finding a yoga class or online video, or even a pick-up game of basketball can maintain
      good physical health.
196 7 · Maintaining Your Mental Health and Managing Stress

· As important as being active is, it is equally critical to spend time sleeping. Note, that being inactive
   (watching TV, playing video games) is not the same to our bodies as restorative sleep. Maintaining a
   regular sleep routine and schedule is critical to your mind and body.

APPLICATION

Choose one health goal from each of the three areas described above and write down how you will ensure
that you meet each goal by listing your tactics, or what you will do regularly to meet the goal.

                                 Goal                       Tactics

Example:        To walk at least 2     1) Block off 30 minutes after the last class of the day to
Being active    miles each day         walk the nature trail on campus
                                       2) Use my watch to track my steps each day to ensure I
                                       have walked at least 2 miles

Eating
healthfully

Being active

Sleeping fully

7.4 Mental Health Basics

                                                            Estimated completion time: 25 minutes.

Question to consider:

  · What are some of the ways to tell if you are holding onto stress?
  · How do mindfulness and gratitude encourage emotional health?

What Is Mental Health?

Mental health "includes emotional, psychological, and social well-being. It affects how we think, feel, act, make
choices, and relate to others. Mental health is more than the absence of a mental illness--it's essential to your
overall health and quality of life."1 According to the National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI), a mental illness
is a condition that affects a person's thinking, feeling, or mood. The condition may affect a person's ability to
relate to others and function throughout the day. A recent survey of over 350,000 college students from
almost 400 campuses across the U.S. found that more than 60% of students met criteria for one or more
mental health illness diagnosis (i.e., depression, anxiety, eating disorder, suicide ideation).2 Although mental
health illness worsened among all students, health disparities were found among racially and ethnically
minoritized (i.e., Asian, Black, Latinx, American Indian/Alaskan Native, Arab American) students.

1 National Institute of Mental Health. "Caring for your mental health." https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/caring-for-your-
mental-health
2 Lipson SK J of Affective Disorders 2022 v306 page138-147

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                      7.4 · Mental Health Basics 197

A mental health condition isn't the result of one event; it is most often the result of multiple overlapping
causes. Environment, lifestyle, and genetic predisposition can all be factors in whether someone develops a
mental health condition. Traumatic life events or stressful experiences may make some people more
susceptible, and brain biochemistry may play a role as well. Exposure to harmful social media also plays a role
and impacts your anxiety levels, self-perception, and other aspects of mental health. Mental health conditions
show up in many ways. Anxiety, depression, and eating disorders are some of the most common.

Depression

Most people feel sad at times. This is a normal reaction to loss or struggles we face. Being sad is not the same
as having depression. When intense sadness lasts for several days or even weeks, and you are no longer
interested in activities you once enjoyed, it may be depression. Depression can lead to a variety of emotional
and physical problems and can decrease a person's ability to function at work and at home.

Depression occurs when something in our brain stops functioning correctly. This dysfunction prevents you
from taking care of yourself, interferes with your relationships, and may lead to you missing school or work.
Depression does not have a single cause. It can follow a life crisis or physical illness, but it can also occur
spontaneously. Several factors including trauma, a significant life change, brain injury, and drug and alcohol
misuse may contribute to depression. Regardless of how or why it occurs, depression is a treatable medical
condition, and the ability to identify what it is and how to treat it is important.

Because depression is a medical illness, it needs to be treated by a health professional. If you are experiencing
symptoms of depression, reach out to your doctor or call your local mental health resources on campus.
During this situation, having a friend or family member to call and talk to is the fastest way to get the help you
need. Building a network of support for yourself is critical.

Suicidal Behavior

Suicide is when people direct violence at themselves with the intent to end their lives, and they die because of
their actions.3 People who contemplate suicide often experience a deep feeling of hopelessness. They often
feel they can't cope with challenging life events and are not able to see solutions to problems. At the moment,
they are unable to see that the challenges are really only temporary. Most survivors of suicide attempts go on
to live wonderful, full lives.

Help is available all day, every day, for anyone who might be in crisis. By offering immediate counseling to
everyone that may need it, crisis centers provide invaluable support at the most critical times. If you or
someone you know has warning signs of suicide, get help as soon as possible. Family and friends are often the
first to recognize any warning signs and can help you to take the first step in finding treatment.

If someone is telling you that they are going to kill themselves, do not leave them alone, and call the suicide
hotline at 988. The National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-TALK (8255) is available 24 hours a day, 7
days a week. A Crisis Text Line is also available 24/7 by texting HOME to 741741, 85258, or 686868.

Depression is a key risk factor for suicide, along with substance abuse, chronic debilitating pain, mental health
disorders, and a family history of suicide.

These are some of the warning signs to help you determine if a friend or loved one is at risk for suicide,
especially if the behavior is new, has increased, or seems related to a painful event:

  · talking about wanting to die or to kill themselves
  · looking for a way to kill themselves, like searching online or buying a gun
  · talking about feeling hopeless or having no reason to live
  · talking about feeling trapped or in unbearable pain
  · talking about being a burden to others

3 National Institute of Mental Health, "Frequently asked questions about suicide." https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/
suicide-faq/index.shtml
198 7 · Maintaining Your Mental Health and Managing Stress

  · increasing the use of alcohol or drugs
  · acting anxious or agitated; behaving recklessly
  · sleeping too little or too much
  · withdrawing or isolating themselves
  · showing rage or talking about seeking revenge
  · extreme mood swings4

Eating Disorders

Eating disorders are not uncommon among students. Stress or anxiety may create a desire for some students
to overeat, while others may develop a concern about body shape or weight and significantly reduce their food
intake. The table below provides three common eating disorders.

 Eating                                                     Description
Disorder

  Type

Anorexia      Is a potentially fatal illness marked by self-starvation. People with anorexia usually have an
nervosa       irrational concern about body shape or weight and eat a very restricted diet. They may also
(also called  feel the need to exercise all the time, even when they are sick or exhausted.
"anorexia")

Binge eating  Is frequent consumption of large amounts of food in a short period of time. People who
              binge regularly (more than once a week) and feel a lack of control over their eating may
              have binge eating disorder (BED).

Bulimia       Is characterized by cycles of excessive eating followed by eliminating food through vomiting
              or with laxatives

Eating disorders can lead to many complications, some of them very serious, like heart conditions and kidney
failure. It is crucial for anyone with an eating disorder to stabilize their health, then continue medical care and
counseling to reach full recovery. Eating disorders can be treated successfully with medical care,
psychotherapy, counseling, or coaching. It is important to seek treatment if you suspect there is an issue.
Treatment can address any underlying psychological issues. If you think you might have an eating disorder,
visit a doctor or your campus health center. The National Eating Disorders Association (https://openstax.org/l/
eating-disorders) also offers information, help, and support.

Anxiety Disorders

Anxiety disorders are the most common mental health concern in the United States, and while there are many
types of anxiety disorders, they all have one thing in common: "persistent, excessive fear or worry in situations
that are not threatening."5 Physically, your heart may race, and you may experience shortness of breath,
nausea, or intense fatigue. Talk with a mental health care professional if you experience a level of anxiety that
keeps you from your regular daily activities.

Identifying Anxiety

Experiencing stress is both normal and healthy to build both your self-efficacy and resilience. We typically

4 U.S. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. "We can all prevent suicide."
https://suicidepreventionlifeline.org/how-we-can-all-prevent-suicide/
5 National Institute of Mental Health. "Anxiety Disorders.", https://www.nami.org/NAMI/media/NAMI-Media/Images/FactSheets/
Anxiety-Disorders-FS.pdf

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 7.4 · Mental Health Basics 199

experience different types of stressors throughout the day. Although stress doesn't always feel good for us to
experience and is often unpleasant when it is happening, it is typically for a short amount of time. Think about
the last time you were stressed: taking an important final exam, having to present your work in front of
classmates, introducing yourself to others at a new club you joined. These situations are typically very short
and centered around a particular event. You may experience sweaty palms, a fast heartbeat, a headache or
stomachache, but these feelings usually go away after the situation. To learn more about what stress does to
your body, visit the American Psychological Association's page on stress (https://openstax.org/l/apa-stress).

       Stress                                Anxiety

Normal, healthy response            Unhealthy response

Acute                               Chronic

Centered around a particular event  Happens for all kinds of events

Feelings usually go away after the event Feelings don't go away

On the other hand, when you are experiencing anxiety, your body and mind are trying to communicate to you
that you need to seek help and may need medical treatment. Anxiety will feel similar to a stressful situation, as
described above, but the feeling doesn't go away. Using an example from above, you have to present your
work in front of your classmates today and you feel very nauseous, your heart is pounding so hard in your
chest you feel dizzy and have to sit down. You don't think you can walk the 10 minutes to class and decide to
just skip class and stay home. This may be anxiety. Anxiety is different than stress as it sometimes prevents
you from doing your daily activities. Anxiety may affect your ability to concentrate, increase your risk for heart
disease, can weaken your immune system, disrupt your sleep, and can cause fatigue, and depression.6 The
table above contrasts the differences between stress and anxiety so that you can better determine what you
are experiencing over time. When you feel any of the symptoms listed above, ask yourself "Is this stress or
anxiety?"

 THE REAL DEAL

  "One thing I would say to encourage a student having issues managing mental health and school is you can
  do it. Take the time you need to seek help for yourself and the resources you need to achieve and be that
  version of you you want to be. Don't let your brain trick you into thinking that you can wait or you aren't
  able to do it. You can, it just takes you finding a system that helps you stay on top of your game. For me,
  being organized just by keeping my room clean led me to wanting to go to school and become a teacher in
  the near future. Discipline within myself was the hardest and still is but learning to work with yourself
  mentally will help you extremely in your academic career."

  --Parker Blue, first-year

Additional Resources

Because entering college is such a big transition, it is important to know what health services are available on
your campus. Some help may be beyond the scope of a college counseling program, and if this is the case,
your college health center can refer you to off-campus resources to support you.

6 The University of Maryland Medical Center UMMC, https://www.umms.org/ummc
200 7 · Maintaining Your Mental Health and Managing Stress

       Regardless of where you attend college, OK2TALK and NAMI offer online, text, and phone support.

         · OK2TALK (https://openstax.org/l/talkorg) is a community for young adults struggling with mental health
             problems. It offers a safe place to talk.

         · Call the NAMI helpline at 800-950-6264, or txt NAMI to 741741.

       Your brain requires a constant supply of energy to function. What you eat and are exposed to have a direct
       impact on its processes, your mood, and your ability to make good decisions. A majority of college students
       feel anxious, lonely, or depressed at some point during the year. We all have bad days, and sometimes bad
       days string into weeks. It's okay to feel bad. What's important is to acknowledge and work through your
       feelings, and find a friend or a counselor to talk to.

     Developing Coping Strategies

       Everyone experiences stress during their lives. It is part of the human experience, and despite how healthy and
       well-adjusted you are, stress is inevitable. What makes a difference is how you deal with it. One of the most
       important things you can do is to keep perspective on your stressors. When feeling stressed, ask yourself, on a
       scale of 1 to 100, how stressful a situation is this? Will I even remember this three years from now? When
       facing potential stressors, the way you interpret what you're experiencing can intensify your stress or minimize
       it.

       There are many ways to manage stress. Take a look at some of the suggestions below that can be added to
       your own "toolkit" for coping with stress. As you read through the descriptions, think about the following
       questions:

         · Which ones have you tried? You may already have one or more that work really well for you.
         · Which ones do you want to try? If you have not tried any or many, consider focusing on adding one to

             your strategies for coping with stress.
         · Which ones would be best in certain situations? It's helpful to have different tools for different

             situations--for example, a calming yoga pose in your dorm room and deep breathing in the classroom.

      Mindfulness

       Mindfulness means being present with your thoughts, feelings, bodily sensations, and surrounding
       environment. Mindfulness is also without judgment--meaning there is no right or wrong way to think or feel
       in a given moment. When we practice mindfulness, our thoughts tune into what we're sensing in the present
       moment rather than rehashing the past or imagining the future.7

       Anything that keeps you present in the moment and gives your prefrontal cortex (the reasoning and thinking
       part of your brain) a break is practicing mindfulness. Mindfulness can be a slow walk; looking intently at the
       grass, trees, flowers, or buildings; and being aware of what you are sensing and feeling. Mindfulness can be
       sitting quietly--even sitting still in a quiet place for as little as a few minutes can reduce heart rate and blood
       pressure.

       Developing a practice of mindfulness is easier than you may think:

         · Slow down. From brushing your teeth, to washing your face, to shampooing your hair--can you take the
             speed out of getting ready in the morning? Focus on the activity, pay attention to what you are doing, stay
             present (this means don't think about what happened last night or what's in store for the day, just stay
             focused on the activity), and take your time.

         · Focus on your breath. How fast are you breathing? Is your breath coming from your chest or your belly?
             Can you feel the air come through your nose on the inhale? Can you slow down the exhale? Can you feel
             your body relax when you slow the exhale?

         · Connect to your environment. Walk for a few minutes, focused on the world around you--look at the

         7 Moran, Joan; University of California at Los Angeles. "Pause, reflect and give thanks." https://newsroom.ucla.edu/stories/
         gratitude-249167

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                      7.4 · Mental Health Basics 201

      leaves on the trees or the light at the corner, listen to the sounds around you, stay with your surroundings,
      and observe what you see and hear around you.

      "We can't change the world, at least not quickly, but we can change our brains. By practicing
      mindfulness all of us have the capacity to develop a deeper sense of calm."

     -- Rick Hanson, author, Resilient

Deep Breathing

When people hear mindfulness they often think of meditation. While meditation is one method of
mindfulness, there are many others that may be simpler and easier for you to practice. Deep breathing helps
lower stress and reduce anxiety, and it is simple yet very powerful. A daily mindful breathing practice has been
shown to reduce test anxiety in college students.8 A 2-4-6-8 breathing pattern is a very useful tool that can be
used to help bring a sense of calm and to help mild to moderate anxiety. It takes almost no time, requires no
equipment, and can be done anywhere:

  · Start by quickly exhaling any air in your lungs (to the count of 2).
  · Breathing in through your nose, inhale to the count of 4.
  · Hold your breath for a count of 6.
  · Slowly exhale through your mouth to the count of 8.

This is one round. Do not repeat the quick exhale again. Instead start round two with an inhale through your
nose to the count of 4, hold for 6, and exhale to 8. Repeat for three more rounds to relax your body and mind.

With practice, 2-4-6-8 breathing will become a useful tool for times when you experience tension or stress.

Meditation

Dan Harris, a news reporter at ABC, suffered a major panic attack on national television. Following this
challenging period in his life, he learned to meditate and found that it made him calmer and more resilient.
He's now on a mission to make meditation approachable to everyone. Dan used to be a skeptic about
meditation but now says that if he learned to meditate, anyone can learn to meditate! Dan reminds us that we
are going to get lost, and our mind is going to stray, and that's okay. Simply notice when you're lost and start
over. Every time your mind strays and you start over, it is like a bicep curl for your brain. Start with 3 minutes of
meditation, and slowly work your way up to 15 or 20. To hear more about Dan's journey, watch this video
(https://openstax.org/l/danharris), and for a simple meditation to get started, you can try one of the videos on
the meditation Youtube channel (https://openstax.org/l/meditation). There are also some great meditation
apps including Insight Timer, CALM, and Headspace.

Gratitude

Too often people think it is the external factors that bring us joy and happiness, when really it's all related to
internal work. According to UCLA's Mindfulness Awareness Research Center, "Having an attitude of gratitude
changes the molecular structure of the brain, and makes us healthier and happier. When you feel happiness,
the central nervous system is affected. You are more peaceful, less reactive and less resistant."9

Numerous studies show that people who count their blessings tend to be happier and less depressed. In a UC
Berkeley study, researchers recruited 300 people who were experiencing emotional or mental health
challenges and randomly divided them into three groups. All three groups received counseling services. The
first group also wrote a letter of gratitude every week for three weeks. The second group wrote about their
thoughts and feelings with negative experiences. The third group received only counseling. The people in the
group who wrote gratitude letters reported significantly better mental health for up to 12 weeks after the
writing exercise ended.

8 Levitin, Time Special Edition 2018, The New Mindfulness
9 2016 Study Journal of PLoS One, https://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/article?id=10.1371/journal.pmed.1000316
202 7 · Maintaining Your Mental Health and Managing Stress

       This would suggest that a healthy emotional self-care practice is to take note of good experiences or when you
       see something that makes you smile. Think about why the experience feels so good. According to Rick Hanson,
       author of Resilient, "Each day is strewn with little jewels. The idea is to see them and pick them up. When you
       notice something positive, stay with the feeling for 30 seconds. Feel the emotions in your whole body. Maybe
       your heart feels lighter or you're smiling. The more you can deepen and lengthen positive experiences the
       longer those positivity neurons in your brain are firing--and the longer they fire the stronger the underlying
       neural networks become. Repeat that process a half dozen times a day and you'll feel stronger, more stable
       and calmer within a few weeks."10

         Figure 7.3 Do you have a toolkit filled with a variety of coping tools to help you navigate any stressful situation? (Credit: Modification
         of work by Robin Benzrihem)

        ACTIVITY

         Take a look at some of the suggested tools for your coping toolkit. Which ones have you tried? Have they
         been effective in helping you manage stress? Ask two friends or family members about their favorite stress-
         management strategies. What has worked for you and others that is not on this list? Identify two new tools
         you would like to explore and articulate how you will determine if they work for you, and then you can
         confidently add them to your toolkit.

     Asking for Help

       If you find that you are stuck in a low mood and are more often feeling down, hopeless, a burden to others
       and simply don't find many things bring you joy, you may need help from a professional. As just discussed,
       there may be situations when you may want advice or support and need to reach out to others. Having your
       own support system is key. In this section you will build the foundation of your support system.
       You may have a teacher, guidance couselor, a friend's big brother/sister, or your own sibling who has helped
       you through difficult situations. Once in college, some of them may be harder to reach. Consider who you
       know now and start the process of building a bigger system.

         10 Hanson, R. (2020). Resilient. Harmony

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 7.4 · Mental Health Basics 203

ACTIVITY

Take a moment now to list the names of a few people who are part of your support system. Do you have
their phone number or emails? Do you know where they live? This is a great start. You can even create a
contact list in your phone titled 'student mental health services' so that it's ready when you need it.

          People Contact Number  Best Type of Support

          Jane Doe xxx-xxx-xxxx  Setting boundaries with family

          List of Resources

Reaching out and making a few good friends in this new environment will be a great start in this process. This
may be easier said than done; however, it is a great skill to develop when in college as you are around so many
people. You will also share at least one or two values or strengths with these individuals at your school which is
a great conversation starter. Other people that may be in your support system could be family members,
professors or counselors at school, or even a sports coach or leader of a community group you participate in.

Examples of situations in which you may need to ask for help are endless. You may have low motivation to
complete assignments or attend class, be unable to concentrate during lectures, feel helpless with simple
tasks, miss family or friends, or just feel unhappy with being in college. All of these situations could be related
to a lack of sleep, poor eating habits, the negative effects of sustained stress, or symptoms of depression you
may be experiencing. If you find that you are failing class or are in danger of being dropped because of
attendance issues, or just can't seem to be motivated to leave your dorm room, use your support system.
Figure 7.4 provides a flowchart for dealing with common situations you may experience in college by providing
prompts for determining when you can make changes on your own and when you may need to seek help.
204 7 · Maintaining Your Mental Health and Managing Stress

                                                                      Figure 7.4 Common Situations and Next Steps

       If you found yourself in one of these situations and needed support today, who would you call and why? If they
       weren't available, who is the next person on your list? Having a plan and a group of people you can reach out
       to is a game changer for when you are stuck in a situation and need help in moving forward.
       Sometimes, seeking help and starting the conversation with someone can feel intimidating and even stressful.
       Consider these examples to help you begin:

         · "I feel very alone today. Can we talk?"
         · "I think I am going to fail my class. I could really use some help coming up with a plan."
         · "I said some things that I shouldn't have to my close friend and don't know what to do about it. What

             would you do if you were me?"
         · "You are so good at working in groups and I just hate it. It makes me feel so uncomfortable. Could you tell

             me how you do it?"
         · "I have to get up in front of my class to present on a research topic and I am very nervous. What can I do

             to feel less stressed about this?"
       Having a list of a few people that you can call or stop to chat with will make these situations easier to manage
       and help you feel like you are not in it alone. When you do reach out, consider how you feel, what your mood is
       like, if you have a handle on your emotions. You should be able to express yourself in the situation but have
       space to receive help. Remember it is best to go for a walk to cool off or take a few moments by pausing to
       gather your thoughts. This is a great time to pull in your support system to help you work through these
       feelings and emotions. With your support system you will be able to have a clearer picture of the problem and
       discover some steps to take to overcome the situation.

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                      7.5 · The Role of Social Media on Mental Health 205

 7.5 The Role of Social Media on Mental Health

                                                                                                 Estimated Completion Time: 30 minutes.

Questions to Consider:
  · Why do I use social media?
  · How can I balance positive and negative social media use?
  · How can I identify and improve problematic social media use?
  · What should I do if I experience cyberbullying?

Some people refer to the time we are living in as the age of overload. It's easy to get worn down by social
media and the constant news cycle, and to be overwhelmed by too many choices that social media affords us.
We live in a fast-paced, always-on world with a lot of pressures.
Social media offers many benefits, from staying connected to your loved ones and friends, learning about
events in your community, and providing you with the ability to get information quickly. Unfortunately, these
benefits are compounded with many risks (see Figure 7.5).11 Among college students, social media has also
been associated with negative effects on self-esteem and self-image. Overuse of social media has been found
to increase symptoms of anxiety, loneliness, and depression.

                                                              Figure 7.5 The Pros and Cons of Social Media

Uncovering Your Relationship with Social Media

By better understanding your relationship with social media, you will be more successful in finding the right
balance and occasions for using it. The best way to get started is to just become aware of your relationship
with social media and how it may or may not impact your own mental health.

 ANALYSIS QUESTION

  What is your relationship with social media? Do you feel you may have a problematic relationship with
  social media use? Here are some Questions to Consider and to learn more regarding your relationship with
  social media use:

    · Do you spend a lot of time planning or thinking about how to use social media?

11 Haddad JM Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2021; 23(11): 70.
206 7 · Maintaining Your Mental Health and Managing Stress

· Do you have difficulty concentrating in class or when you are studying due to social media use?
· Do you often use social media as an escape from what is happening in the real world?
· Do you feel you have to spend time on social media to feel satisfaction or pleasure?
· Do you find yourself engaging in or wanting to engage in social media when it is not appropriate (e.g.,

   during a class)?
· Do you feel that you are more irritable, anxious, or sad when you are not able to use social media?
· Do you have experience with attempting to control your social media use and not being successful in

   such efforts?

Upon reflection from the activity above, where is your relationship with social media? To consider the
relationship another way, think about the questions in the table below? Which more accurately describes your
most frequent feelings when using social media?

Frequency       Do you use social media for occasional      Or do you perhaps feel that you need
and Duration    entertainment and connection?               constant stimulation and validation from your
                                                            online network?

Feelings and    Do you find yourself truly happy after      Or have you noticed that your mood is
Impact          looking through friends' posts or seeing    negatively impacted by what you are seeing
                your feed?                                  on social media?

Outcomes        Do you take inspiration and ideas from      Or do you frequently feel you are "less than,"
and desire for  social media?                               or feel pressure to change?
change

Impact on Your Focus and Attention

When asked how social media use impacts a student's ability to study, two out of three undergraduate college
students indicated they were more drawn to social media than their school work.12 Although the answer may
be as simple as social media is more fun, the deeper issue may be related to how your use of social media has
trained your brain to prefer to take in information in short doses. Social media rewards a distracted, shorter
attention span, which may reward giving our brain quick doses of dopamine. (Dopamine is a chemical in your
brain related to feelings of pleasure or satisfaction.) Similarly, when your phone beeps, buzzes, or vibrates with
new posts waiting for you, your brain receives a dose of dopamine.

Distractions from social media have also been linked to our desire to be connected and be available for people
in our networks.13 Similar studies have shown that the fear of missing out (FoMO) leads to significant social
media-driven distractions.

The first step of gaining control over these distractions is by eliminating them. As you know, you can easily
turn on/off your phone (watch, computer, etc.) notifications. Consider switching away from social media during
your relaxing time and pick up a book or magazine, an old school puzzle, or journaling on paper. Another way
to improve your concentration is to focus on one task at a time. Put away your phone for 30-90 minutes, jot
down three tasks you need to complete, and check one off at a time. The more you use these strategies, the
faster you will regain your focus and attention.

12 Kolhar M Saudi Journal of Biological Sciences 2021; 28(4):2216
13 Koessmeier C Frontiers in Psychology 2021. "Why are we distracted by social media?" https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/
10.3389/fpsyg.2021.711416/full

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                      7.5 · The Role of Social Media on Mental Health 207

                                                                   Figure 7.6 Strategies to Regain Focus

Impact on Relationships

Problematic social media use has been well documented among individuals who experience social anxiety and
loneliness.14 For these individuals, social media is often used as a form of connection when in-person
relationships are lacking. As mentioned above, for individuals who actively use social media as a way to directly
communicate with others, social media use can provide social support and connection. Alternatively, those
who use social media more passively, such as only to view other's lives, have more negative outcomes that can
include depression and anxiety. Are you active in your engagement or passive?
If you feel your engagement is only passive, consider this as a red flag, and start by setting boundaries on your
social media use as discussed above. To prevent social media from impacting your relationships, consider
using social media more actively by reaching out to those in your network to plan in-person meet ups. Also, if
you find yourself frequently comparing yourself to what you see on others' social media, remember that
people's digital life might not be reflective of reality. If you find such comparisons damaging your self-esteem
and relationship with yourself, reach out to your support network and open the conversation.

Need for Validation

Consider this scenario: Josh just finished finals week and posted on social media, "I guess I will start packing
up my room. I know I just failed my chemistry final. My parents are going to threaten not to pay for next
semester." An hour later, Josh is back in his dorm room and checks his account. No comments. No likes. No
"hug" or "care" emoji.
How did you feel when you read this situation? Did it trigger you to cringe and feel bad for Josh? Have you ever
found yourself in a similar situation? How did you feel then?
When you first started using social media you may have simply posted a picture or update in order to keep
your friends and family connected with your life. At some point in time, you likely started to expect likes and
comments. Eventually, if you don't get the same level of likes and comments you have become accustomed to,
you may start to think your connections are not interested in you.

14 O'Day EB Computers in Human Behavior Reports 2021
208 7 · Maintaining Your Mental Health and Managing Stress

       According to research, the lack of response is often interpreted as "no one cares since no one took the time to
       respond." This line of thinking can lead to self-doubt, insecurity, and anxiety.15 Seeking validation - either
       positive or negative -- via social media is moving your relationship with social media into problem territory. If
       you reach that point, you should pause and reflect on the meaning of this behavior. One of the immediate
       steps you can take to disrupt this unhealthy cycle is to pause before you post.

                                                                                               Figure 7.7

     Problematic Social Media Use

       In 2021, the average internet user spent nearly two and a half hours per day on social media.16 That translates
       to over 37 days per year, and over the average lifetime, more than seven years of time. Let that sink in. Since
       we spend so much time on social media, dedicating such a massive portion of our lives to it, it's even more
       important we spend that time well. As stated above, there are definitely positives associated with engaging in
       social media, especially if you use it to learn more, broaden your social network, and enhance your life by
       letting it lead you to new offline experiences. However, there are times when social media use, or overuse, can
       be problematic and unhealthy.
       Factors that lead to an individual having problematic social media use include the following:
        1. poor self-regulation,
        2. lack of control of time spent on social media,
        3. social media as a mood regulator,
        4. history of obsessive thinking,
        5. social media impacting your social and/or professional life, and
        6. if social media use is altered to negate these negative factors yet the individual relapses.17
       As a student, problematic social media use could mean that your attendance in class declines or you fail to
       complete assignments, which leads to lower academic achievement. You may find watching videos and
       viewing posts more satisfying than learning. You may regularly become distracted while participating in
       activities that require your full attention, such as driving.18 Further, problematic social media use refers to
       using social media platforms for reasons that are illegal, unethical, or socially unacceptable behaviors such as
       stalking, bullying, or spreading misinformation.

         15 McLean Hospital. "The social dilemma: Social media and your mental health." https://www.mcleanhospital.org/essential/it-or-
         not-social-medias-affecting-your-mental-health
         16 Kemp S. "Reels Grew by 220M and other mindblowing stats." Hootsuite blog, 2022. https://blog.hootsuite.com/simon-kemp-
         social-media/
         17 Stanculescu E. Telematics and Informatics. 2022. "Social media addiction profiles and their antecedents." https://dl.acm.org/doi/
         abs/10.1016/j.tele.2022.101879
         18 Sun Y. Addictive Behaviors. 2021. "A review of theories and models applied in studies of social media addiction and implications
         for future research"

         Access for free at openstax.org
                        7.5 · The Role of Social Media on Mental Health 209

As previously described, evaluating your relationship with social media is the first place to start. In a recent
intervention to decrease problematic social media use, students were asked to log their daily use of social
media for one week.19 They logged the length of their time on social media, as well as how they were using it
and their thoughts and emotions. After one week, students significantly reduced their level of problematic
social media use and improved their mental health and academic efficiency.

Cyberbullying

The relationship between mental health issues and bullying is well documented. The relationship between
mental health and bullying in the digital space, known as cyberbullying, is a newer problem and unfortunately
provides a platform for bullies to say things behind the screen that most likely would never be said in person.
Compared to traditional bullying, cyberbullying isn't easily reduced by supervision, has the potential for larger
audiences, is often anonymous, and has fewer opportunities for someone to provide direct feedback in order
to put a stop to the activity.20

For individuals experiencing cyberbullying, it is much harder to avoid attacks and/or escape as the bullying can
take place any time of the day. Cyberbullying has a larger audience due to how well connected social media is
throughout the community, state, country, and world. Posts and conversations on social media have limitless
reach which often puts the victim in a situation with very little control. Once information is in the virtual world,
the text becomes very hard to remove and can "go viral" where it becomes so popular you can find it on any
search platform.

Cyberbullying via social media can affect people of all ages, and it puts individuals in a difficult situation in
which they cannot adequately defend themselves. The roles of each person involved in cyberbullying is
consistently in a state of transition as people switch roles from being the victim, to the perpetrator, or the
bystander as social media features (i.e., like, share) are utilized. In a recent study of US college students, 1 out
of 2 students report being a victim of cyberbullying, while 1 out of 4 students report being a perpetrator at
least one time per month.21

Prevention strategies to decrease frequency of cyberbullying events are limited; however, research addressing
victimization has noted the most effective strategy is to engage your social support network. Together you and
a supportive person in your life can discuss the situation and make a plan to avoid further cyberbullying.
Eliminating your social media platform where the attacks are occurring is not the only solution. Social media
companies are aware that their users may experience these negative events and have put systems into place
to report when users engage in such attacks. These companies have also enabled features to block or modify
account privacy to prevent situations in the future. The table below provides common examples of
cyberbullying and their explanations.

Forms of Cyberbullying  Explanation

Victimization           person who receives the harmful communication

Perpetration            person initiating the harmful communication

Bystander or witness    person who witnesses the harmful communication

19 Hou Y. Journal of Psychosocial Research on Cyberspace. 2019. "Social media addiction: its impact, mediation, and intervention."
20 Sticca F. Journal of Youth and Adolescence. 2013. "Longitudinal risk factors for cyberbullying in adolescence."
21 Giumetti GW. Aggressive Behavior 2022;48:40. "Predictors and outcomes of cyberbullying among college students: A two-wave
study." https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ab.21992
210 7 · Maintaining Your Mental Health and Managing Stress

GET CONNECTED

If you feel you or someone you know is a victim, a perpetrator, or that you are a witness to cyberbullying
you can contact student services and they can help safely guide you to the correct resources on your
campus. If you need immediate assistance, IT departments and campus security can help you as well as
recommend local law enforcement if illegal activity is at play including but not limited to harassment and
stalking. Keep a record of the details including dates and times and take pictures when possible.

For more information on cyberbullying consult these resources.

Resource                                                    Details

stopbullying.gov   This is a federal government website and is managed by the U.S. Department of
                   Health and Human Services. It provides trusted resources for prevention and
                   reporting of cyberbullying as well as documents strategies to deal with "haters."

cyberbullying.org  This website provides a list of social media apps, gaming networks, and other
                   platforms and a link to how to report cyberbullying for this particular website.

jedfoundation.org  The Jed Foundation is a nonprofit focused on youth mental health and suicide
                   prevention. Through this website you can find immediate resources for you ("I
                   need help") or for someone you want to help ("I want to help"). The website also
                   has a resource page with more information on cyberbullying including how to
                   cope, understanding what it is, balancing social media, and more.

7.6 Physical Health Basics

                                                            Estimated completion time: 32 minutes.

Questions to Consider:

  · What is healthy eating?
  · Why is it important to stay hydrated?
  · How important is exercise to a healthy body?
  · Are you getting enough sleep to be healthy?
  · What are toxins, and how can they affect your health?

You have one body. Treat it well so as to maximize its ability to serve you throughout your life. Often physical
health gets moved to the bottom of the priority list when we are busy. Taking care of your physical health
doesn't mean six-pack abs or training for a marathon. It means honoring your physical needs so your body can
function properly, feeding your cells the nutrients that will keep your body working well your entire life, and
minimizing exposure to toxins to reduce your risk of disease.

Healthy Eating

While it's not the only thing that contributes to great health, what you eat makes a huge difference. We have
37 trillion cells in our body. The only way they function optimally is with good nutrition. As a college student,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                    7.6 · Physical Health Basics 211

you will be surrounded by temptations to eat poorly. Although it is okay to choose unhealthy food options in
moderation, your goal will be to focus on making healthier choices to fuel your mind and body daily.
One way to ensure you are making healthy meal choices is by using the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA) Healthy Plate Guidelines. MyPlate illustrates five different food groups considered the
building blocks for a healthy plate for each meal--vegetables, fruits, protein, grains, and dairy.

Figure 7.8 Eating healthy is a journey shaped by many factors, including our state of life, situations, preferences, access to food,
culture, traditions, and the personal decisions we make over time. The USDA recommends that vegetables and fruits make up the
largest portions of your diet, and to be mindful of your servings of carbohydrates, proteins, and dairy. MyPlate offers ideas and tips
to help you create a healthier eating style that meets your individual needs and improves your health. (Credit: USDA / Public Domain)

Whole Foods vs. Processed Foods

Choose whole foods. Whole foods are any foods that have not been processed, packaged, or altered in any
way. Whole foods are an essential part of a healthy diet because they contain the vitamins and minerals our
bodies need.
Examples of whole foods include the following:

  · Vegetables: Carrots, broccoli, kale, avocados, cauliflower, spinach, peppers
  · Fruits: Apples, bananas, blueberries, strawberries, grapes, melons, peaches
  · Grains: Brown rice, oatmeal, barley, buckwheat, quinoa, millet
  · Beans: Black, pinto, kidney, black-eyed peas, chickpeas
Minimize non-whole foods, often called processed foods. These are foods that have been processed, such as
cookies, hot dogs, chips, pasta, deli meat, and ice cream. Even seemingly healthy foods like yogurt, granola,
and other cereals are processed and should be checked for added sugar and other unhealthy ingredients.
Review the label on these items and look for products that have less than 5 grams of fat and 10 grams of
added sugars per serving. Also, review the dietary fiber and select products that have at least 3 grams per
serving. Dietary fiber is a good thing; the higher the number the better. Fiber makes you feel full, and helps
with digestion. Following these simple guidelines will help you select the best foods.
The average American eats 62 percent of their daily calories from processed foods.22 In order for your body to
be as healthy as possible, it's extremely important to include lots of whole foods in your diet.

      "When you eat junk food you think junk thoughts."
      -- Michael Bernard Beckwith

How to Read a Food Label

The U.S. government requires food manufacturers to put a label on every processed food product. This is so
we, as consumers, know what we are putting into our bodies and can make good dietary choices. A quick
review of the label will provide a lot of important information about what you are eating, yet most people don't

22 Dr. Joel Furhman https://www.mensjournal.com/features/joel-fuhrman-the-doctor-is-out-there-20121107/
212 7 · Maintaining Your Mental Health and Managing Stress

       take the time to read the label. This is a big mistake.
       Think of the front of the package as a marketing billboard. Don't be fooled by the marketing. Every day millions
       of dollars are spent to persuade us to eat foods that are not healthy for us. Through visuals and words (like
       natural, healthy, or gluten free), the food industry wants us to make assumptions about the nature of a food
       product without looking at the facts. For example, many people eat protein bars thinking they are a healthy
       choice, but protein bars can have up to 30 grams of sugar! Understanding the nutrition information and
       ingredients will help you make healthier choices. When you take the time to read the labeled ingredients, you
       are no longer being marketed to--you are staring at the facts.

         Figure 7.9 This label displays the key nutritional information about a common container of fruit salad. Though fruit is generally
         healthy, be aware of the amount of calories and sugars, and particularly the serving size to which those amounts are tied. (Credit:
         U.S. Food and Drug Administration/Public Domain)

       This video on how to read a food label (https://openstax.org/l/foodlabels) is a helpful overview on what else to
       look for.

     What You Drink

       What is your go-to drink when you are thirsty? Soda? Juice? Coffee? How about water? Most of your blood and
       every cell in your body is composed of water. In fact, water makes up 60 to 80 percent of our entire body mass,

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                    7.6 · Physical Health Basics 213

so when we don't consume enough water, all kinds of complications can occur. To function properly, all the
cells and organs in our body need water. Proper hydration is key to overall health and well-being. By the time
you feel thirsty, you are already dehydrated. Dehydration is when your body does not have as much water and
fluids as it needs.

Researchers at Virginia Polytechnic discovered that mild dehydration (as little as losing 1 to 2 percent of body
water) can impair cognitive performance.23 Water increases energy and relieves fatigue, helps maintain
weight, flushes toxins, improves skin complexion, improves digestion, and is a natural headache remedy (your
brain is 76 percent water). Headaches, migraines, and back pains are commonly caused by dehydration. Your
body will also let you know it needs water by messaging through muscle cramps, achy joints, constipation, dry
skin, and of course a dry mouth.

Aside from feeling thirsty, the easiest way to tell if you are dehydrated is to check your urine. If it is a dark
shade of yellow, your urine is over-concentrated with waste. Water helps to flush out waste, so when you're
hydrated there's a higher ratio of water to waste, turning your urine a lighter color.

One of the best habits you can develop is to drink a large glass of water first thing in the morning. Your body
becomes a little dehydrated as you sleep. Drinking water first thing in the morning allows your body to
rehydrate, which helps with digestion and helps move the bowels for regularity in the morning. It also helps to
eliminate the toxins your liver processed while you slept.

Check out this video (https://openstax.org/l/drinkwater) for more benefits of drinking water.

"But I don't like the taste of water!" No problem. Select any non-caloric beverage. Flavored waters are a perfect
choice and there are many options with and without bubbles or caffeine. Limit your intake of caloric beverages
such as juice, soda, and high calorie beverages at your favorite coffee shop.

Exercise

Many people exercise to maintain or lose weight, or increase cardiovascular health, but physical outcomes are
only one potential benefit of exercise. Regular exercise can improve the quality of your sleep, strengthen your
bones, increase your energy levels, and reduce your risk of high blood pressure, diabetes, and even some
forms of cancer.24 Regular exercise is key to living a long, healthy life.

There are three basic types of exercise--flexibility, strength training, and cardiovascular.

1. Flexibility is the range in motion of the joints in your body, or the ability for your muscles to move freely.
      Without adequate flexibility, daily activities can become difficult to do. Stretching increases your body's
      flexibility, improves circulation, and sends more blood to your muscles. Just a few minutes a day of deep
      stretching can have a powerfully positive impact on your health. Yoga and Tai Chi are other wonderful
      ways to improve your flexibility.

2. Strength is the body's ability to produce force. Strength training helps improve muscle strength and
      muscle mass, which will become increasingly important as you age. Increased muscle helps your body
      burn calories more efficiently. Strength training also helps maintain bone strength. In addition to lifting
      weights, other ways to build strength include push-ups, pull-ups, squats, lunges, and yoga.

3. Cardiovascular is the body's ability to use oxygen efficiently during exercise. As one's ability to use oxygen
      improves, daily activities can be performed with less fatigue. Great cardiovascular modes of exercise
      include jogging, swimming, biking, and HIIT (high intensity interval training). HIIT is short bursts of
      intense activity followed by a rest period. With HIIT, you can squeeze a lot of benefit into a short period of
      time. Click here for an example of HITT workouts (https://openstax.org/l/hiitworkout).

23 University of Virginia https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4207053/
24 Harvard Medical School https://www.health.harvard.edu/newsletter_article/Exercise_as_medicine
214 7 · Maintaining Your Mental Health and Managing Stress

         Figure 7.10 Many colleges offer a variety of unique and interesting exercise programs and classes, which you can take advantage of
         to learn new things and stay fit. (Credit: Jo Allebon / Flickr / Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC-BY 2.0))

       Research indicates that regular aerobic exercise can support memory and cognition. In these studies, aerobic
       exercise generally increases the number of new neurons created in the brain's memory center and also
       reduces inflammation.25 Inflammation in the brain may contribute to the development of dementia and other
       neurodegenerative conditions. It might be good timing to take a jog before you sit down to study for a test!
       It's important to move throughout the day, and every day. Aim to exercise for 150 minutes a week. You don't
       have to be the king or queen of CrossFit; it's the daily movement that is most important. Research has found
       that three brisk walks for 10 minutes a day is a great start. While it is best to integrate all three types of
       exercise, the best exercise is the one you will actually do. Find and commit to a form of exercise you will enjoy.

     Sleep

       How often do you wake up filled with energy, eager to embrace the day? How often do you wake up still tired,
       with heavy eyes that just don't want to open? Your answer to these questions has a direct bearing on the
       quality of your decisions, your ability to use good judgment, the extent to which you can focus in the
       classroom, and ultimately your long-term health.
       A great night's sleep begins the minute you wake up. The choices you make throughout the day impact how
       quickly you fall asleep, whether you sleep soundly, and whether your body is able to successfully complete the
       cycle of critical functions that only happen while you sleep.
       Sleep is the foundation of health, yet almost 40 percent of adults struggle to get enough sleep.26 Lack of sleep
       affects mental and physical performance and can make you more irritable. The diminished energy that results
       from too little sleep often leads us to make poor decisions about most things, including food. Think about the
       last time you were really tired. Did you crave pizza, donuts, and fries--or a healthy salad? Studies have shown
       that people who sleep less are more likely to eat fewer vegetables and eat more fats and refined
       carbohydrates, like donuts.27
       With sufficient sleep it is easier to learn, to remember what you learned, and to have the necessary energy to
       make the most of your educational experience. Without sufficient sleep it is harder to learn, to remember what
       you learned, and to have the energy to make the most of your educational experience. It's that simple.

     What Happens When We Sleep?

       Sleep is a time when our bodies are quite busy repairing and detoxifying. While we sleep we fix damaged

         25 Kelty, Journal of Applied Physiology
         26 Cleveland Clinic, https://health.clevelandclinic.org/lack-sleep-make-crave-junk-food/
         27 Cleveland Clinic, https://health.clevelandclinic.org/lack-sleep-make-crave-junk-food/

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                    7.6 · Physical Health Basics 215

tissue, toxins are processed and eliminated, hormones essential for growth and appetite control are released
and restocked, and energy is restored.
A review of hundreds of sleep studies concluded that most adults need around eight hours of sleep to
maintain good health. Some people may be able to function quite well on seven and others may need closer to
nine, but as a general rule, most people need a solid eight hours of sleep each night. And when it comes to
sleep, both quantity and quality are important.
When sleep is cut short, the body doesn't have time to complete the phases for the repair and detoxification.
A tiny lobe called the pineal gland helps us fall asleep. The pineal gland secretes melatonin to calm the brain.
The pineal gland responds to darkness. If you are watching TV until the minute you go to bed and then sleep
with the artificial light from smartphones and other devices, your brain is tricked into thinking it is still
daylight; this makes it difficult for the pineal gland to do its job. In addition, if the TV shows you watch before
bed are violent or action-packed, your body will release cortisol (the stress hormone). Anything that creates
stress close to bedtime will make it more difficult to fall asleep. A bedtime practice of quiet activities like
reading, journaling, listening to music, or meditation will make it much easier to fall asleep.

What Happens If You Don't Get Enough Sleep?

Lack of sleep has a big impact on your overall state of health and well-being. Studies have linked poor sleep to
a variety of health problems. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have identified sleep
deprivation as a public health epidemic.

Figure 7.11 The Effects of Sleep Deprivation This visual depicts many of the ways we are affected by insufficient sleep. (Credit:
Häggström, Mikael (2014). "Medical gallery of Mikael Häggström 2014". WikiJournal of Medicine. Public Domain.)

Some of the health risks of insufficient sleep include the following:
Increased risk of heart attack and stroke: In his book Why We Sleep, Matthew Walker, PhD, shares Japanese
research showing that male workers who average six hours of sleep or less are 400 to 500 percent more likely
to suffer one or more cardiac arrests than those getting more than six hours of sleep each night. Another
study of women between the ages of 20 and 79 found that those who had mild sleep disturbance such as
taking longer to fall asleep or waking up one or more times during the night were significantly more likely to
have high blood pressure than those who fell asleep quickly and slept soundly.28
Impaired cognitive function: Even one night of sleeping less than six hours can impact your ability to think
clearly the next day.

28 Matthew Walker, PhD Why We Sleep
216 7 · Maintaining Your Mental Health and Managing Stress

       Increased risk of accidents: Sleep deprivation slows your reaction time, which increases your risk of
       accidents. You are three times more likely to be in a car crash if you are tired.
       According to the American Sleep Foundation, 40 percent of people admitted to falling asleep behind the wheel
       at least once. A Governor's Highway Safety Association report estimates there are 6,400 fatal drowsy-driving
       crashes each year. Fifty percent of these crashes involve drivers under the age of 25.29

         Figure 7.12 Driving while drowsy puts you, your passengers, and many others in danger. (Credit: Modification of work by Governors
         Highway Safety Association.)

       Driving after 20 hours without sleep is the equivalent of driving with a blood-alcohol concentration of 0.08
       percent--the U.S. legal limit for drunk driving.
       Weight gain/increased risk for obesity: Sleep helps balance your appetite by regulating hormones that play
       a role in helping you feel full after a meal. Also, cortisol is released during times of anxiety, and exhaustion
       causes your body to produce more cortisol. This can stimulate your appetite.
       Increased risk of cancer: Tumors grow up to three times faster in laboratory animals with severe sleep
       dysfunctions. Researchers believe this is because of disrupted melatonin production, as melatonin has both
       antioxidant and anticancer activity.
       Increased emotional intensity: The part of the brain responsible for emotional reactions, your amygdala, can
       be 60 percent more reactive when you've slept poorly, resulting in increased emotional intensity.
       For more information on the advantages and health risks of sleep watch this TED Talk (https://openstax.org/l/
       sleepsuperpower) by Matt Walker, PhD, Director of the Sleep Center at U California Berkeley.

     Tips to Improve the Quality of Your Sleep

       Now that you are more aware of the ways insufficient sleep harms your body, let's review some of the things
       you can do to enhance your sleep.
       Make sleep a priority.
       It can be challenging once in college, but try to get on a schedule where you sleep and wake at the same time
       every day to get your body accustomed to a routine. This will help your body get into a sleep rhythm and make
       it easier to fall asleep and get up in the morning.
       Sleep in a cool, quiet, dark room.

         29 Governors Highway Safety Association

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                    7.6 · Physical Health Basics 217

Create a sleeping environment that is comfortable and conducive to sleep. If you can control the temperature
in your room, keep it cool in the evening. Scientists believe a cool bedroom (around 65 degrees) may be best
for sleep, since it mimics our body's natural temperature drop. Exposure to bright light suppresses our body's
ability to make melatonin, so keep the room as dark as possible. A 2010 study in The Journal of Clinical
Endocrinology & Metabolism found that individuals exposed to room light "during the usual hours of sleep
suppressed melatonin by greater than 50%."30 Even the tiniest bit of light in the room (like from a clock radio
LCD screen) can disrupt your internal clock and your production of melatonin, which will interfere with your
sleep. A sleep mask may help eliminate light, and earplugs can help reduce noise.

Avoid eating late or drinking alcohol or caffeine close to bedtime.

It is best to finish eating at least two hours before bedtime and avoid caffeine after lunch. While not everyone
is affected in the same way, caffeine hangs around a long time in most bodies. Although alcohol will make you
drowsy, the effect is short-lived and you will often wake up several hours later, unable to fall back to sleep.
Alcohol can also keep you from entering the deeper stages of sleep, where your body does most of the repair
and healing. A 2013 Scientific Research study concluded that "energy drinks, other caffeinated beverages and
alcoholic beverages are risk factors of poor sleep quality." It's important to finish eating hours before bedtime
so your body is able to heal and detoxify and it is not spending the first few hours of sleep digesting a heavy
meal.

Start to wind down an hour before bed.

Making mindfulness and/or a gratitude practice (as discussed previously) a part of your bedtime routine are
well documented as improving an individual's ability to fall asleep and have better quality of sleep. There are
also great apps to help with relaxation, stress release, and falling asleep which include mediations, gratitude
practice, and mindfulness. Consider the Insight Timer (https://openstax.org/l/insighttimer) app, or any of the
free apps (https://openstax.org/l/sleepapps) listed by the American Sleep Association.

Exercise for 30 minutes a day.

One of the biggest benefits of exercise is its effect on sleep. A study from Stanford University found that 16
weeks in a moderate-intensity exercise program allowed people to fall asleep about 15 minutes faster and
sleep about 45 minutes longer. Walking, yoga, swimming, strength training, jumping rope--whatever it is, find
an exercise you like and make sure to move your body every day.

Improve your diet.

Low fiber and high saturated fat and sugar intake is associated with lighter, less restorative sleep with more
wake time during the night. Processed food full of chemicals will make your body work extra hard during the
night to remove the toxins and leave less time for healing and repair.

Sleep affects how we look, feel, and function on a daily basis and is vital to our health and quality of life. When
you get the sleep your body needs, you look more vibrant, you feel more vibrant, and you have the energy to
live your best life.

Now, with a better understanding of the benefits of getting the recommended hours of nightly sleep and the
health risks of not getting enough sleep, what changes can you make to improve the quality and quantity of
your sleep?

Difficulty sleeping may be a sign of something else happening in your mind or body (i.e., anxiety, insomnia,
sleep apnea). If you are doing all the right things and still have trouble falling or staying asleep, talk to your
doctor or go to your student health services.

Here are some resources to learn more:

30 JCEM, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3047226/
218 7 · Maintaining Your Mental Health and Managing Stress

         · Healthy Sleep (https://openstax.org/l/gettingsleep), Harvard Medical School Division of Sleep Medicine
         · Insomnia Treatment (https://openstax.org/l/insomniatreatment), American Association of Sleep Medicine
         · Sleep Medicine (https://openstax.org/l/behaviroalsleepmedicine), Society of Behavioral Sleep Medicine

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                           7 · Family & Friends Matter 219

    Family & Friends Matter

JT has always been a hard worker, even when balancing college and work has been stressful. However, shortly
after the end of the year, JT's family experiences the sudden death of his father. While he had had health issues,
the family is not prepared for the loss, especially right after JT's grandparents, aunts, uncles, and cousins
celebrated the holidays together. JT is very close to his family, and the thought of returning to his classes and
continuing to work seems too much to bear.

Nonetheless, JT begins the new semester, but soon finds it difficult to get out of bed and go to class. Working is
the only thing that he has motivation to do, perhaps because he needs to work to pay the bills. When JT feels
well enough to go to class, he comes in late, loses focus during class, and forgets to submit assignments.

JT's boss has seen no difference in his work ethic or behavior, but JT's professors have noticed he is not
performing well, and a few of them have reached out to find out what is going on. JT has ignored the
professors' emails and skipped appointments with his advisor to talk about his academic risk. Despite being
encouraged to seek on-campus counseling, JT is convinced that he can get better on his own and doesn't have
the motivation to talk to anyone other than his family members who understand best what he is going
through.

Let's Think About It

JT has several options. Think through the consequences of each one, and choose the best option or create
your own option.

  · JT continues to deal with his depression and anxiety by missing classes and avoiding work with the hope
      that with time it will get better.

  · JT talks to their professor about what he is going through to see if there is a way to get extensions on
      assignments.

  · JT meets with a counselor to talk through options for improving his mental health that would involve
      additional costs including regular therapy and medication.

Let's Talk About It

JT may feel uncomfortable expressing his mental and emotional needs--and he need not share personal
health information with others if he does not want to--but he could communicate with those who are affected
by his behaviors. Here are some suggestions for communicating with others about the dilemma that JT is
facing:

  · "I am going through some tough things right now and have not been myself. While I am very committed
      to my education, my actions are not in line with that commitment. I am struggling with how to get back on
      track."

  · "I have had some personal issues that have kept me from focusing on my course work. I am planning to
      seek some counseling and would like to talk about what steps I can take now, if any, to help me make up
      for lost time in the course."

  · "I want to share an explanation--and not an excuse--about my behavior in and out of class. I have been
      struggling with some family issues that have made it difficult to feel good enough to come to class and do
      the work. Do you have any advice for me or would you be able to talk to me about it at length?"

Whatever choice you would make in this situation, it is always best to communicate clearly your needs, your
concerns, and even your uncertainties.

    Summary

As you learned in this chapter, your college experience will be impacted by your own health and well-being.
During these years, you will start the process of learning who you are and who you want to be. Your values will
220 7 · Summary

be questioned and your strengths will become more apparent not only to you but also to your support system.
The goal of this chapter was to introduce you to the complex relationship between your mind and body; to
help you identify the differences between feeling stressed versus being anxious; and to know when feeling sad
may be symptoms of depression.
This foundational knowledge will help to empower you to not only improve your self-efficacy, but also help you
become more resilient during difficult situations. With the hope you can continue to grow in this area and
improve your health and well-being, consider one of the items below and commit to setting it as your new top
priority:

  · Reach out to your support system and start the conversation with a person you have identified as an
      important support for your health. Tell them why you included them and let them know that you value
      them as a key person in your life.

  · Identify other strategies that you can turn to during difficult times. Talk to your friends to learn how they
      handle difficult situations and if they have specific strategies that help them through such times.

  · Consider the resources available to you on campus. Are there classes that can help you learn to meditate
      or how to handle stress? Where is the student health service and what treatment and prevention
      opportunities are provided for students?

  · Think back to situations that did not go smoothly in the past. What knowledge and skills can you take from
      this chapter and apply to that situation which would have a different, more positive outcome. If a similar
      situation happens again, what would you do differently?

Access for free at openstax.org
8 · Introduction                                                                                                                   221

8
           Understanding Financial Literacy

Figure 8.1 Financial success depends on getting a good start and avoiding setbacks and wrong turns. It's a lifelong process, more
like a marathon than a sprint. (Credit: Bengt Nyman / Flickr / Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC-BY 2.0))

Chapter Outline

  8.1 Personal Financial Planning
  8.2 Savings, Expenses, and Budgeting
  8.3 Credit Cards
  8.4 Paying for College

      Introduction

 STUDENT STORY

  Ana has been working on campus at a part-time job. She likes the flexibility of her schedule even though
  she doesn't make enough money in a week to cover her increasing expenses.
  Ana has been going out with new friends, and they like to spend money on food, entertainment, and
  clothing. Ana never learned how to budget, so she spends what she has and hopes that she can earn
  enough each week to replenish her bank account.
  When she calls home to ask her parents if they will give her some money each month, she finds out that her
  mother has been laid off from her job and is not sure how she will pay for her college next year. Her parents
  are worried that Ana may have to move back home or transfer to a more affordable school after all.
  Ana is devastated by the news. She has finally made friends and has joined a club on campus. She also likes
  her classes and is close to choosing a major. She doesn't want to leave this college, but is not sure what to
  do.
  She has one small scholarship, student loans, and a grant and her family's contributions cover the rest of
  her tuition, fees, room, and board. Without her part-time job, she would have no spending money for
222 8 · Understanding Financial Literacy

         personal expenses. She is concerned about what her next steps are.
         What Do You Think?

           · If you were Ana, what would you think about paying for college without the help of your family?
           · What would you do to improve your financial skills?
           · What resources could you explore to help you manage your financial challenges?
           · How do you feel about paying for college and managing your finances? Why do you feel this way?

     Student Survey

       How financially literate are you? This survey will help you determine how the chapter concepts relate to you
       right now. As we are introduced to new concepts and practices, it can be informative to reflect on how your
       understanding changes over time. Take this quick survey to figure it out, ranking the statements on a scale of
       1--4, 1 meaning "least like me" and 4 meaning "most like me."
        1. I actively and regularly plan and/or monitor my finances.
        2. I understand the benefits and risks of credit.
        3. I have a plan to repay my student loans.
        4. I regularly take steps to protect my identity and assets.
       You can also take the Chapter 8 survey (https://openstax.org/l/collegeconcisesurvey07) anonymously online.

        STUDENT PROFILE

         "A big part of the college experience for many students is the art of the student loan process. This has been
         both a painful and challenging experience for me over the course of the first semester. The biggest
         struggle for me has been simply understanding what everything means and what I'm supposed to do.
         Another challenge has been determining how exactly I'm going to pay these loans back while also saving
         for rent, utilities, additional expenses, and a study abroad fund with a part-time job that I don't even have
         yet."
         --Hanna Moyster University of Central Arkansas

     About This Chapter

       In this chapter, you will learn to reach your personal life goals by implementing financial planning and
       strategies to protect yourself, manage your money today, and put yourself in a better position for tomorrow.
       How you act today impacts your tomorrow.
       By the end of this chapter, you should be able to do the following:

         · Align your personal and financial goals through smart financial planning.
         · Create a saving and spending plan and track your performance.
         · Identify best practices and risks associated with credit cards and other debt.
         · Determine the best opportunities for you to finance your college education.

     What Would You Do?

       Think about this scenario: Everything was working out for Elan. They got into the college they wanted to, and
       some friends were planning to attend as well. They felt like an adult and were looking forward to new
       freedoms and opportunities. Elan's parents let them get a credit card after high school graduation. Elan shared
       an apartment with their friends just off campus, and was able to get where they needed to go because they

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                            8.1 · Personal Financial Planning 223

had a car. Elan had also saved over $1,000 from gifts and a summer job. They needed a new laptop.

Elan planned to stay within set limits. They went to the store and found a very knowledgeable salesperson,
Jermain, who said he knew exactly what Elan needed. Jermain pointed out that the laptop in Elan's budget
would do schoolwork just fine, but it was not as powerful as the best unit with advanced gaming features.
Plus, the better computer came with new headphones! Jermain suggested that Elan could later sell the
computer to incoming students. (Most first-year students bought used computers if they did not have one
when they came to school.) The high-powered computer was $2,000, though, and Elan didn't have that much
money. Maybe they should use the credit card? Maybe their new part-time job would pay for it? But Jermain
arranged for a small down payment and monthly payments of only $100. That did not seem too bad to Elan.
The future looked bright.

At least, that's what Elan thought. They soon realized that working more hours meant fewer hours to study.
Meanwhile, Elan's rent and gas usage went up, and, as a young car owner, their insurance was through the
roof. Only three months into the first semester, Elan missed a payment on the laptop and accrued a late fee.
They put the next laptop payment on the credit card. Soon, Elan was alternating payments between the credit
card, laptop, and car, building up interest and late charges. Now Elan was having trouble paying their rent and
started getting calls from creditors. Everything had seemed so promising. Elan didn't know where they had
gone wrong.

Elan comes to you and shares the situation. They ask, "What could I have done differently?"

This chapter offers you insight into your finances so that you can make good decisions and avoid costly
mistakes. We all face chances to spend money to try to get what we want. Many think only about now and not
next month, next year, or ten years from now, but our behavior now has consequences later. Not everyone can
own all the latest technology, drive their dream car, continually invest for their retirement, or live in the perfect
home at this moment. But by understanding the different components of earning money, banking, credit, and
budgeting, you can begin working toward your personal and financial goals. We'll also discuss a related topic,
safeguarding your accounts and personal information, which is critical to protecting everything you've worked
for. By the end of this chapter, you will have good insights for Elan . . . and yourself!

 8.1 Personal Financial Planning

                                                                                                  Estimated completion time: 13 minutes.

Questions to Consider:

  · What simple steps do I take to create a financial plan?
  · How do I use financial planning in everyday life?
  · How is the financial planning process implemented for every purchase?

      "By failing to plan, you are preparing to fail."

      --Benjamin Franklin

Honestly, practicing money management isn't that hard to figure out. In many ways it's similar to playing a
video game. The first time you play a game, you may feel awkward or have the lowest score. Playing for a
while can make you okay at the game. But if you learn the rules of the game, figure out how to best use each
tool in the game, read strategy guides from experts, and practice, you can get really good at it.
224 8 · Understanding Financial Literacy

       Money management is the same. It's not enough to "figure it out as you go." If you want to get good at
       managing your money, you must treat money like you treat your favorite game. You have to come at it with a
       well-researched plan. Research has shown that people with stronger finances are healthier1 and happier,2
       have better marriages,3 and even have better cognitive functioning.4

     The Financial Planning Process

       Personal goals and behaviors have a financial component or consequence. To make the most of your financial
       resources, you need to do some financial planning. The financial planning process consists of five distinct
       steps: goal setting, evaluating, planning, implementing, and monitoring.

      Financial Planning in Five Steps

        1. Develop Personal Goals
              What do I want my life to look like?

        2. Identify and Evaluate Alternatives for Achieving Goals for My Situation
              What do my savings, debt, income, and expenses look like?
              What creative ways are available to get the life I want?

        3. Write My Financial Plan
              What small steps can I take to start working toward my goals?

        4. Implement the Plan
              Begin taking those steps, even if I can only do a few small things each week.

        5. Monitor and Adjust the Plan
              Make sure I don't get distracted by life. Keep taking those small steps each week. Make adjustments
                 when needed.

                                                                            Figure 8.2 Steps of financial planning.

         1 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0277953613002839
         2 https://academic.oup.com/geronj/article-abstract/38/5/626/578092
         3 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1741-3729.2012.00715.x and https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/
         j.1741-3729.2012.00715.x/abstract
         4 https://science.sciencemag.org/content/341/6149/976%20

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                            8.1 · Personal Financial Planning 225

How to Use Financial Planning in Everyday Life

The financial planning process isn't only about creating one big financial plan. You can also use it to get a
better deal when you buy a car or computer or rent an apartment. In fact, any time you are thinking about
spending a lot of money, you can use the financial planning process to pay less and get more.
To explore financial planning in depth, we'll use the example of buying a car.

1. Develop Goals

First, what do you really need? If you're looking for a car, you probably need transportation. Before you decide
to buy a car, consider alternatives to buying a car. Could you take a bus, walk, or bike instead? Often one goal
can impact another goal. Cars are typically not good financial investments. We have cars for convenience and
necessity, to earn an income and to enjoy life. Financially, they are an expense. They lose value, or depreciate,
rather than increasing in value, like savings. So buying a car may slow your savings or retirement plan goals.
Cars continually use up cash for gas, repairs, taxes, parking, and so on. Keep this in mind throughout the
planning process.

2. Identify and Evaluate Alternatives for Achieving Goals in Your Current Situation.

For this example, let's assume that you have determined the best alternative is to buy a car. Do you need a new
car? Will your current car last with some upkeep? Consider a used car over a new one. On average, a new car
will lose one-fifth of its value during its first year.5 Buying a one-year-old car is like getting a practically new car
for a 20 percent discount. So in many cases, the best deal may be to buy a five- or six-year-old car. Sites such as
the Kelley Blue Book website (KBB.com) and Edmunds.com can show you depreciation tables for the cars you
are considering. Perhaps someone in your family has a car they will sell you at a discount.
Do you know how much it will cost in total to own the car? It will help to check out the total cost of ownership
tools (also on KBB.com and Edmunds.com) to estimate how much each car will cost you in maintenance,
repairs, gas, and insurance. A cheap car that gets poor gas mileage and breaks down all the time will actually
cost you more in the long run.

Figure 8.3 Weighing all the factors is critical when deciding on any purchase, especially a major one like a car. (Credit: Greg
Gjerdingen / Flickr / Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC-BY 2.0))

5 Krome, Charles. "Car Depreciation." 2018, Carfax. https://www.carfax.com/blog/car-depreciation
226 8 · Understanding Financial Literacy

3. Write Down Your Financial Plan

Goal             Item                     Details                     Budget                  Timeline

Transportation/  2014 Toyota              Black, A/C, power windows,  Car $12,000 (max)       Have $3600 in
Car              Camry                    less than 60,000 miles                              savings for this.
                                                                         Down payment
                                                                                      $3,000  Save $50/week.

                                                                        Insurance $100/       Purchase in
                                                                                          mo  approximately 11
                                                                                              weeks.
                                                                           Sales tax $900

                                                                       + Licensing $145

                                                                             Cash needed
                                                                                      $4,145

Computer         Used or                  Dell w/ Windows, minimum    $300                    Sell current laptop
                 refurbished              13", 128G hard drive, HD                            for $100.
                 laptop                   Graphics                    Use free Windows
                                                                      update from             Buy refurbished
                                                                      school.                 from Dell site for
                                                                                              $289.
                                                                      Use free Wi-Fi at
                                                                      school.                 $189 on credit
                                                                                              card.

                                                                                              Pay off when
                                                                                              statement comes.

Table 8.1 Examples of financial plans for a car and a computer.

4. Implement Your Plan

Once you've narrowed down which car you are looking for, do more online research with resources such as
Kelley Blue Book to see what is for sale in your area. You can also begin contacting dealerships and asking
them if they have the car you are looking for with the features you want. Ask the dealerships with the car you
want to give you their best offer, then compare their price to your researched price. You may have to spend
more time looking at other dealerships to compare offers, but one goal of online research is to save time and
avoid going from place to place if possible.

When you do go to buy the car, bring a copy of your written plan into the dealership and stick to it. If a
dealership tries to switch you to a more expensive option, just say no, or you can leave to go to another
dealership. Remember Elan in our opening scenario? They went shopping alone and caved to the pressure and
persuasion of the salesperson. If you feel it is helpful, take a responsible friend or family member with you for
support.

5. Monitor and Adjust the Plan to Changing Circumstances and New Life Goals

Life changes, and things wear out. Keep up the recommended maintenance on the car (or any other
purchase). Keep saving money for your emergency fund, then for your next big purchase. The worst time to
buy something is when you need to replace an important item that stops working or is damaged, because you
are easier to take advantage of when you are desperate. You will be glad that you have an emergency fund.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                  8.2 · Savings, Expenses, and Budgeting 227

A good practice is to keep making car payments once the car loan is paid off. If you are paying $300 per month
for a car loan, when the loan is paid off, put $300 per month into a savings account for a new car instead. Do it
long enough and you can buy your next car using your own money!

Use the Financial Planning Process for Everything

The same process can be used to make every major purchase in your life. When you rent an apartment, begin
with the same assessment of your current financial situation, what you need in an apartment, and what goals
it will impact or fulfill. Then look for an apartment using a written plan to avoid being sold on a more
expensive place than you want.
You can even use the process of assessing and planning for small things such as buying textbooks or weekly
groceries. While saving a few bucks each week may seem like a small deal, you will gain practice using the
financial planning process, so it will become automatic for when you make the big decisions in life. Stick to
your plan.

 8.2 Savings, Expenses, and Budgeting

                                                                                                  Estimated completion time: 19 minutes.

Questions to Consider:
  · How is the flow of money best measured?
  · How do I keep things balanced?
      "Do not save what is left after spending; instead spend what is left after saving."
      --Warren Buffett6

What is the best way to get to the Mississippi River from here? Do you know? To answer the question, even
with a map app, you would need to know where you are starting from and exactly where on the river you want
to arrive before you can map the best route. Our financial lives need maps, too. You need to know where you
are now and where you want to end up in order to map a course to meet the goal.
You map your financial path using a spending and savings plan, or budget, which tracks your income, savings,
and spending. You check on your progress using a balance sheet that lists your assets, or what you own, and
your liabilities, or what you owe. A balance sheet is like a snapshot, a moment in time, that we use to check our
progress.

Budgets

The term budget is unpleasant to some people because it just looks like work. But who will care more about
your money than you? We all want to know if we have enough money to pay our bills, travel, get an education,
buy a car, etc. Technically, a budget is a specific financial plan for a specified time. Budgets have three
elements: income, saving and investing, and expenses.

6 Buffett, Warren. The Essays of Warren Buffett: Lessons for Corporate America. 1991. Cardozo Law Review.
228 8 · Understanding Financial Literacy

         Figure 8.4 A budget is a specific financial plan for a finite amount of time. For example, you can set a budget for a term or longer, but
         be sure to revisit it to make adjustments as needed.

      Income

       Income most often comes from our jobs in the form of a paper or electronic paycheck. During school, you may
       receive support from family that could be considered income. You may also receive scholarships, grants, or
       student loan money. When listing your income for your monthly budget, you should use your net pay, also
       called your disposable income. It is the only money you can use to pay bills. If you currently have a job, look at
       the pay stub or statement. You will find gross pay, then some money deducted for a variety of taxes, leaving a
       smaller amount--your net pay.
       Sometimes you have the opportunity to have some other, optional deductions taken from your paycheck
       before you get your net pay. Examples of optional deductions include 401(k) or health insurance payments.
       You can change these amounts, but you should still use your net pay when considering your budget.
       Some individuals receive disability income, social security income, investment income, alimony, child support,
       and other forms of payment on a regular basis. All of these go under income.

      Saving and Investing

       The first bill you should pay is to yourself. You owe yourself today and tomorrow. The quote at the start of this
       section was said by Warren Buffet who is one of the most successful investors of the 20th century, with a
       personal fortune of more than $60 billion. Setting aside a certain amount of money for savings and
       investments, before paying bills and making discretionary, or optional, purchases, will put you on a path to
       building your own reserve. Savings can be for an emergency fund or for short-term goals such as education, a
       wedding, travel, or a car. Investing, such as putting your money into stocks, bonds, or real estate, offers higher
       returns at a higher risk than money saved in a bank. Investments include retirement accounts that can be
       automatically funded with money deducted from your paycheck. Automatic payroll deductions are an effective
       way to save money before you can get your hands on it. Make saving money a priority to assure that you will
       work as hard to make the payment to yourself as you work to make your car or housing payment. The money
       you "pay" toward saving or investing will earn you back your money, plus some money earned on your money.
       Compare this to the cost of buying an item on credit and paying your money plus interest to a creditor. Paying
       yourself first is a habit that pays off!

             Pay yourself first! Put something in savings from every paycheck or gift.

      Expenses

       Expenses are categorized in two ways. One method separates them into fixed expenses and variable expenses.

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                  8.2 · Savings, Expenses, and Budgeting 229

Rent, insurance costs, and utilities (power, water) are fixed: they cost about the same every month and are
predictable based on your arrangement with the provider. Variable expenses, on the other hand, change based
on your priorities and available funds; they include groceries, restaurants, cell phone plans, gas, clothing, and
so on. You have a good degree of control over your variable expenses. You can begin organizing your
expenses by categorizing each one as either fixed or variable.
A second way to categorize expenses is to identify them as either needs or wants. Your needs come first: food,
basic clothing, safe housing, medical care, and water. Your wants come afterward, if you can afford them while
sticking to a savings plan. Wants may include meals at a restaurant, designer clothes, video games, other
forms of entertainment, or a new car. After you identify an item as a need or want, you must exercise self-
control to avoid caving to your desire for too many wants.

 ACTIVITY

  List the last ten purchases you made, and place each of them in the category you think is correct.

                                              Item Need Expense $ Want Expense $

                                              Totals

                                                    Table 8.2

How do your total "need" expenses compare to your total "want" expenses? Should either of them change?
Budgets are done in a chart or spreadsheet format and often look like the ones below. Pay attention to how
the first budget differs from the second.

Income (use net monthly pay)

                              Paycheck $2200

                                                                    Other $300

Total Income                                                        $2500

Table 8.3 This budget balances because all money is accounted for.
230 8 · Understanding Financial Literacy

Saving and Investing                                                    $120
Savings Account                                                         $240
Investments                                                             $2140

                       Amount Left for Expenses

Expenses (Monthly)

                                                                        Housing $750

                                          Car Payment/Insurance $450

                                                                        Groceries $400

                                          Restaurants/Food Delivery $100

                                                                        Internet $60

                                                                        Phone $60

                                          Medical Insurance and Copays $120

                                                                        Gas $200

                                          Total Expenses                $2140

  Balance (Amount left for expenses minus total expenses) $0

Table 8.3 This budget balances because all money is accounted for.

                                          Income (use net monthly pay)

                                                                        Paycheck $2200

                                                                        Other $300

                                          Total Income                  $2500

  Saving and Investing

Table 8.4 Note that this budget is out of balance because Restaurants, Phone, and Gas
are more expensive, so the total expenses are more than the amount available to pay
for them.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                 8.2 · Savings, Expenses, and Budgeting 231

Savings Account                                  $120
Investments                                      $240
                                                 $2140
                       Amount Left for Expenses

Expenses (Monthly)

                                                 Housing $750

                    Car Payment/Insurance $450

                                                 Groceries $400

                    Restaurants/Food Delivery $225

                                                 Internet $60

                                                 Phone $75

                    Medical Insurance and Copays $120

                                                 Gas $250

                    Total Expenses               $2330

                             Balance (Amount left for expenses minus total expenses) -$190

                                Table 8.4 Note that this budget is out of balance because Restaurants, Phone, and Gas
                                are more expensive, so the total expenses are more than the amount available to pay
                                for them.

Balancing Your Budget

Would you take all your cash outside and throw it up in the air on a windy day? Probably not. We want to hold
on to every cent and decide where we want it to go. Our budget allows us to find a place for each dollar. We
should not regularly have money left over. If we do, we should consider increasing our saving and investing.
We also should not have a negative balance, meaning we don't have enough to pay our bills. If we are short of
money, we can look at all three categories of our budget: income, savings, and expenses.

We could increase our income by taking a second job or working overtime, although this is rarely advisable
alongside college coursework. The time commitment quickly becomes overwhelming. Another option is to cut
savings, or there's always the possibility of reducing expenses. Any of these options in combination can work.

Another, even less desirable option is to take on debt to make up the shortfall. This is usually only a short-term
solution that makes future months and cash shortages worse as we pay off the debt. When we budget for
each successive month, we can look at what we actually spent the month before and make adjustments.
232 8 · Understanding Financial Literacy

      Tracking the Big Picture

       When you think about becoming more financially secure, you're usually considering your net worth, or the
       total measure of your wealth. Earnings, savings, and investments build up your assets--that is, the valuable
       things you own. Borrowed money, or debt, increases your liabilities, or what you owe. If you subtract what you
       owe from what you own, the result is your net worth. Your goal is to own more than you owe.
       When people first get out of college and have student debt, they often owe more than they own. But over time
       and with good financial strategies, they can reverse that situation. You can track information about your
       assets, liabilities, and net worth on a balance sheet or part of a personal financial statement. This information
       will be required to get a home loan or other types of loans. For your net worth to grow in a positive direction,
       you must increase your assets and decrease your liabilities over time.

             Assets (Owned) - Liabilities (Owed) = Net Worth

        ANALYSIS QUESTION

         Can you identify areas in your life where you are losing money by paying fees on your checking account or
         interest on your loans? What actions could you take to stop giving away money and instead set yourself up
         to start earning money?

Good Practices That Build Wealth          Bad Practices That Dig a Debt Hole

Tracking all spending and saving          Living paycheck to paycheck with no plan

Knowing the difference between needs and  Spending money on wants instead of saving
wants

Resisting impulse buying and emotional    Using credit to buy more that you need and increasing what
spending                                  you owe

Table 8.5

GET CONNECTED

You can write down your budget on paper or using a computer spreadsheet program such as Excel, or you
can find popular budgeting apps that work for you.7 Some apps link to your accounts and offer other
services such as tracking credit cards and your credit score. The key is to find an app that does what you
need and use it.

Here are some examples:

  · Mint (https://openstax.org/l/mint)
  · Wally (https://openstax.org/l/wally)
  · Goodbudget (https://openstax.org/l/goodbudget)

7 https://www.techtimes.com/articles/80726/20150902/best-budgeting-apps-for-college-students-mint-you-need-a-budget-and-
more.htm

Access for free at openstax.org
                  8.3 · Credit Cards 233

8.3 Credit Cards

                  Estimated completion time: 15 minutes.

Questions to Consider:

  · How dangerous is debt?
  · What should I think about when getting and using a credit card?
  · What is the purpose of a credit score?

Yes, taking on too much debt can (and does) have disastrous effects on people's personal finances, but if used
appropriately, debt can be a tool to help you build wealth. Debt is like fire. You can use it to keep yourself
warm, cook food, and ward off animals--but if you don't know how to control it, it'll burn your house down.

The Danger of Debt

When you take out a loan, you take on an obligation to pay the money back, with interest, through a monthly
payment. You will take this debt with you when you apply for auto loans or home loans, when you enter into a
marriage, and so on. Effectively, you have committed your future income to the loan. While this can be a good
idea with student loans, take on too many loans and your future self will be poor, no matter how much money
you make. Worse, you'll be transferring more and more of your money to the bank through interest payments.

Compounding Interest

While compounding works to make you money when you are earning interest on savings or investments, it
works against you when you are paying the interest on loans. To avoid compounding interest on loans, make
sure your payments are at least enough to cover the interest charged each month. The good news is that the
interest you are charged will be listed each month on the loan account statements you are sent by the bank or
credit union, and fully amortized loans will always cover the interest costs plus enough principal to pay off
what you owe by the end of the loan term.

The two most common loans on which people get stuck paying compounding interest are credit cards and
student loans. Paying the minimum payment each month on a credit card will just barely cover the interest
charged that month, while anything you buy with the credit card will begin to accrue interest on the day you
make the purchase. Since credit cards charge interest daily, you'll begin paying interest on the interest
immediately, starting the compound interest snowball working against you. When you get a credit card, always
pay the credit card balance down to $0 each month to avoid the compound interest trap.

Getting and Using a Credit Card

One of the most controversial aspects of personal finance is the use of credit cards. While credit cards can be
an incredibly useful tool, their high interest rates, combined with how easily credit cards can bury you in debt,
make them extremely dangerous if not managed correctly.

Reflect on Elan from the chapter introduction and how they felt. How would you (or did you) feel to hold a new
credit card with a $2,000 spending limit?

Benefits of a Credit Card

There are three main benefits of getting a credit card. The first is that credit cards offer a secure and
convenient method of making purchases, similar to using a debit card. When you carry cash, you have the
potential of having the money lost or stolen. A credit card or debit card, on the other hand, can be canceled
and replaced at no cost to you.
234 8 · Understanding Financial Literacy

       Additionally, credit cards offer greater consumer protections than debit cards do when lost or stolen. These
       consumer protections are written into law, and with credit cards you have a maximum liability of $50. With a
       debit card, you are responsible for all charges made up until the point you report the card stolen. In order to
       have the same protections as with credit cards, you need to report the debit card lost or stolen within 48
       hours. The longer you wait to report the loss of the card, or the longer it takes you to realize you lost your card,
       the more money in stolen charges you may be responsible for, up to an unlimited amount.8

       The final benefit is that a credit card will allow you to build your credit score, which is helpful in many aspects
       of life. While most people associate a credit score with getting better rates on loans, credit scores are also
       important to getting a job, lowering car insurance rates, and finding an apartment.9

     How to Use a Credit Card

       All the benefits of credit cards are destroyed if you carry credit card debt. Credit cards should be used as a
       method of paying for things you can afford, meaning you should only use a credit card if the money is already
       sitting in your bank account and is budgeted for the item you are buying. If you use credit cards as a loan, you
       are losing the game.

       Every month, you should pay off your credit card in full, meaning you will bring the loan amount down to $0. If
       your statement says you charged $432.56 that month, make sure you can pay off all $432.56. If you do this,
       you won't pay any interest on the credit card.

       But what happens if you don't pay it off in full? If you are even one cent short on the payment, meaning you
       pay $432.55 instead, you must pay daily interest on the entire amount from the date you made the purchases.
       Your credit card company, of course, will be perfectly happy for you to make smaller payments--that's how
       they make money. It is not uncommon for people to pay twice as much as the amount purchased and take
       years to pay off a credit card when they only pay the minimum payment each month.

       What to Look for in Your Initial Credit Card

        1. Find a Low-Rate Credit Card

             Even though you plan to never pay interest, mistakes will happen, and you don't want to be paying high
             interest while you fix a misstep. Start by narrowing the hundreds of card options to the few with the lowest
             APR (annual percentage rate).

        2. Avoid Cards with Annual Fees or Minimum Usage Requirements

             Your first credit card should ideally be one you can keep forever, but that's expensive to do if they charge
             you an annual fee or have other requirements just for having the card. There are many options that won't
             require you to spend a minimum amount each month and won't charge you an annual fee.

        3. Keep the Credit Limit Equal to Two Weeks' Take-Home Pay

             Even though you want to pay your credit card off in full, most people will max out their credit cards once
             or twice while they are building their good financial habits. If this happens to you, having a small credit
             limit makes that mistake a small mistake instead of a $5,000 mistake.

        4. Avoid Rewards Cards

             Everyone loves to talk about rewards cards, but credit card companies wouldn't offer rewards if they didn't
             earn them a profit. Rewards systems with credit cards are designed by experts to get you to spend more
             money and pay more interest than you otherwise would. Until you build a strong habit of paying off your
             card in full each month, don't step into their trap.

         8 Federal Trade Commission. "Lost Or Stolen Credit, ATM, and Debit Cards." 2012.
         9 Purposeful Finance. "Four Surprising Ways Your Credit Score Will Affect Your Life." https://www.purposefulfinance.org/home/
         Articles/2016/four-surprising-ways-your-credit-score-will-affect-your-life

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                     8.3 · Credit Cards 235

What Is a Good Credit Score?

Most credit scores have a 300-850 score range. The higher the score, the lower the risk to lenders. A "good"
credit score is considered to be in the 670-739 score range.

Credit     Rating       Description
 Score
Ranges

< 580      Poor         This credit score is well below the average score of US consumers and
                        demonstrates to lenders that the borrower may be a risk.

580-669 Fair            This credit score is below the average score of US consumers, though many
                        lenders will approve loans with this score.

670-739 Good            This credit score is near or slightly above the average of US consumers, and
                        most lenders consider this a good score.

740-799    Very Good    This credit score is above the average of US consumers and demonstrates to
                        lenders that the borrower is very dependable.

800+       Exceptional  This credit score is well above the average score of US consumers and clearly
                        demonstrates to lenders that the borrower is an exceptionally low risk.

Table 8.6

Components of a Credit Score and How to Improve Your Credit

Credit scores contain a total of five components. These components are credit payment history (35 percent),
credit utilization (30 percent), length of credit history (15 percent), new credit (10 percent), and credit mix (10
percent). The main action you can take to improve your credit score is to stop charging and pay all bills on
time. Even if you cannot pay the full amount of the credit card balance, which is the best practice, pay the
minimum on time. Paying more is better for your debt load but does not improve your score. Carrying a
balance on a credit card does not improve your score. Your score will go down if you pay bills late and owe
more than 30 percent of your credit available. Your credit score is a reflection of your willingness and ability to
do what you say you will do--pay your debts on time.

 THE REAL DEAL

"College can be expensive and it is important to track your expenses and prioritize earnings to avoid
unnecessary debt. I wish I would have taken more steps, for example, to eat at the college campus as much
as possible my freshman year. I put the quality of food over the value of money. Throughout my college
experience, I have learned the importance of being financially responsible and planning for the future. I
have been saving as much as possible on a consistent basis. For example, putting earnings of 10-20% into
savings each month, while my checking is for simple expenditures such as one or two nights out to eat a
week with friends while I use my college meal plan for most food every day. If you are having difficulty
understanding financial literacy, do not hesitate to seek out help from other friends, workshops offered by
the college, or even professors. By taking a proactive approach to managing your finances, you can set
yourself up for success and achieve your financial goals. I have learned the value of money, and understand
236 8 · Understanding Financial Literacy

how to allocate and use my resources to my advantage. With experiences and mistakes, comes a fixed
mindset and change. Do not be afraid to take risks, but understand fully what you are giving up to get it."

--Ethan Marbaise, junior

8.4 Paying for College

                                          Estimated completion time: 35 minutes.

Questions to Consider:

  · What choices should you consider when taking on student debt?
  · How do you match debt to postgraduate income?
  · What types of financial aid are available?
  · How do you apply for financial aid?
  · What are the best repayment strategies?

      "An investment in knowledge always pays the best interest."

     --Benjamin Franklin, The Way to Wealth: Ben Franklin on Money and Success

As you progress through your college experience, the cost of college can add up rapidly. Worse, your anxiety
about the cost of college may rise faster as you hear about the rising costs of college and the horror stories
regarding the "student loan crisis." It is important to remember that you are in control of your choices and the
cost of your college experience, and you do not have to be a sad statistic.

Education Choices

Education is vital to living. Education starts at the beginning of our life, and as we grow, we learn language,
sharing, and to look both ways before crossing the street. We also generally pursue a secular or public
education that often ends at high school graduation. After that, we have many choices, including getting a job
and stopping our education, working at a trade or business started by our parents and bypassing additional
schooling, earning a certificate from a community college or four-year college or university, earning a two-year
or associate degree from one of the same schools, and completing a bachelor's or advanced degree at a
college or university. We can choose to attend a public or private school. We can live at home or on a campus.

Each of these choices impacts our debt, happiness, and earning power. The average income goes up with an
increase in education, but that is not an absolute rule. The New York Federal Reserve Bank reported in 2017
that approximately 34 percent of college graduates worked in a job that did not require a college degree10 . Of
course, many well-paying occupations do require a bachelor's or master's degree. You have started on a path
that may be perfect for you, but you may also choose to make adjustments.

College success from a financial perspective means that you must:

  · Know the total cost of the education
  · Consider job market trends
  · Work hard at school during the education
  · Pursue ways to reduce costs

Most importantly: Buy only the amount of education that returns more than you invest.

10 Cooper. P. (2017). "New York Fed highlights underemployment among college graduates." https://www.forbes.com/sites/
prestoncooper2/2017/07/13/new-york-fed-highlights-underemployment-among-college-graduates/#55be172f40d8

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   8.4 · Paying for College 237

According to US News & World Report, the average cost of college (including university) tuition and fees varies

widely. In-state colleges average $10,338 while out-of-state students pay $22,698 for the same state college.

Private colleges average $38,185 . The local community college averages approximately $3,726. On-campus
housing and meals, if available, can add approximately $10,000 per year.11 See the table below, and create

your own chart after you research.

                                      Sample College Costs

Type of School               Annual Tuition without  Tuition If Living on  Total Cost at Planned
                                        Housing              Campus               Completion

Community College (2 yr.) $3,726                     Live at Home          $7,452

Public University, In State  $9,716                  Live at Home          $38,864
(4 yr.)

Public University, In State                          $19,716               $78,864
(4 yr.)

Public University, Out of    $21,629                 $31,629               $126,516
State (4 yr.)

Private College (4 yr.)      $35,676                 $45,676               $182,704

Table 8.7

You may need to adjust your college plan as circumstances change for you and in the job market. You can
modify plans based on funding opportunities available to you (see next sections) and your location. You may
prefer a community-college-only education, or you may complete two years at a community college and then
transfer to a university to complete a bachelor's degree. Living at home for the first two years or all of your
college education will save a lot of money if your circumstances allow. Be creative!

Key to Success: Matching Student Debt to Post-Graduation Income

Students and parents often ask, "How much debt should I have?" The problem is that the correct answer
depends on your personal situation. A big-firm attorney in a major city might make $120,000 in their first year
as a lawyer. Having $100,000 or even $200,000 in student debt in this situation may be reasonable. But a high
school teacher making $40,000 in their first year would never be able to pay off the debt.

The amount of student debt you take on should be tied to the income you expect.

11 Kerr, E. and Wood, S. (2019). "The cost of private versus public colleges." US News and World Reports. https://www.usnews.com/
education/best-colleges/paying-for-college/articles/2019-06-25/the-cost-of-private-vs-public-colleges
238 8 · Understanding Financial Literacy

         Figure 8.5 Each field of employment brings with it an average income and assumed debt. This graph shows the impact of an
         attorney's income versus debt, and then compares a teacher who took a $100,000 loan with one who took a $30,000 loan. Note the
         teacher's income is the same in both cases. (Credit: Based on information from National Association of Colleges and Employers and
         US Bureau of Labor Statistics.)

      Research Your Starting Salary

       Begin by researching your expected starting salary when you graduate. Most students expect to make
       significantly more than they will actually make.12 As a result, your salary expectations are likely much higher
       than reality. Ask professors at your college what is typical for a recent graduate in your field, or do
       informational interviews with human resource managers at local companies. Explore the US Bureau of Labor
       Statistics' Occupational Outlook Handbook (https://openstax.org/l/OOH). Another handy tool that gives
       general information based on your personal experience and location is the PayScale (https://openstax.org/l/
       salariesbyoccupation). Search websites and talk to employees of companies that interest you for future
       employment to identify real starting salaries.

      Undergraduate Degree: 1 x Annual Salary

       For students working toward a bachelor's or associate degree, or both forms of undergraduate degrees, you
       should try to keep your student loans equal to or less than your expected first year's salary. So if, based on
       research, you expect to make $40,000 in your first year out of college, then $33,000 in student loans would be
       a reasonable amount for you to pay out of a monthly budget with some sacrifice.

      Advanced Degrees: 1-2 x Annual Salary

       Once you've graduated with your bachelor's degree, you may want to get an advanced degree such as a
       master's degree, a law degree, a medical degree, or a doctorate. While these degrees can greatly increase your
       income, you still need to match your student debt to your expected income. Advanced degrees can often
       double your expected annual salary, meaning your total debt for all your degrees should be equal to or less
       than twice your expected first job income. A lower number for the debt portion of your education would be
       more manageable.
       Your goal should be to pay for college using multiple methods so your student loan debt can be as small as
       possible, rather than just making low monthly payments on a large loan that will lead to a higher overall cost.

         12 Hess, Abigail. "College Grades expect to earn $60,000." 2019. CNBC. https://www.cnbc.com/2019/02/15/college-grads-expect-to-
         earn-60000-in-their-first-jobfew-do.html

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                       8.4 · Paying for College 239

Types of Financial Aid: How to Pay for College

The true cost of college may be more than you expected, but you can make an effort to make the cost less
than many might think. While the price tag for a school might say $40,000, the net cost of college may be
significantly less. The net price for a college is the true cost a family will pay when grants, scholarships, and
education tax benefits are factored in. The net cost for the average family at a public in-state school is only
$3,980. And for a private school, free financial aid money reduces the cost to the average family from $32,410
per year to just $14,890.

If you haven't visited your college's financial aid office recently, it's probably worth it to talk with them. You
must seek out opportunities, complete paperwork, and learn about then meet the specific criteria, but it can
save you thousands of dollars.

Type of College            Average Published Yearly Tuition and Fees

Public Two-Year College (in-district students) $3,900

Public Four-Year College (in-state students) $9,400

Private Four-Year College  $37,600

Table 8.8 Source: National Center for Education Statistics (https://nces.ed.gov/fastfacts/display.asp?id=76)

Grants and Scholarships

Grants and scholarships are free money you can use to pay for college. Unlike loans, you never have to pay
back a grant or a scholarship. All you have to do is go to school. And you don't have to be a straight-A student
to get grants and scholarships. There is so much free money, in fact, that billions of dollars go unclaimed every
year.13

While some grants and scholarships are based on a student's academic record, many are given to average
students based on their major, ethnic background, gender, religion, or other factors. There are likely dozens or
hundreds of scholarships and grants available to you personally if you look for them.

Federal Grants

Federal Pell Grants are awarded to students based on financial need, although there is no income or wealth
limit on the grant program. The Pell Grant can give you more than $6,000 per year in free money toward
tuition, fees, and living expenses.14 If you qualify for a Pell Grant based on your financial need, you will
automatically get the money.

Federal Supplemental Educational Opportunity Grants (FSEOGs) are additional free money available to
students with financial need. Through the FSEOG program, you can receive up to an additional $4,000 in free
money. These grants are distributed through your school's financial aid department on a first-come, first-
served basis, so pay close attention to deadlines.

Teacher Education Assistance for College and Higher Education (TEACH) Grants are designed to help
students who plan to go into the teaching profession. You can receive up to $4,000 per year through the
TEACH Grant. To be eligible for a TEACH Grant, you must take specific classes and majors and must hold a
qualifying teaching job for at least four years after graduation. If you do not fulfill these obligations, your
TEACH Grant will be converted to a loan, which you will have to pay back with both interest and back interest.

There are numerous other grants available through individual states, employers, colleges, and private

13 https://www.usatoday.com/story/college/2015/01/20/29-billion-unused-federal-grant-awards-in-last-academic-year/37399897/
14 https://studentaid.ed.gov/sa/types/grants-scholarships/pell
240 8 · Understanding Financial Literacy

       organizations.
       State Grants
       Most states also have grant programs for their residents, often based on financial need. Eleven states have
       even implemented free college tuition programs for residents who plan to continue to live in the state. Even
       some medical schools are beginning to be tuition free. Check your school's financial aid office and your state's
       department of education for details.
       College/University Grants and Scholarships
       Most colleges and universities have their own scholarships and grants. These are distributed through a wide
       variety of sources, including the school's financial aid office, the school's endowment fund, individual
       departments, and clubs on campus.
       Private Organization Grants and Scholarships
       A wide variety of grants and scholarships are awarded by foundations, civic groups, companies, religious
       groups, professional organizations, and charities. Most are small awards under $4,000, but multiple awards
       can add up to large amounts of money each year. Your financial aid office can help you find these
       opportunities.
       Employer Grants and Scholarships
       Many employers also offer free money to help employees go to school. A common work benefit is a tuition
       reimbursement program, where employers will pay students extra money to cover the cost of tuition once
       they've earned a passing grade in a college class. And some companies are going even further, offering to pay
       100 percent of college costs for employees. Check to see whether your employer offers any kind of educational
       support.

         Figure 8.6 Employers in certain fields, such as healthcare, may offer their own grants and scholarships. (Credit: Ano Lobb / Flickr /
         Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC-BY 2.0))

      Additional Federal Support

       The federal government offers a handful of additional options for college students to find financial support.
       Education Tax Credits
       The IRS gives out free money to students and their parents through two tax credits, although you will have to
       choose between them. The American opportunity tax credit (AOTC) will refund up to $2,500 of qualifying
       education expenses per eligible student, while the lifetime learning credit (LLC) refunds up to $2,000 per year
       regardless of the number of qualifying students.

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          8.4 · Paying for College 241

While the AOTC may be a better tax credit to choose for some, it can only be claimed for four years for each
student, and it has other limitations. The LLC has fewer limitations, and there is no limit on the number of
years you can claim it. Lifetime learners and nontraditional students may consider the LLC a better choice.
Calculate the benefits for your situation.

The IRS warns taxpayers to be careful when claiming the credits. There are potential penalties for incorrectly
claiming the credits, and you or your family should consult a tax professional or financial adviser when
claiming these credits.

Federal Work-Study Program

The Federal Work-Study Program provides part-time jobs through colleges and universities to students who
are enrolled in the school. The program offers students the opportunity to work in their field, for their school,
or for a nonprofit or civic organization to help pay for the cost of college. If your school participates in the
program, it will be offered through your school's financial aid office.

Student Loans

Federal student loans are offered through the US Department of Education and are designed to give easy and
inexpensive access to loans for school. You don't have to make payments on the loans while you are in school,
and the interest on the loans is tax deductible for most people. Direct Loans, also called Federal Stafford
Loans, have a competitive fixed interest rate and don't require a credit check or cosigner.

Direct Subsidized Loans

Direct Subsidized Loans are federal student loans on which the government pays the interest while you are in
school. Direct Subsidized Loans are made based on financial need as calculated from the information you
provide in your application. Qualifying students can get up to $3,500 in subsidized loans in their first year,
$4,500 in their second year, and $5,500 in later years of their college education.

Direct Unsubsidized Loans

Direct Unsubsidized Loans are federal loans on which you are charged interest while you are in school. If you
don't make interest payments while in school, the interest will be added to the loan amount each year and will
result in a larger student loan balance when you graduate. The amount you can borrow each year depends on
numerous factors, with a maximum of $12,500 annually for undergraduates and $20,500 annually for
professional or graduate students.

There are also total loan limits that apply to put a maximum cap on the total amount you can borrow for
student loans.

Direct PLUS Loans

Direct PLUS Loans are additional loans a parent, grandparent, or graduate student can take out to help pay for
additional costs of college. PLUS loans require a credit check and have higher interest rates, but the interest is
still tax deductible. The maximum PLUS loan you can receive is the remaining cost of attending the school.

Parents and other family members should be careful when taking out PLUS loans on behalf of a child. Whoever
is on the loan is responsible for the loan forever, and the loan generally cannot be forgiven in bankruptcy. The
government can also take Social Security benefits should the loan not be repaid.

Private Loans

Private loans are also available for students who need them from banks, credit unions, private investors, and
even predatory lenders. But with all the other resources for paying for college, a private loan is generally
unnecessary and unwise. Private loans will require a credit check and potentially a cosigner, they will likely
have higher interest rates, and the interest is not tax deductible. As a general rule, you should be wary of
private student loans or avoid them altogether.
242 8 · Understanding Financial Literacy

     Repayment Strategies

       Payments on student loans will begin shortly after you graduate. While many websites, financial "gurus," and
       talking heads in the media will encourage you to pay off your student loans as quickly as possible, you should
       give careful consideration to your repayment options and how they may impact your financial plans. Quickly
       paying off your student loans or refinancing your student loans into a private loan may be the worst option
       available to you.

      Payment Plans

       The federal government has eight separate loan repayment programs, each with their own way of calculating
       the payment you owe. Five of the programs tie loan payments to your income, which can make it easier to
       afford your student loans when you are just starting off in your career. The programs are described briefly
       below, but you should seek the help of a licensed fiduciary financial adviser familiar with student loans when
       making decisions related to student loan payment plans.

       The standard repayment plan sets a consistent monthly payment to pay off your loan within 10 years (or up to
       30 years for consolidated loans). You can also choose a graduated repayment plan, which will begin with lower
       payments and then increase the payment every two years. The graduated plan is also designed to pay off your
       student loans in 10 years (or up to 30 years for consolidated loans). A third option is the extended repayment
       plan, which provides a fixed or graduated payment for up to 25 years. However, none of these programs are
       ideal for individuals planning to seek loan forgiveness options, which are discussed below.

       Beyond the "normal" repayment options, the government offers five income-based repayment options: (1) the
       Pay As You Earn (PAYE) repayment plan, (2) the Revised Pay As You Earn (REPAYE) repayment plan, (3) the
       Income-Based Repayment (IBR) plan, (4) the Income-Contingent Repayment (ICR) plan, and (5) the Income-
       Sensitive Repayment (ISR) plan. Each program has its method of calculating payments, along with specific
       requirements for eligibility and rules for staying eligible in the program. Many income-based repayment plans
       are also eligible for loan forgiveness after a set period of time, assuming you follow all the rules and remain
       eligible.

      Loan Forgiveness Programs

       Many income-based repayment options also have a loan forgiveness feature built into the repayment plan. If
       you make 100 percent of your payments on time and follow all of the other plan rules, any remaining loan
       balance at the end of the plan repayment term (typically 20 to 30 years) will be forgiven. This means you will
       not have to pay the remainder on your student loans.

       This loan forgiveness, however, comes with a catch: taxes. Any forgiven balance will be counted and taxed as
       income during that year. So if you have a $100,000 loan forgiven, you could be looking at an additional $20,000
       tax bill that year (assuming you were in the 20 percent marginal tax rate).

       Another option is the Public Service Loan Forgiveness (PSLF) program for students who go on to work for a
       nonprofit or government organization. If eligible, you can have your loans forgiven after working for 10 years
       in a qualifying public service job and making 120 on-time payments on your loans. A major advantage of PSLF
       is that the loan forgiveness may not be taxed as income in the year the loan is forgiven.

       Consider Professional Advice

       The complexity of the payment and forgiveness programs makes it difficult for non-experts to choose the best
       strategy to minimize costs. Additionally, the strict rules and potential tax implications create a minefield of
       potential financial problems. In 2017, the first year graduates were eligible for the PSLF program, 99 percent of
       applicants were denied due to misunderstanding the programs or having broken one of the many
       requirements for eligibility.15

         15 https://www.forbes.com/sites/zackfriedman/2019/05/01/99-of-borrowers-rejected-again-for-student-loan-forgiveness/

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          8.4 · Paying for College 243

Your Rights as a Loan Recipient

As a recipient of a federal student loan, you have the same rights and protections as you would for any other
loan. This includes the right to know the terms and conditions for any loan before signing the paperwork. You
also have the right to know information on your credit report and to dispute any loan or information on your
credit file.

If you end up in collections, you also have several rights, even though you have missed loan payments. Debt
collectors can only call you between 8 a.m. and 9 p.m. They also cannot harass you, threaten you, or call you at
work once you've told them to stop. The United States doesn't have debtors' prisons, so anyone threatening
you with arrest or jail time is automatically breaking the law.

Federal student loans also come with many other rights, including the right to put your loan in deferment or
forbearance (pushing pause on making payments) under qualifying circumstances. Deferment or forbearance
can be granted if you lose your job, go back to school, or have an economic hardship. If you have a life event
that makes it difficult to make your payments, immediately contact the student loan servicing company on
your loan statements to see if you can pause your student loan payments.

The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) has created a series of sample letters (https://openstax.org/
l/debtcollectors) you can use to respond to a debt collector. You can also file a complaint (https://openstax.org/
l/consumercomplaint) with the CFPB if you believe your rights have been violated.

Applying for Financial Aid, FAFSA, and Everything Else

The federal government offers a standard form called the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA),
which qualifies you for federal financial aid and also opens the door for nearly all other financial aid. Most
grants and scholarships require you to fill out the FAFSA, and they base their decisions on the information in
the application.

The FAFSA only requests financial aid for the specific year you file your application. This means you will need to
file a FAFSA for each year you are in college. Since your financial needs will change over time, you may qualify
for financial aid even if you did not qualify before.

You can apply for the FAFSA through your college's financial aid office or at studentaid.gov
(https://openstax.org/l/fafsa) if you don't have access to a financial aid office. Once you file a FAFSA, any
college can gain access to the information (with your approval), so you can shop around for financial aid offers
from colleges.

Maintaining Financial Aid

To maintain your financial aid throughout your college career, you need to make sure you meet the eligibility
requirements for each year you are in school, not just the year of your initial application. The basic
requirements include being a US citizen or eligible noncitizen, having a valid Social Security number, and
registering for selective service if required. Undocumented residents may receive financial aid as well and
should check with their school's financial aid office.

You also must make satisfactory academic progress, including meeting a minimum grade-point average,
taking and completing a minimum number of classes, and making progress toward graduation or a certificate.
Your school will have a policy for satisfactory academic progress, which you can get from the financial aid
office.
244 8 · Understanding Financial Literacy

      What to Do with Extra Financial Aid Money

       One expensive mistake that students make with financial aid money is spending the money on non-education
       expenses. Students often use financial aid, including student loans, to purchase clothing, take vacations, or
       dine out at restaurants. Nearly 3 percent spend student loan money on alcohol and drugs.16 These non-
       education expenses are major contributors to student loan debt, which will make it harder for you to afford a
       home, take vacations, or save for your retirement after you graduate.
       When you have extra student loan money, consider saving it for future education expenses. Just like you will
       need an emergency fund all your adult life, you will want an emergency fund for college when expensive
       books or travel abroad programs present unexpected costs. If you make it through your college years with
       extra money in your savings, you can use the money to help pay down debt.

        ANALYSIS QUESTION

         A closer look: How much student loan debt do you currently have, and how much do you think you'll have
         by the end of college? How could this debt impact your future?

         16 https://studentloanhero.com/featured/smart-dumb-money-moves-students/
         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                           8 · Family & Friends Matter 245

    Family & Friends Matter

Ana has several ideas for what to major in and because she has had to take out student loans to cover the
costs of college, she is worried about getting a job after graduation that pays enough for her to afford the
monthly loan payments. Fortunately, she has met with her financial aid advisor who has provided her with a
few options that could help her cover her costs for the remainder of her time in college.

One of her options is to major in education and become a middle school science teacher. She likes this option
because she loves science and working with young people. She finds out that her state has a student grant
program for teachers in STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) fields who agree to teach
for five years in a rural part of the state, a place that is several hours from Ana's hometown. The program
provides grants to cover the remaining costs of a degree for the promise of the graduate's teaching in the
designated district for the entire 5 years. However, the program requires that Ana commit to the major now,
complete the degree, and sign on for at least 5 years of teaching service. If she breaks any part of the
requirements, the grants will turn into loans that she will owe the state.

While Ana is excited by the opportunity to earn grant money, she is concerned about being so far away from
her family for that long and the commitment to the degree and length of service. Her family still relies on her
and had planned for her to be close to them after graduation. While this is not the only option that Ana has for
covering the costs of her education, it is the most promising one. The others are scholarships and internships
that are highly competitive, and Ana is not confident that she has the grades or the experiences to compete
with other more accomplished or needy students.

Let's Think About It

Ana has several options. Think through the consequences of each one, and choose the best option or create
your own option.

  · Ana majors in education and applies for the grant program even if it means being away from her family
      for an extended time and carries the possibility the grants will become loans if she doesn't fulfill the
      commitment.

  · Ana chooses to apply for the scholarships and internships only.
  · Ana applies for the grant program and will wait until after she graduates to decide if she wants to

      maintain the commitment.

Let's Talk About It

Ana's situation sounds as if it can help her get the financial support she needs, but it comes with a long-term
commitment that she and her family may not be ready for. She will need to think about the pros and cons of
any of her next steps and communicate what she is thinking to her family. Here are some suggestions for
communicating with others about the dilemma that Ana is facing:

  · "I have an opportunity to get grants to cover my educational costs, but it comes with a big commitment.
      Can we talk about how this decision may affect all of us now and in the future?"

  · "I have explored different options for paying for college, and this one seems to be the best one. Can you
      help me talk through the others to see if there is anything else I need to consider?"

  · "I have to admit I am nervous about locking myself into such a commitment even though I know the grant
      money is much needed for me to continue my degree with less stress. Can I share with you what I am
      feeling and why?"

Whatever choice you would make in this situation, it is always best to communicate clearly your needs, your
concerns, and even your uncertainties.
246 8 · Summary

    Summary

There are a lot of benefits to good financial management. Primarily, it generally allows you to do more of what
you want with your life. When you have poor financial habits, too much of your money goes into other people's
pockets. But when you have good financial management habits, you can afford to do more because you have
worked hard, separated needs from wants, saved and invested, and avoided credit card and debt pitfalls.
However, financial literacy is a topic that many college students struggle with, but good financial planning
habits will benefit you long after your college days are behind you. To make the most of what you have learned
about financial literacy, specifically student debt and strategies for managing your finances in college, consider
what else you would like to work on. Choose one of the following to explore further this term:

  · Create a budget with your expenses and income. Look for ways to eliminate unnecessary spending and
      increase your ability to pay for your college expenses.

  · Research college grants, scholarships, and loans and create a list of potential opportunities that you can
      take now and in the future to help you cover your costs while in college. Rank your options.

  · Develop an emergency fund and guidelines for when to use it.
  · Research the best credit card options for you at this time.

    Checking In: Your College Readiness Checklist

Summer

                                                                       9th Grade

                   Consider if you'll need help with your college search. If you think you might need some
                   outside support, start your research on college counselors now. Ask for recommendations from
                   friends or look for consultants who belong to a professional organization, like the Independent
                   Educational Consultants Association.

                   Take some free classes. Online, you can find thousands of free classes that let you explore
                   your interest in everything from the financial markets to content marketing to international
                   women's health and human rights. Many are taught by professors from colleges like Duke,
                   Stanford, and Harvard.

                   Do some summer reading. You might have required summer reading, but don't forget to read
                   for fun, too! For each book, write in your college binder the title, the author, and a few
                   sentences about what you liked about the book -- you might need this for college applications!

                   Keep busy. Get a job. Start a business. Volunteer in your community. Try a new hobby. Don't
                   let the summer pass without doing something to help others or explore your interests.

Table 8.9

Access for free at openstax.org
            8 · Checking In: Your College Readiness Checklist 247

                                                               10th Grade

            Put upcoming college fairs on your calendar. Now is the time to start creating and refining
            your college list. Attend in-person college fairs that are offered locally. Can't find any? You'll find
            plenty of virtual opportunities.

            Do a social media audit. Go through your Facebook, Instagram, TikTok, and other social media
            accounts and ensure there's nothing posted you wouldn't want colleges or coaches to see.

            Identify what you want from your college experience. As you're narrowing your college list,
            it helps to know what you're looking for. This quick survey from Corsava (https://corsava.com/
            for-students) helps you identify your preferences and find college fits.

            Talk with college students who are home for the summer or recent college graduates.
            Find out what they like about the school they chose -- and what they don't. What would they
            have done differently?

Table 8.10

                                                               11th Grade

            Add application and school-specific deadlines to your calendar. Then take time to
            periodically review them. Application, scholarship, and honors college deadlines will vary from
            school to school, and you don't want to miss even one!

            Start brainstorming, outlining, and writing your personal statement. Google examples of
            personal statements, read about what colleges expect from the essay, then start writing.
            Supplemental essay prompts will be released later in the summer, so you can wait to write
            those. Don't forget to proofread your essays before you submit them.

            Explore college alternatives. Not every student is ready, willing, and able to attend college
            upon graduation. If this describes you, consider some of the great alternatives to a traditional
            four-year college, like community college, trade schools, or other specialized programs.

            Finalize your college list with your parents. Make sure your list meets your and your family's
            criteria in terms of size, location, offerings, cost, and more. Don't forget to consider how
            potential scholarships, financial aid, merit, travel costs, and other factors will affect your total
            cost.

Table 8.11
248 8 · Checking In: Your College Readiness Checklist

                                                                      12th Grade
                   Complete to-do items for your freshman year. This includes signing up for (and attending)
                   orientation sessions, signing up for meal plans, meeting with your advisor to register for
                   classes, finding a roommate, and making travel arrangements.
                   Request copies of your final transcript a week or two after school lets out. Keep an
                   unofficial copy for yourself, and have your school send an official copy to your selected college.
                   Note: You must also send official transcripts from any local colleges from which you took dual
                   credit classes.
                   Get prepared for independent living. Soon, you'll be navigating life more independently --
                   like doing laundry, cooking, advocating for yourself, managing your health care, and taking
                   care of finances. Work with your parents this summer to make sure you're ready.
                   Have fun. You've worked hard to get to this point, and now it's time to take advantage of every
                   opportunity your home for the next four years will give you. Congratulations!

Table 8.12

Access for free at openstax.org
9 · Introduction                                                                                               249

9
           Planning Your Future

Figure 9.1 (Credit: University of the Fraser Valley / Flickr / Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC-BY 2.0))

Chapter Outline

  9.1 Setting Goals and Staying Motivated
  9.2 Planning Your Degree Path
  9.3 Making a Plan
  9.4 Using the Career Planning Cycle

      Introduction

 STUDENT STORY

  Michael entered college wanting to become a physical therapist, but he has had difficulty earning good
  grades in his math and science courses. He knows that graduate school--a requirement for his career
  pathway--is competitive and his GPA currently needs to be greatly improved if he wants to have a chance of
  getting in.
  This semester he is taking a history course and finds himself excited to do the work and attend class. The
  way the professor leads the discussion--and the readings she has selected--make Michael want to learn all
  he can. He has never felt this way in any class and is surprised by his deep interest.
  When he calls his family to share how college is going, he mentions that he really likes his history course
  and that the professor has encouraged him to take more courses in the department. His parents express
  some concern that he may change his major--and his career pathway--to history or something else that
  would keep him from a solid, high-paying career in health care.
  Michael is not sure what to think after the conversation. He is beginning to question whether physical
  therapy is the right major for him--it is certainly more challenging than he anticipated--and whether there
  is something else he wants to explore.
250 9 · Planning Your Future

         However, he is not sure if history is just an interesting side venture or if it is something he seriously wants to
         pursue. He is also concerned about what he would do after graduation if he were to change his major so
         drastically. Would it be better to find another pathway within healthcare even if it is not physical therapy?
         Michael is not sure what he should do.
         What Do You Think?

           · If you were Michael, what would you have thought when you realized you prefer a different major or
               career pathway than what you originally thought you would do?

           · How would you have handled the reaction from your family?
           · What could you do to get a better idea of what you really want to study or do after graduation?
           · How do you feel about planning a degree or choosing a career pathway? Why do you feel this way?

     Student Survey

       How do you feel about your readiness to create an academic and life plan? These questions will help you
       determine how the chapter concepts relate to you right now. As you are introduced to new concepts and
       practices, it can be informative to reflect on how your understanding changes over time. Take this quick survey
       to figure it out, ranking questions on a scale of 1--4, 1 meaning "least like me" and 4 meaning "most like me."
        1. I know why I want to go to college and what I want to accomplish.
        2. I have set both short- and long-term academic goals.
        3. I am familiar with the requirements I must complete and options I must select to obtain a college degree.
        4. I am familiar with the resources, tools, and individuals who can assist me in developing an effective plan

             for success.
       You can also take the Chapter 9 survey (https://openstax.org/l/collegeconcisesurvey08) anonymously online.

        STUDENT PROFILE

         "I came into my university with little to no knowledge about how to decide a college major. I can now say
         with confidence that I have found the major for me! This was not an easy process though. It takes a lot of
         reflection to decide where you will focus your time and energy for your college career. The most important
         thing I had to consider was what major would provide me with learning outcomes that matter the most to
         me. I switched my major three or four times and each time I weighed the pros and cons of the major I was
         exiting and the one I was transitioning into. I decided to major in sociology and it has been the best
         decision of my academic career! I value social awareness and deep understandings of social phenomenon
         and sociology provided the course material necessary to place me on a path to begin learning about those
         topics. As a first-generation and low-income student, navigating college pathways can be difficult. That is
         why it is so important to be open to change and set on learning what you want, to learn how to get yourself
         to the next step!"
         --Drew Carter, Rice University

     About This Chapter

       Among the most celebrated differences between high school and college is the freedom that students look
       forward to when they complete their mandatory high school education and take up the voluntary pursuit of a
       college degree. Though not every college freshman comes fresh from high school, those who do might be
       looking forward to the freedom of moving away from home onto a campus or into an apartment. Others
       might be excited about the potential to sleep in on a Monday morning and take their classes in the afternoon.

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                              9.1 · Setting Goals and Staying Motivated 251

For others, balancing a class schedule with an already-busy life filled with work and other responsibilities may
make college seem less like freedom and more like obligation. In any case, and however they might imagine
their next experience to be, students can anticipate increased freedom of choice in college and the ability to
begin to piece together how their values, interests, and developing knowledge and skills will unfold into a
career that meets their goals and dreams.

By the time you complete this chapter, you should be able to do the following:

  · Learn to set short-term goals that build toward a long- term goal, and plan how you will track progress
      toward your goals.

  · List the types of college certificates, degrees, special programs, and majors you can pursue, as well as
      general details about their related opportunities and requirements.

  · Take advantage of resources to draft and track an academic plan.
  · Recognize decision-making and planning as continuous processes, especially in response to unexpected

      change.

 9.1 Setting Goals and Staying Motivated

                                                                                                  Estimated completion time: 11 minutes.

Questions to Consider:

  · How do I set motivational goals?
  · What are SMART goals?
  · What's the importance of an action plan?
  · How do I keep to my plan?

Motivation often means the difference between success and failure. That applies to school, to specific tasks,
and to life in general. One of the most effective ways to keep motivated is to set goals.

Goals can be big or small. A goal can range from I am going to write one extra page tonight, to I am going to
work to get an A in this course, all the way to I am going to graduate in the top of my class so I can start my
career with a really good position. The great thing about goals is that they can include and influence a number
of other things that all work toward a much bigger picture. For example, if your goal is to get an A in a certain
course, all the reading, studying, and every assignment you do for that course contributes to the larger goal.
You have motivation to do each of those things and to do them well.

Setting goals is something that is frequently talked about, but it is often treated as something abstract. Like
time management, goal setting is best done with careful thought and planning. This next section will explain
how you can apply tested techniques to goal setting and what the benefits of each can be.

Set Goals That Motivate You

The first thing to know about goal setting is that a goal is a specific end result you desire. If the goal is not
something you are really interested in, there is little motivational drive to achieve it. Think back to when you
were much younger and some well-meaning adult set a goal for you--something that didn't really appeal to
you at all. How motivated were you to achieve the goal? More than likely, if you were successful at all in
meeting the goal, it was because you were motivated by earning the approval of someone or receiving a
possible reward, or you were concerned with avoiding something adverse that might happen if you did not do
what you were told. From an honest perspective in that situation, your real goal was based on something else,
not the meeting of the goal set for you. To get the most from the goals you set, make sure they are things that
you are interested in achieving.
252 9 · Planning Your Future

That is not to say you shouldn't set goals that are supported by other motivations (e.g., If I finish studying by
Friday, I can go out on Saturday), but the idea is to be intellectually honest with your goals.

Set SMART Goals

Goals should also be SMART. In this case, the word smart is not only a clever description of the type of goal,
but it is also an acronym that stands for Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Relevant, and Time-bound. The
reason these are all desirable traits for your goals is because they not only help you plan how to meet the goal,
but they can also contribute to your decision-making processes during the planning stage.

What does it mean to create SMART goals?

  · Specific--For a goal to be specific, it must be defined enough to actually determine the goal. A goal of get
     a good job when I graduate is too general. It doesn't define what a good job is. In fact, it doesn't even
     necessarily include a job in your chosen profession. A more specific goal would be something like be hired
     as a nurse in a place of employment where it is enjoyable to work and that has room for promotion.

  · Measurable--The concept of measurable is one that is often overlooked when setting goals. What this
      means is that the goal should have clearly defined outcomes that are detailed enough to measure and can
     be used for planning of how you will achieve the goal. For example, setting a goal of doing well in school is
     a bit undefined, but making a goal of graduating with a GPA above 3.0 is measurable and something you
      can work with. If your goal is measurable, you can know ahead of time how many points you will have to
      earn on a specific assignment to stay in that range or how many points you will need to make up in the
      next assignment if you do not do as well as you planned.

  · Attainable--Attainable or achievable goals means they are reasonable and within your ability to
     accomplish. While a goal of make an extra one million dollars by the end of the week is something that
      would be nice to achieve, the odds that you could make that happen in a single week are not very realistic.

  · Relevant--For goal setting, relevant means it applies to the situation. In relation to college, a goal of
     getting a horse to ride is not very relevant, but getting dependable transportation is something that would
      contribute to your success in school.

  · Time-bound--Time-bound means you set a specific time frame to achieve the goal. I will get my paper
     written by Wednesday is time-bound. You know when you have to meet the goal. I will get my paper
     written sometime soon does not help you plan how and when you will accomplish the goal.

In the following table you can see some examples of goals that do and do not follow the SMART system. As you
read each one, think about what elements make them SMART or how you might change those that are not.

           Goal                     Is it
                                 SMART?

I am going to be rich No There is nothing really specific, measurable, or time-bound in this
someday.                                   goal.

I will graduate with my Yes                The statement calls out specific, measurable, and time-bound
degree, on time.                           details. The other attributes of attainable and relevant are
                                           implied.

I am going to save

enough money to buy a            Yes       All SMART attributes are covered in this goal.

newer car by June.

Table 9.1

Access for free at openstax.org
                                      9.1 · Setting Goals and Staying Motivated 253

           Goal                Is it
                            SMART?

I would like to do well in            While this is clearly time-bound and meets most of the SMART
                                      goal attributes, it is not specific or measurable without defining
all my courses next         No        what "do well" means.

semester.

I am going to start being a No        While most of the SMART attributes are implied, there is nothing
nicer person.                         really measurable in this goal.

I will earn at least a 3.0            All of the SMART attributes are present in this goal.
GPA in all my courses next Yes
semester.

I am going to start being No          While most of the SMART attributes are implied, there is nothing
more organized.                       really measurable in this goal.

Table 9.1

Long-Term Goals

Once you have learned how to set goals that are specific and measurable, consider developing both long-term
and short-term goals. Long-term goals are future goals that often take years to complete. An example of a
long-term goal might be to complete a Bachelor of Arts degree within four years. Another example might be
purchasing a home or running a marathon. While this chapter focuses on academic and career planning, long-
term goals are not exclusive to these areas of your life. You might set long-term goals related to fitness,
wellness, spirituality, and relationships, among many others. When you set a long-term goal in any aspect of
your life, you are demonstrating a commitment to dedicate time and effort toward making progress in that
area. Because of this commitment, it is important that your long-term goals are aligned with your values.

Short-Term Goals

Setting short-term goals helps you consider the necessary steps you'll need to take, but it also helps to chunk a
larger effort into smaller, more manageable tasks. Even when your long-term goals are SMART, it's easier to
stay focused and you'll become less overwhelmed in the process of completing short-term goals.

You might assume that short-term and long-term goals are different goals that vary in the length of time they
take to complete. Given this assumption, you might give the example of a long-term goal of learning how to
create an app and a short-term goal of remembering to pay your cell phone bill this weekend. These are valid
goals, but they don't exactly demonstrate the intention of short- and long-term goals for the purposes of
effective planning.

Instead of just being bound by the difference of time, short-term goals are the action steps that take less time
to complete than a long-term goal, but that help you work toward your long-term goals. To determine your
best degree option, it might make sense to do some research to determine what kind of career you're most
interested in pursuing. Or, if you recall that short-term goal of paying your cell phone bill this weekend,
perhaps this short-term goal is related to a longer-term goal of learning how to better manage your budgeting
and finances.

Setting Long- and Short-Term Goals

Consider this scenario: While meeting with an academic advisor at his college to discuss his change of major,
Sunil was tasked with setting long- and short-term goals aligned with that major. He selected a degree plan in
254 9 · Planning Your Future

       business administration, sharing with his advisor his intention to work in business and hopefully human
       relations in particular. His advisor discussed with him how he could set short-term goals that would help his
       progress on that plan. Sunil wondered if he should be as specific as setting short-term goals week by week or
       for the successful completion of every homework assignment or exam. His advisor shared that he could
       certainly break his goals down into that level of specificity if it helped him to stay focused, but recommended
       that he start by outlining how many credits or courses he would hope to complete. Sunil drafted his goals and
       planned to meet again with his advisor in another week to discuss.

                                             Figure 9.2 Sunil drafted his goals before meeting with his advisor to discuss them.

       Sunil worried that his list of short-term goals looked more like a checklist of tasks than anything. His advisor
       reassured him, sharing that short-term goals can absolutely look like a checklist of tasks because their
       purpose is to break the long-term goal down into manageable chunks that are easier to focus on and
       complete. His advisor then recommended that Sunil add to his plan an additional note at the end of every
       other semester to "check in" with his advisor to make certain that he was on track.

      Planning for Adjustments

       You will recall from the SMART goals goal-setting model that goals should be both measurable and attainable.
       Far too often, however, we set goals with the best of intentions but then fail to keep track of our progress or
       adjust our short-term goals if they're not helping us to progress as quickly as we'd like. When setting goals, the
       most successful planners also consider when they will evaluate their progress. At that time, perhaps after each
       short-term goal should have been met, they may reflect on the following:
        1. Am I meeting my short-term goals as planned?

              If so, celebrate!
              If not, you may want to additionally consider:
        2. Are my short-term goals still planned across time in a way that they will meet my long-term goals?
              If so, continue on your path.

                 If not, reconsider the steps you need to take to meet your long-term goal. If you've gotten off track or if
                 you've learned that other steps must be taken, set new short-term goals with timelines appropriate to
                 each step. You may also want to seek some additional advice from others who have successfully met

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                              9.1 · Setting Goals and Staying Motivated 255

          long-term goals that are similar to your own.
3. Are my long-term goals still relevant, or have my values changed since I set my goals?

      If your goals are still relevant to your interests and values, then continue on your path, seeking advice
          and support as needed to stay on track.

      If your goals are no longer relevant or aligned with your values, give careful consideration to setting
          new goals.

While departing from your original goals may seem like a failure, taking the time to reflect on goals before you
set them aside to develop new ones is a success. Pivoting from one goal to new, better-fitting goal involves
increased self-awareness and increased knowledge about the processes surrounding your specific goal (such
as the details of a college transfer, for example). With careful reflection and information seeking, your change
in plans may even demonstrate learning and increased maturity!

 APPLICATION

  Take a moment to practice setting long- and short-term goals. Your short-term goal should help you
  progress toward your long-term goal. Include a plan for when and how you will know if you're on track or if
  you need to adjust your goals to match new priorities.

                                                    My Long-Term Goal:

                                                    My Short-Term Goal:

                                                    My Plan for Checking My Progress:

Keep in mind that values and goals may change over time as you meet new people, your life circumstances
change, and you gain more wisdom or self-awareness. In addition to setting goals and tracking your progress,
you should also periodically reflect on your goals to ensure their consistency with your values.
256 9 · Planning Your Future

         Figure 9.3 These seven ways to stay motivated are good suggestions from highly successful people. What other strategies would
         you suggest?

     9.2 Planning Your Degree Path

                                                                                                          Estimated completion time: 32 minutes.
       Questions to Consider:

         · What types of college degrees or certifications can I pursue?

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                             9.2 · Planning Your Degree Path 257

  · What is the difference between majors and minors?
  · How do preprofessional programs differ from other majors?
  · Do some majors have special requirements beyond regular coursework?

To set goals for your academic and career path, you must first have an understanding of the options available
for you to pursue and the requirements you will need to meet. The next section provides an overview of
academic programs and college degrees that are common among many colleges and universities in the United
States. Please note that each institution will have its own specific options and requirements, so the intention of
this section is both to help you understand your opportunities and to familiarize you with language that
colleges typically use to describe these opportunities. After reviewing this section, you should be better able to
formulate specific questions to ask at your school or be better prepared to navigate and search your own
college's website.

Types of Degrees

Whereas in most states high school attendance through the 12th grade is mandatory, or compulsory, a college
degree may be pursued voluntarily. There are fields that do not require a degree. Bookkeeping, computer
repair, massage therapy, and childcare are all fields where certification programs--tracks to study a specific
subject or career without need of a complete degree--may be enough.

However, many individuals will find that an associate or bachelor's degree is a requirement to enter their
desired career field. According to United States Census data published in 2017, more than one-third of the
adult population in the country has completed at least a bachelor's degree, so this may be the degree that is
most familiar to you.
258 9 · Planning Your Future

         Figure 9.4 The number of American's receiving Bachelor's degrees has increased significantly. While not every job requires one, the
         level of overall education required for most careers continues to go up. (Credit: US Department of Commerce / Public Domain)

       Not every job requires a bachelor's degree, and some require even higher degrees or additional specialized
       certifications. As you develop your academic plan, it is important to research your field of interest to see what
       requirements might be necessary or most desirable.

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                9.2 · Planning Your Degree Path 259

Require Associate  Require Bachelor's Degrees            Require Additional       Require Graduate
       Degrees                                              Certifications               Degrees

Radiology          Nurse                                 Public School Teacher  Lawyer
Technician
                                                                                College or University
Dental Hygienist   Computer/Information                  Accountant             Professor
                   Systems Manager
                                                                                Pharmacist
Web Developer      Airline Pilot                         Financial Advisor
                                                                                Marriage and Family
Graphic Designer   Electrical Engineer                                          Therapist

Automotive         Construction Manager                                         Occupational
Technician                                                                      Therapist

Table 9.2 Example Jobs by Minimum Degree Qualification1

To distinguish between the types of degrees, it is useful to understand that courses are often assigned a
number of credits, sometimes called semester hours as well. Credits relate to the calculated hours during a
course that a student spends interacting with the instructor and/or the course material through class time,
laboratory time, online discussions, homework, etc. Courses at all degree levels are typically assigned a value
of one to six credits, although students often need to complete a developmental education course or two,
often in English or math. These requirements, which cost as much as typical college courses but do not grant
college credit, are meant to provide some basic information students may have missed in high school but that
will be necessary to keep up in college-level coursework.

The minimum or maximum number of credits required to graduate with different degrees varies by state or
institution, but approximate minimum numbers of credits are explained below. Keep in mind that although a
minimum number of credits must be completed to get a certain degree, total credits completed is not the only
consideration for graduation--you must take your credits or courses in particular subjects indicated by your
college.

To determine your best degree option, it might make sense to do some research to determine what kind of
career you're most interested in pursuing. Visit your campus career center or guidance office to meet with a
counselor to guide you through this process. These services are free to students while they are enrolled in
school, but can be pricey if used outside a school setting, so take advantage. There are other tools online you
can investigate.

 GET CONNECTED

These free, online self-assessments help you narrow down your choices.

  · MyPlan (https://openstax.org/l/valuesassessment) identifies your motivations by having you rank
      different aspects of work, then creating a ranked list of different possible jobs.

  · MAPP Test (https://openstax.org/l/MAPPassessment) helps you determine what you love to do and
      what you don't love to do and then creates a list of jobs that might be a good fit for you.

1 Minimum degree qualifications may vary by state.
260 9 · Planning Your Future

           · The Career Cluster Interest Survey (https://openstax.org/l/clustersurvey) is a quick tool to let you create
               career clusters based on personal qualities and school subjects and activities you especially enjoy.

      Associate Degrees

       To enter an associate degree program, students must have a high school diploma or its equivalent. Associate
       degree programs may be intended to help students enter a technical career field, such as automotive
       technology, graphic design, or entry-level nursing in some states. Such technical programs may be considered
       an Associate of Applied Arts (AAA) or Associate of Applied Science (AAS) degrees, though there are other titles
       as well.
       Other associate degree programs are intended to prepare a student with the necessary coursework to transfer
       into a bachelor's degree program upon graduation. These transfer-focused programs usually require similar
       general education and foundational courses that a student would need in the first half of a bachelor's degree
       program. Transfer-focused associate degrees may be called Associate of Arts (AA) or Associate of Science (AS),
       or other titles, depending on the focus of study.

         Figure 9.5 Air traffic controllers are extremely important and well-paid jobs that typically require an associate degree. (Credit: Expert
         Infantry / Flickr / Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC-BY 2.0))

       An associate degree is typically awarded when a student has completed a minimum of 60 credits,
       approximately 20 courses, meeting the requirements of a specific degree. Some technical associate degrees,
       such as nursing, may require additional credits in order to meet requirements for special certifications. You
       may find that your college or university does not offer associate degrees. Most associate degrees are offered
       by community or junior colleges, or by career and technical colleges.

        ACTIVITY
        What to Ask

         If you're planning your associate degree, here are some specific questions you may want to research.
         If you intend to enter a technical career that requires special certification:

           · Does the college prepare you to take a certification exam, or will you be meeting those requirements
               through offered courses?

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                             9.2 · Planning Your Degree Path 261

    · Does the college have any special internship or employment placement arrangements with employers
        to help you gain experience or get started in the field?

  If you intend to transfer upon graduation:

    · Is the college regionally accredited?
    · Does the college have any special transfer agreements for guaranteed transfer of credits or perhaps

        for discounted tuition?
    · Does your state have special transfer agreements or requirements that make it easier to transfer to

        colleges or universities within the same state?

Bachelor's Degrees

When someone generally mentions "a college degree," they are often referring to the bachelor's degree, or
baccalaureate degree. Because it takes four years of full-time attendance to complete a bachelor's degree, this
degree is also referred to as a "four-year degree." Similar to an associate degree, to enter a bachelor's degree
program a student must have completed a high school diploma or its equivalent. Both associate degrees and
bachelor's degrees are considered undergraduate degrees, thus students working toward these degrees are
often called undergraduates. A student with an associate degree may transfer that degree to meet some
(usually half) of the requirements of a bachelor's degree; however, completion of an associate degree is not
necessary for entry into a bachelor's degree program.

A bachelor's degree is usually completed with a minimum of 120 credits, or approximately 40 courses. Some
specialized degree programs may require more credits. (If an associate degree has been transferred, the
number of credits from that degree usually counts toward the 120 credits. For example, if an associate degree
was 60 credits, then a student must take 60 additional credits to achieve their bachelor's degree.)

Bachelor of Arts (BA), Bachelor of Science (BS), Bachelor of Science in Nursing (BSN), and Bachelor of Fine Arts
(BFA) are the most popular degree titles at this level and differ primarily in their focus on exploring a broader
range of subject areas, as with a BA, versus focusing in more depth on a particular subject, as with a BS, BSN,
or BFA. Regardless of whether a student is pursuing a BA, BS, BSN, or BFA, each of these programs requires a
balance of credits or courses in different subject areas. In the United States, a bachelor's degree comprises
courses from three categories: general education courses, major courses, and electives. A fourth category of
courses would be those required for a minor, which we will discuss in more detail in the section on majors and
minors.

General Education

General education, also called core curriculum, is a group of courses that are often set as requirements by
your state or by your individual college. These courses provide you with a foundation of knowledge across a
breadth of fields and are also intended to help you further develop college-level critical-thinking and problem-
solving abilities. You may be able to select courses from a general education menu of courses available at your
institution. More than half of your bachelor's degree program is likely made up of general education courses.

  English composition

  Humanities courses that study our beliefs and the expression of our beliefs such as literature, philosophy,
  politics, art, or religious studies

  Social science courses that study our behavior such as psychology, sociology, anthropology, or economics

Table 9.3 General Education Categories. While your college may use different labels, general education courses often include a
selection of courses from these categories.
262 9 · Planning Your Future

         Laboratory science courses such as biology, chemistry, physics, and environmental science

         Mathematics

         Technology or computer skills

         Foreign language, diversity, or global studies courses that provide introduction to different cultures or
         global social issues and promote cultural awareness

         College success or first-year experience courses that provide introduction to your specific institution,
         discuss college-level expectations and skills, and/or provide assistance with academic and career planning

         Table 9.3 General Education Categories. While your college may use different labels, general education courses often include a
         selection of courses from these categories.

       Major Courses
       Major courses are courses in your field of interest and provide you with the foundational knowledge required
       for further study in that field or with the skills necessary to enter your career. Some schools may refer to these
       as career studies courses. Major courses often have a series of prerequisites, or courses that must be taken in
       sequence prior to other courses, starting with an introductory course and progressing into more depth. Major
       courses usually make up about a fourth or more of a bachelor's degree (30 credits, or approximately 10
       courses). A BS or BFA degree may require more major courses than a BA degree. Colleges and universities
       usually require students to select a major by the time they've completed 30 total credits.
       Electives
       Electives are free-choice courses. Though you may have a choice to select from a menu of options to meet
       general education and major requirements, electives are even less restricted. Some students may be able to
       take more electives than others due to their choice of major or if they are able to take courses that meet more
       than one requirement (for example, a sociology course may be both a major requirement and a general
       education social science course). Some colleges intentionally allow room for electives in a program to ensure
       that students, particularly those students who are undecided about their major, are able to explore different
       programs without exceeding the total number of credits required to graduate with a bachelor's degree. In
       other cases, students may have taken all of their major courses and fulfilled their general education
       requirements but still need additional credits to fulfill the minimum to graduate. The additional courses taken
       to meet the total credit requirement (if necessary) are considered electives.

        THE REAL DEAL

         "One advice I would give would be to do your research on what you want to major in, don't do anything for
         the money because you have to think about whether you will be doing this career for a lifetime so choose
         wisely. To encourage a student I would say it's okay to get your feet wet when it comes to choosing what
         you want to do as far as your major. Sometimes it takes a couple of failed attempts in order to find the right
         path for you! Keep going and never give up!"
         --Ashanti Paden, first-year

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                             9.2 · Planning Your Degree Path 263

Graduate Degrees

According to United States Census data published in 2018, 13.1 percent of the U.S. adult population have
completed advanced degrees.2 Whereas associate and bachelor's degrees are considered undergraduate
degrees and require high school graduation for entry, advanced degrees called graduate degrees require prior
completion of a bachelor's degree. Some professions require graduate degrees as a minimum job
qualification, such as pharmacists, lawyers, physical therapists, psychologists, and college professors. In other
cases, students may be motivated to pursue a graduate degree to obtain a higher-level job or higher salary, or
to be more competitive in their field. Some students are also interested in learning about some subject in
greater depth than they did at the undergraduate level. Because graduate degrees do not include general
education or free elective courses, they are very focused on career-specific knowledge and skills. Graduate
degrees include master's, doctoral, and professional degrees. Master's degrees often require 30-60 credits and
take one to two years of full-time attendance to complete. Some master's degrees, like those for counselors,
require supervised job experience as a component of the degree and therefore require more credits.

Figure 9.6 Pharmacists and related scientific or medical careers require graduate degrees. (Credit: US Department of Agriculture /
Flickr / Public Domain)

Doctorate and professional degrees are the highest level of advanced degrees. Approximately 3.5% of the U.S.
adult population has completed a doctorate or professional degree. Very few careers require this level of
education for entry, so fewer individuals pursue these degrees. Doctorates are offered in many subjects and
primarily prepare students to become researchers in their field of study. This in-depth level of education often
requires an additional 90-120 credits beyond the bachelor's degree, and may or may not require a master's
degree prior to entry. (A master's degree as an entry requirement may reduce the number of credits required
to complete the doctoral degree.)
Professional degrees are a specific type of doctorate-level degree that focus on skills to be applied in a
practical, or hands-on, career rather than as a researcher. The most common professional degrees are Doctor
of Medicine (MD) for aspiring medical doctors, Juris Doctor (JD) for aspiring lawyers, Doctor of Pharmacy
(PharmD) for aspiring pharmacists, and Doctor of Education (EdD) for aspiring school and college or university
administrators. If the career you are pursuing requires a graduate degree, you should keep this end goal in
mind as you plan for the timeline and finances required to meet your goals. You may also want to inquire
about special agreements that your college or university may have to expedite admission into or completion of
graduate degrees. For example, some universities offer 4+1 master's programs, wherein students take both
bachelor's and master's level courses during their last year as an undergraduate to accelerate the completion

2 United States Census Bureau. (2019, February 21). Number of People with Master's and Doctoral Degrees Doubles Since 2000.
Retrieved from: https://www.census.gov/library/stories/2019/02/number-of-people-with-masters-and-phd-degrees-double-
since-2000.html
264 9 · Planning Your Future

       of both degrees.

     Majors and Minors

       One of the most common questions an undergraduate college student will be asked is "What's your major?" As
       we already noted, your major is only one part of your undergraduate (associate or bachelor's) degree, but it is
       the part that most demonstrates your interests and possible future goals. At some point during your studies,
       you will be asked to decide on, or declare, a major. You may also be able to select a minor or additional
       concentration. Whereas a major comprises approximately 10-12 courses of a bachelor's degree program and
       is required, a minor is usually 5-8 courses, is often optional, and may count toward or contribute to exceeding
       the total number of credits required for graduation. Rather than take elective courses, some students will
       select courses that meet the requirements for a minor. When selecting a major and possibly a minor, you'll
       want to consider how the knowledge and skills you gain through those fields of study prepare you for a
       particular career. Majors and minors can be complementary. For example, a major in business might be well-
       matched with a minor in a foreign language, thus allowing the student to pursue a career in business with a
       company that hires bilingual employees. It is important to research careers of interest to you when selecting
       your major and/or minor to determine what will best help you to meet your goals.

         Figure 9.7 Many majors, such as nursing, allied health, and emergency medical technician, may include simulations and other
         activities to expose students to the real-world activities of their field. (Credit: COD Newsroom / Flickr / Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC-BY
         2.0))

     Preprofessional Programs

       Some undergraduate degrees are specifically designed to prepare students to later pursue professional
       degrees (such as the MD or PharmD) at the graduate level. Such programs are called preprofessional
       programs, preprofessional majors, or preprofessional tracks. The most common preprofessional programs are
       premed, prelaw, and prepharmacy, but you may see other offerings. Although some preprofessional programs
       are structured as majors that you can declare, many preprofessional programs are a sequence of
       recommended courses and activities that a student can follow alongside a related major. While following a
       preprofessional program may not guarantee your admittance to a professional program, it does increase the
       likelihood of acceptance to and preparation for a graduate professional program.
       Consider Loretta's story as an example of how a student might be on a preprofessional track. Loretta has
       decided that she would like to become a medical doctor. She has declared biology as her major and is taking
       the courses required to graduate with a bachelor of science degree in biology. Her university does not have a

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                             9.2 · Planning Your Degree Path 265

premed major, but it does have a premed track. She informs her academic advisor of her career goals, and her
advisor provides her information about the premed track. The premed track includes a list of courses that
students should take to prepare for the medical school entrance exams, called MCATs. Some of these courses
are biology courses that overlap with Loretta's biology major, while others are higher-level chemistry courses
that are not required for her major. She can take these chemistry courses, and any other premed-track
courses, as her elective courses. The premed track at Loretta's university includes opportunities to attend
MCAT study workshops and premed student club meetings. It also provides recommendations for summer
volunteering and internships that will strengthen Loretta's resume and application to medical school following
the completion of her bachelor's degree.

Special Requirements of Majors

While preprofessional programs prepare students for entrance into graduate professional degree programs,
some undergraduate majors involve special requirements beyond the usual courses and classroom experience
to prepare students for entrance to their career. Such requirements provide students practical experience or
prerequisites for licensure necessary for a particular job. When requirements are major-specific, it is often
because the requirement is state-mandated for that job. Majors that often include state-mandated special
requirements are education, social work, and nursing. Some colleges and universities may require all students
to participate in additional experiences beyond their regular coursework. You will want to ask your college
about details specific to your major or institution. In this section we will generally discuss four such special
requirements and experiences: fieldwork and internships, clinicals, student teaching, and service learning.

Fieldwork and Internships

Fieldwork and internships may also be referred to as practicums and field experience. These requirements
provide hands-on work experience in a career, or field. When fieldwork or internships are required for your
major, such as with a social work major, it is often listed as a course requirement among your major
requirements. In other words, you usually receive credits for your fieldwork as you would for a lab or lecture
course. Your fieldwork instructor will likely ask you to reflect on and report on your experiences. They will likely
confer with a supervisor at your fieldwork site, the place where you are working, to help assess your hands-on
learning. Fieldwork and internships provide students with opportunities to practice the skills they've learned in
the classroom while also introducing them to the values and culture of the organizations and communities in
which they hope to be employed. It is important to note that fieldwork and internship experiences are often
available to students even if they are not required for their major. You may want to inquire with your academic
advisors, faculty, or career services office to determine what opportunities might be available for you to gain
this type of experience in your field of interest.

Clinicals

Clinicals are a type of fieldwork specifically required of nursing students. Clinicals may take place in hospitals,
nursing homes, or mental health facilities. They provide nursing students who are nearing the end of their
degree programs with the opportunity to practice nursing skills that cannot be learned in a regular classroom.
During clinicals, students will interact with real patients to conduct physical examinations, draw blood,
administer medicine, and provide other care as necessary. Because of the risk to patients, students
participating in clinicals are more closely supervised by experienced professionals than those in other types of
fieldwork experiences. Thus, clinicals function very much like a real-world classroom and progress to more
independent work through the semester. Before undertaking clinicals, nursing students will need to complete
certain coursework and pass a physical examination and background check. Because clinicals are often much
longer than a class meeting, students will need to work with staff from the program to plan their schedule. It
may not be feasible to work at another job while completing clinicals, so if you must work while you're in
college, it's important to discuss this with nursing staff or academic advisors and to plan ahead.
266 9 · Planning Your Future

      Student Teaching

       Student teaching is a specific type of fieldwork undertaken by students who plan to teach at the preschool,
       elementary, or middle and high school levels. Education students are often required to complete a student
       teaching experience in order to obtain a teaching license in their state. Students must often complete core
       education coursework prior to student teaching and must complete a background check prior to placement in
       a school setting. During their student teaching experience, students are usually paired one-on-one with an
       experienced teacher and have the opportunity to observe that teacher, get to know the students, understand
       the classroom culture, and participate in lessons as a teaching assistant as needed or appropriate. Much like
       nursing clinicals, this highly supervised fieldwork experience usually progresses to more independent work
       when the student teacher is asked to deliver and reflect on a lesson plan of their own design. Keep in mind as
       you plan for student teaching, that, unlike other fieldwork experiences, student teaching is limited to fall or
       spring semesters and cannot be completed in the summer because most schools are closed during the
       summer terms. Also, it may not be feasible to work at another job while completing your student teaching
       experience, so if you must work while you're in college, it's important to discuss this with your program staff or
       academic advisors and to plan ahead.

         Figure 9.8 Student teaching is an extremely important aspect of becoming a K-12 educator. The experience helps future teachers
         practice their skills and understand the complexity of working in the classroom. (Credit: seansinnit / Flickr / Attribution 2.0 Generic
         (CC-BY 2.0))

      Service Learning

       While service learning may not be required of a specific major, you may see this special requirement for a
       course or as a general graduation requirement for your college or university. It's also an excellent opportunity
       to try out something that interests you, something that could lead to or be part of your eventual career.
       Service learning is very much like volunteering or community service. The purpose of service learning is to
       interact with and meet the needs of your local community. Service learning does differ from volunteering in
       that it is more structured to meet specific learning goals. For example, if you were engaging in service learning
       for an environmental science course, your activities would likely be focused on local environmental issues. Or,
       if you were engaging in service learning for a sociology course, you would likely be working with local
       community groups or organizations not only to assist these organizations, but also to observe how groups
       interact. Like fieldwork, service learning provides you an opportunity to observe and apply concepts learned in
       the classroom in a real-world setting. Students are often asked to reflect on their service learning activities in
       the context of what they've been learning in class, so if you're engaged in service learning, be thinking about
       how the activities you do relate to what you've learned and know.

         Access for free at openstax.org
                   9.3 · Making a Plan 267

9.3 Making a Plan

                   Estimated completion time: 28 minutes.

Questions to Consider:

  · What resources are available to help me understand my degree program requirements?
  · Who can assist me in making a plan?
  · What tools are available to help me develop and track the progress of my plan?
  · Is there anything else I can do now to plan for after I graduate?

As previously noted, most associate degrees require a minimum of 60 credit hours for completion, and
bachelor's degrees minimally require a total of 120 credits. Some individuals refer to these degrees as "two-
year" and "four-year" degrees, respectively. To complete a 60-credit associate degree in two years, you would
need to take 15 credits (about five classes) in the fall and spring semesters during both years of your
attendance. To complete a 120-credit bachelor's degree in four years, you would need to take 15 credits in the
fall and spring semesters each of your four years. It is therefore entirely possible to complete these degrees in
two and four years, particularly if you use the three primary resources that colleges provide to help you with
your planning: curriculum maps, academic advisors, and interactive planning technology.

Curriculum Maps

Many colleges and universities will provide curriculum maps, or course checklists to illustrate the sequence of
courses necessary to follow this timeline. These timelines often assume that you are ready to take college-level
math and English courses and that you will be attending college as a full-time student. If placement tests
demonstrate a need for prerequisite math and English coursework to get you up to speed, your timeline will
likely be longer.

Many students attend college part-time, often because of family or work responsibilities. This will obviously
have an impact on your completion timeline as well. Programs that have special requirements may also
require that you plan for additional time. For example, it may be the case that you cannot take other courses
while completing clinicals or student teaching, so you will need to plan accordingly. Alternatively, you may be
able to speed up, or accelerate, your timeline to degree by taking courses during summer or winter terms. Or
if you take fewer than 15 credits per semester, you can take courses during the summer terms to "make up"
those credits and stay on track toward those two- or four-year graduation goals.3

Academic Advisors

All colleges and universities provide resources such as a academic advisors to assist you with your academic
planning. Academic advisors may also be called success coaches, mentors, preceptors, or counselors. They
may be staff members, or faculty may provide advisement as an additional role to their teaching
responsibilities. Regardless of what your college calls this role, academic advisors are individuals who are able
to assist you in navigating the puzzle of your academic plan and piecing your courses and requirements
together with your other life obligations to help you meet your goals.

An advisor is an expert on college and major requirements and policies, while you are the expert on your life
circumstances and your ability to manage your study time and workload. It is also an advisor's responsibility to
understand the details of your degree requirements. This person can teach you how to best utilize college
resources to make decisions about your academic and career path. An advisor can help you connect with other
college staff and faculty who might be integral to supporting your success. Together with your advisor, you can

3 Brookdale Community College Office of Career and Leadership Development. (2016). Your Career Checklist. Retrieved from:
https://www.brookdalecc.edu/career
268 9 · Planning Your Future

       create a semester-by-semester plan for the courses you will take and the special requirements you will meet.
       Refer to the end of this section for a detailed planning template that you could use in this process. Even if your
       college does not require advising, it is wise to meet with your advisor every semester to both check your
       progress and learn about new opportunities that might lend you competitive advantage in entering your
       career.
       Common Functions of Academic Advisors
       Academic advisors can help you:

         · Set educational and career goals
         · Select a major and/or minor
         · Understand the requirements of your degree
         · Navigate the online tools that track the progress of your degree
         · Calculate your GPA and understand how certain choices may impact your GPA
         · Discuss your academic progress from semester to semester
         · Assist with time management strategies
         · Connect with other support and resources at the college such as counseling, tutoring, and career services
         · Navigate institutional policies such as grade appeals, admission to special programs, and other concerns
         · Strategize how to make important contacts with faculty or other college administrators and staff as

             necessary (such as discussing how to construct professional emails)
         · Discuss transfer options, if applicable
         · Prepare for graduate school applications

        APPLICATION

         Academic Planning Readiness Checklist: Review the checklist below and mark each item if you agree. For
         those you cannot yet answer, consult your instructor, academic advisor, or college website to locate these
         important details.
          1. I know the total number of credits required to graduate from my program.
          2. I know the difference between general education, major, and elective classes.
          3. I know whether I am required to take preparatory or developmental courses in math and English, and

               whether these courses will count among my total credits toward my degree.
          4. I am aware of the special requirements of my major (if any) and the prerequisites I must complete.
          5. I am aware of the minimum entry requirements for my desired career field and know whether I should

               be preparing to plan for a graduate degree as well.

        ACTIVITY

        Draft an Academic Plan

         With the assistance of your instructor or academic advisor, find the curriculum map for your major or for an
         example major that you might be considering if you're still exploring. Use the information in the curriculum
         map to draft an academic plan for your undergraduate degree. This plan should include both a semester-
         by-semester sequence of courses and a list of related activities to help you progress toward your career or
         graduate school goals. Keep in mind any personal circumstances that may impact your plan (such as
         whether you'll need to attend part-time or full-time). You may use the grid provided or utilize your college's

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                9.3 · Making a Plan 269

  student planning software if available. For your reference, you will find the start of an example grid from a
  dedicated environmental science student below.
  Note: If your college offers courses using the quarter system rather than semesters, you may need to draft
  your own grid. You can find example planning grids for quarter systems online.

Figure 9.9 This sample of an academic plan was completed with the help of a college advisor. Below you'll find a blank template that
you can use (or adapt) for your own plan.
270 9 · Planning Your Future

         Figure 9.10 This two-year version of the planning document may need to be adopted for colleges operating on a quarter, trimester,
         or other schedule. (Downloadable versions are available at OpenStax.org.)
         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                     9.4 · Using the Career Planning Cycle 271

 9.4 Using the Career Planning Cycle

                                                                                                  Estimated completion time: 30 minutes.
Questions to Consider:

  · What steps should I take to learn about my best opportunities?
  · What can I do to prepare for my career while in college?
  · What experiences and resources can help me in my search?

Figure 9.11 You can use the Career Planning Cycle to consider and reconsider your approach and progress in choosing and moving
toward a career. (Credit: Based on work by Lisa August.)

The Career Planning Cycle helps us apply some concrete steps to figuring out where we might fit into the work
world. If you follow the steps, you will learn about who you truly are, and can be, as a working professional.
You will discover important knowledge about the work world. You will gain more information to help you make
solid career decisions. You will get experience that will increase your qualifications. You will be more prepared
to reach your professional goals. And the good news is that colleges and universities are set up nicely to help
you utilize this process.

Learn About Yourself

To understand what type of work suits us and to be able to convey that to others to get hired, we must
become experts in knowing who we are. Gaining self-knowledge is a lifelong process, and college is the
perfect time to gain and adapt this fundamental information. Following are some of the types of information
that we should have about ourselves:

  · Interests: Things that we like and want to know more about. These often take the form of ideas,
      information, knowledge, and topics.
272 9 · Planning Your Future

         · Skills/Aptitudes: Things that we either do well or can do well. These can be natural or learned and are
             usually skills--things we can demonstrate in some way. Some of our skills are "hard" skills, which are
             specific to jobs and/or tasks. Others are "soft" skills, which are personality traits and/or interpersonal skills
             that accompany us from position to position.

         · Values: Things that we believe in. Frequently, these are conditions and principles.
         · Personality: Things that combine to make each of us distinctive. Often, this shows in the way we present

             ourselves to the world. Aspects of personality are customarily described as qualities, features, thoughts,
             and behaviors.

       In addition to knowing the things we can and like to do, we must also know how well we do them. What are
       our strengths? When employers hire us, they hire us to do something, to contribute to their organization in
       some way. We get paid for what we know, what we can do, and how well or deeply we can demonstrate these
       things. Think of these as your Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities (KSAs). As working people, we can each think of
       ourselves as carrying a "tool kit." In our tool kit are the KSAs that we bring to each job. As we gain experience,
       we learn how best to use our tools. We gain more tools and use some more often than others, but all the tools
       we gather during our career stay with us in some form.

      Formal Assessments

       Formal assessments are typically referred to as "career tests." There are thousands available, and many are
       found randomly on the Internet. While many of these can be fun, "free" and easily available instruments are
       usually not credible. It is important to use assessments that are developed to be reliable and valid. Look to
       your career center for their recommendations; their staff has often spent a good deal of time selecting
       instruments that they believe work best for students.

       Here are some commonly used and useful assessments that you may run across:

         · Interest Assessments: Strong Interest Inventory, Self-Directed Search, Campbell Interest and Skill Survey,
             Harrington-O'Shea Career Decision-Making System

         · Personality Measures: Myers-Briggs Type Indicator, CliftonStrengths (formerly StrengthsQuest), Big Five
             Inventory, Keirsey Temperament Sorter, TypeFocus, DiSC

         · Career Planning Software: SIGI 3, FOCUS 2

      Informal Assessments

       Often, asking questions and seeking answers can help get us information that we need. When we start
       working consciously on learning more about any subject, things that we never before considered may become
       apparent. Happily, this applies to self-knowledge as well. Some things that you can do outside of career testing
       to learn more about yourself can include:

       Self-Reflection:

         · Notice when you do something that you enjoy or that you did particularly well. What did that feel like?
             What about it made you feel positive? Is it something that you'd like to do again? What was the impact that
             you made through your actions?

         · Most people are the "go to" person for something. What do you find that people come to you for? Are you
             good with advice? Do you tend to be a good listener, observing first and then speaking your mind? Do
             people appreciate your repair skills? Are you good with numbers? What role do you play in a group?

         · If you like to write or record your thoughts, consider creating a career journal that you update regularly,
             whether it's weekly or by semester. If writing your own thoughts is difficult, seek out guided activities that
             help prompt you to reflect.

         · Many colleges have a career planning course that is designed to specifically lead you through the career
             decision-making process. Even if you are decided on your major, these courses can help you refine and
             plan best for your field.

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                     9.4 · Using the Career Planning Cycle 273

Explore Jobs and Careers

Many students seem to believe that the most important decision they will make in college is to choose their
major. While this is an important decision, even more important is to determine the type of knowledge you
would like to have, understand what you value, and learn how you can apply this in the workplace after you
graduate. For example, if you know you like to help people, this is a value. If you also know that you're
interested in math and/or finances, you might study to be an accountant. To combine both of these, you would
gain as much knowledge as you can about financial systems and personal financial habits so that you can
provide greater support and better help to your clients.
The four factors of self-knowledge (interests, skills/aptitudes, values, and personality), which manifest in your
KSAs, are also the factors on which employers evaluate your suitability for their positions. They consider what
you can bring to their organization that is at once in line with their organization's standards and something
they need but don't have in their existing workforce.
Along with this, each job has KSAs that define it. You may think about finding a job/career as looking like the
figure below.

Figure 9.12 Your fit for a job lies at the intersection of your attributes and the elements of the position. When your strengths align
with the employer needs, both can mutually benefit.

The importance of finding the right fit cannot be overstated. Many people don't realize that the KSAs of the
person and the requirements of the job have to match in order to get hired in a given field. What is even more
important, though, is that when a particular job fits your four factors of self-knowledge and maximizes your
KSAs, you are most likely to be satisfied with your work! The "fit" works to help you not only get the job, but
also enjoy the job.
So if you work to learn about yourself, what do you need to know about jobs, and how do you go about
learning it? In our diagram, if you need to have self-knowledge to determine the YOU factors, then to
determine the JOB factors, you need to have workplace knowledge. This involves understanding what
employers in the workplace and specific jobs require. Aspects of workplace knowledge include:

  · Labor Market Information: Economic conditions, including supply and demand of jobs; types of
      industries in a geographic area or market; regional sociopolitical conditions and/or geographic attributes.

  · Industry Details: Industry characteristics; trends and opportunities for both industry and employers;
      standards and expectations.

  · Work Roles: Characteristics and duties of specific jobs and work roles; knowledge, skills, and abilities
      necessary to perform the work; training and education required; certifications or licenses; compensation;
274 9 · Planning Your Future

      promotion and career path; hiring process.

This "research" may sound a little dry and uninteresting at first, but consider it as a look into your future. If you
are excited about what you are learning and what your career prospects are, learning about the places where
you may put all of your hard work into practice should also be very exciting! Most professionals spend many
hours not only performing their work but also physically being located at work. For something that is such a
large part of your life, it will help you to know what you are getting into as you get closer to realizing your
goals.

There are many and varied types of experiential learning opportunities that can help you learn more about
different career opportunities. The table below provides a brief overview.

                                 Internship and Experiential Learning Terminology

Internship      A period of work experience in a professional organization, in which participants
                (interns) are exposed to and perform some of the tasks of actual employees. Internships
                are usually a relatively high commitment, and may be paid and/or result in college credit.

Externship/Job  Usually a briefer and lower-commitment experience than internships, in which
Shadowing       participants observe work activities and perhaps undertake small projects. Unpaid and
                not credit-bearing.

Fieldwork       A period or trip to conduct research or participate in the "natural environment" of a
                discipline or profession. Fieldwork may involve visiting a work site, such as a hospital or
                nursing home, or being a part of a team gathering data or information.

Apprenticeship  A defined period of on-the-job training in which the student is formally doing the job and
                learning specific skills. Unlike most internships, apprenticeships are usually formal
                requirements to attain a license or gain employment in skilled trades, and they are
                growing in use in health care, IT, transportation, and logistics.

Undergraduate   Even as an undergrad, you may find opportunities to partake in actual research in your
Research        field of study. Colleges often have strict guidelines on types and levels of participation,
                and you will likely need to apply. The benefits include firsthand knowledge of a core
                academic activity and exposure to more people in your field.

Related         It may be possible to get a regular, low-level paying job directly in your field of study or in
Employment      a related place of work. While it's not essential, simply being around the profession will
                better inform and prepare you.

Table 9.4

Access for free at openstax.org
                 9.4 · Using the Career Planning Cycle 275

  Clinicals,     Health care, education, and other fields often have specific requirements for clinicals
  Student        (learning experience in health care facilities) or student teaching. These are often
  Teaching, and  components of the major and required for both graduation and licensure.
  Related
  Experiences    Students learn educational standards through tackling real-life problems in their
                 community. Involvement could be hands-on, such as working in a homeless shelter.
  Service        Students could also tackle broad issues in an indirect manner, such as by solving a local
  Learning       environmental problem.

Table 9.4

What to Do to Get Ready

Being prepared to find a job means putting evidence of your KSAs together in a way that employers will
understand. It is one thing to say you can do something; it is another to show that you can. The following are
things that you will want to compile as a part of your college career.

Resumes and Profiles: The College Version

You may already have a resume or a similar profile (such as LinkedIn), or you may be thinking about
developing one. Usually, these resources are not required for early college studies, but you may need them for
internships, work-study, or other opportunities. When it comes to an online profile, something that is a public
resource, be very considerate and intentional when developing it.

Resume

A resume is a summary of your education, work experience, and other accomplishments. It is not simply a list
of what you've done; it's a showcase that presents the best you have to offer for a specific role. While most
resumes have a relatively similar look and feel, there are some variations in the approach. Especially when
developing your first résumé or applying in a new area, you should seek help from resources such as career
counselors and others with knowledge of the field. Websites can be very helpful, but be sure to run your
resume by others to make sure it fits the format and contains no mistakes.

A resume is a one-page summary (two, if you are a more experienced person) that generally includes the
following information:

  · Name and contact information
  · Objective and/or summary
  · Education--all degrees and relevant certifications or licenses

      While in college, you may list coursework closely related to the job to which you're applying.

  · Work or work-related experience--usually in reverse chronological order, starting with the most recent
      and working backward. (Some resumes are organized by subject/skills rather than chronologically.4 )

  · Career-related/academic awards or similar accomplishments
  · Specific work-related skills

While you're in college, especially if you go to college directly after high school, you may not have formal
degrees or significant work experience to share. That's okay. Tailor the resume to the position for which you're
applying, and include high school academic, extracurricular, and community-based experience. These show
your ability to make a positive contribution and are a good indicator of your work ethic.

4 Writing@CSU. "Organizing Your Resume." https://writing.colostate.edu/guides/page.cfm?pageid=1517&guideid=77
276 9 · Planning Your Future

       If you have significant experience outside of college, you should include it if it's relatively recent, relates to the
       position, and/or includes transferable skills (discussed above) that can be used in the role for which you're
       applying. Military service or similar experience should nearly always be included. If you had a long career with
       one company quite some time ago, you can summarize that in one resume entry, indicating the total years
       worked and the final role achieved. These are judgment calls, and again you can seek guidance from experts.

                                       Figure 9.13 Resumes summarize your accomplishments, education, skills, and experience.

       Digital Profiles
       An online profile is a nearly standard component of professional job seeking and networking. LinkedIn is a
       networking website used by people from nearly every profession. It combines elements of résumés and
       portfolios with social media. Users can view, connect, communicate, post events and articles, comment, and
       recommend others. Employers can recruit, post jobs, and process applications. Alternatives include Jobcase,
       AngelList, Hired, and Nexxt. These varying sites work in similar ways, with some unique features or practices.

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                     9.4 · Using the Career Planning Cycle 277

Some professions or industries have specific LinkedIn groups or subnetworks. Other professions or industries
may have their own networking sites, to be used instead of or in addition to LinkedIn. Industry, for example, is
a networking site specifically for culinary and hospitality workers.

As a college student, it might be a great idea to have a LinkedIn or related profile. It can help you make
connections in a prospective field, and provide access to publications and posts on topics that interest you.
Before you join and develop a public professional profile, however, keep the following in mind:

  · Be professional. Write up your profile information, any summary, and job/education experience
     separately, check for spelling and other errors, and have someone review before posting. Be sure to be
      completely honest and accurate.

  · Your profile isn't a contest. As a college student, you may only have two or three items to include on
      your profile. That's okay. Overly long LinkedIn profiles--like overly long resumes--aren't effective anyway,
      and a college student's can be brief.

  · Add relevant experience and information as you attain it. Post internships, summer jobs, awards, or
     work-study experiences as you attain them. Don't list every club or organization you're in if it doesn't
      pertain to the professional field, but include some, especially if you become head of a club or hold a
      competitive position, such as president or member of a performance group or sports team.

  · Don't "over-connect." As you meet and work with people relevant to your career, it is appropriate to
      connect with them through LinkedIn by adding a personal note on the invite message. But don't send
      connection invites to people with whom you have no relationship, or to too many people overall. Even
      alumni from your own school might be reluctant to connect with you unless you know them relatively well.

  · Professional networking is not the same as social media. While LinkedIn has a very strong social media
      component, users are often annoyed by too much nonprofessional sharing (such as vacation/child
      pictures); aggressive commenting or arguing via comments is also frowned upon. As a student, you
      probably shouldn't be commenting or posting too much at all. Use LinkedIn as a place to observe and
      learn. And in terms of your profile itself, keep it professional, not personal.

  · LinkedIn is not a replacement for a real resume.

Building Your Portfolio

Future employers or educational institutions may want to see the work you've done during school. Also, you
may need to recall projects or papers you wrote to remember details about your studies. Your portfolio can be
one of your most important resources.

Portfolio components vary according to field. Business students should save projects, simulations, case
studies, and any mock companies or competitions they worked on. Occupational therapy students may have
patient thank-you letters, summaries of volunteer activity, and completed patient paperwork (identities
removed). Education majors will likely have lesson plans, student teaching materials, sample projects they
created, and papers or research related to their specialization.

Other items to include in your portfolio:

  · Evidence of any workshops or special classes you attended. Include a certificate, registration letter, or
      something else indicating you attended/completed it.

  · Evidence of volunteer work, including a write-up of your experience and how it impacted you.
  · Related experience and work products from your time prior to college.
  · Materials associated with career-related talks, performances, debates, or competitions that you delivered

      or took part in.
  · Products, projects, or experiences developed in internships, fieldwork, clinicals, or other experiences (see

      below).
  · Evidence of "universal" workplace skills such as computer abilities or communication, or specialized

      abilities such as computation/number crunching.
278 9 · Planning Your Future

       A portfolio is neither a scrapbook nor an Instagram story. No need to fill it with pictures of your college
       experience unless those pictures directly relate to your career. If you're studying theology and ran a religious
       camp, include a picture. If you're studying theology and worked in a food store, leave it out.

       Certain disciplines, such as graphic design, music, computer science, and other technologies, may have more
       specific portfolio requirements and desired styles. You'll likely learn about that in the course of your studies,
       but be sure to proactively inquire about these needs or seek examples. Early in your college career, you should
       be most focused on gathering components for your portfolio, not formalizing it for display or sharing.

      Preparing to Network

       Throughout this chapter, we have discussed how important relationships are to your career development. It
       can sometimes be a little intimidating to meet new people in the professional environment. But with
       preparation and understanding, these encounters can be not only helpful, but also rewarding. Here are some
       ideas to consider when meeting new people who can be helpful to your career:

         · Be yourself. You're your own best asset. If you're comfortable with who you are and where you come
             from, others will be, too.

         · Remember, you're in college and they know it. Don't try to impress everyone with what you know;
             alumni or faculty know more. Instead, talk about what you're learning--your favorite class, the project
             you're most proud of, or even the ones by which you've been most challenged.

         · Be polite, not too casual. If your goal is to become a professional, look and sound the part.
         · Listen.
         · Think of some questions ahead of time. Don't aim for difficult questions or anything too personal, but

             asking people how they got into their career, with whom they studied in college, what their job is like, and
             similar questions will both start conversations and provide you with meaningful insight.
         · Don't stress. Remember, if alumni, even highly successful ones, are speaking to you, it's usually because
             they want to. An encounter over finger food or a brief meetup in the Rad Tech department office isn't
             going to make or break your job prospects.
         · If appropriate and timely, ask if you can keep in touch. Be prepared with a polished email address and
             phone number. For example, if your current address is "fortnitefan@gmail.com," consider creating a
             second account that's more professional.
         · Say thank you. No need to go on and on, but thank them for any advice they give or simply for taking the
             time to talk with you

             While you're in college, don't try to impress everyone with what you know. Instead, talk about
             what you're learning.

      Making Your Case through the Words of Others: Letters of Recommendation

       Whether you go on to graduate school or directly into the workforce (or both at the same time), decision
       makers will want to learn more about you. Your grades, interviews, test scores, and other performance data
       will tell them a lot. But sometimes they'll want to hear from others.

       Letters of recommendation are often a standard component of convincing people you're the right person to
       join their organization. Some positions or institutions require a certain quantity of letters and may have
       specific guidance on who should write them. Other companies will accept them as additional evidence that
       you're a great candidate. Either way, gathering such letters or having a few people whom you can ask for them
       will put you in a better position. Note that internships, especially competitive ones, may also require letters of
       recommendation.

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                     9.4 · Using the Career Planning Cycle 279

Figure 9.14 When you ask someone to write you a letter of recommendation, be prepared to share information about your goals,
your accomplishments, and why you are asking the person in particular. Don't assume that they know which strengths or experience
of yours to highlight. (Credit: US Embassy Jerusalem / Flickr / Attribution 2.0 Generic (CC-BY 2.0))
280 9 · Family & Friends Matter

    Family & Friends Matter

Michael has continued on his path to become a physical therapist even though he has struggled in some of the
basic science classes. In fact, he earned Ds in Chemistry I and in Anatomy and Physiology. He will need to
retake the courses and earn at least Cs in them to graduate with a bachelor's degree in biology, but even more
importantly, he will need to greatly improve his GPA if he wants to be able to get into a graduate program.

Michael has noticed that his enthusiasm for his major classes has waned considerably, especially since he has
taken courses such as history and literature. He loves reading and discussing texts and analyzing their
historical contexts. When he expressess this to his family, they encourage him to "get that out of his system"
and continue on his pathway to physical therapy. In fact, they often share with him news stories about salaries
for people who graduate with liberal arts degrees versus science and mathematics degrees, and the data show
that his physical therapy degree will be far more lucrative over his lifetime.

Even though Michael knows he needs to be able to land a good-paying job after he graduates, he doesn't think
he has what it takes to get through his science courses. Now he is unsure of how to bring this up to his family
as they have made it clear what their expectations are. He doesn't want to disappoint them--and perhaps they
know better what he should do--but he just can't find the motivation to retake the courses and work harder.

Let's Think About It

Michael has several options. Think through the consequences of each one, and choose the best option or
create your own option.

  · Michael continues on the path to become a physical therapist even if that means retaking classes to earn a
      higher GPA so he can apply for graduate school.

  · Michael talks with a career counselor and an academic advisor about his dilemma and finds a more viable
      pathway for himself.

  · Michael has an honest conversation with his family about how he is feeling and why he is not doing well in
      his science classes.

Let's Talk About It

Michael's situation is common among students who think they want to major in something because they like
the idea of it, their family supports the pathway, and the choice can lead to a lucrative career. However, it is
okay to change your mind or decide to study something that interests you even if you are not sure just yet how
to connect it to a career. Here are some suggestions for communicating with others about the dilemma that
Michael is facing:

  · "After some thought and experiences in my classes, I don't feel as though my original major and career
      plan are a good fit for what I would like to study. I would like to explore other options."

  · "I have been talking with a career counselor about other options for careers. I have found some
      interesting pathways that would be different from what I originally chose, but would still be viable ways to
      use what I am learning in college in a career that makes a difference for others."

  · "I am struggling with what I want to study and do with my life. I have found some classes are more
      enjoyable for me--even when they are challenging--and I would like to talk to my professors, advisors,
      and the career services staff about what this may mean for my degree pathway."

Whatever choice you would make in this situation, it is always best to communicate clearly your needs, your
concerns, and even your uncertainties.

    Summary

This chapter began by describing the process of creating short-term, long-term, and SMART goals that can
serve as motivation for you. After a discussion of the relationship between short- and long-term goals and the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                9 · Summary 281

importance of tracking the progress of our goals, the chapter dove into the specifics of academic plans.
Sections on degree types and the special considerations and requirements of certain programs should help
you understand the type of opportunities that may be available to you and the types of questions you should
research and ask. The section on planning your semesters provided you with the types of resources, people,
and tools that you should look for when developing your academic plan. The final section shared some basic
job-seeking advice and information that will allow you to begin the process of building the components
needed to apply for positions during and after college.

To make the most of the time you have in college to explore and plan for your future, consider what you can
do now to create your educational and career pathway. Choose one of the following to explore further or do
this term:

  · Take a variety of values, interests, skills, and personality inventories to learn more about what kinds of
      career environments and tasks would be worth pursuing.

  · Create a degree plan for yourself that includes opportunities to participate in experiential learning and
      activities such as internships and service learning.

  · Explore additional education or credentials you may need to fulfill your career goals.
  · Begin to create a resume or professional profile via social media that shares the experiences you have.
282 9 · Summary
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    Index 283

Index                  G                      N

A                      General education 261  nutrition 210
                       graduate degrees 263
Academic advisors 267                         P
accommodations 152     H
associate degree 260                          portfolio 277
                       Health 189             practice test 148
B                      hidden curriculum 47   practicums 265
                                              preprofessional programs 264
bachelor's degree 261  I                      profile 276
budget 227
                       imposter syndrome 52   R
C                      Income 228
                       interleaving 147       resume 275
Clinicals 265
College Terms 42       K                      S
cramming 139
credit cards 233       KSAs 272               Self-care 164
curriculum maps 267                           service learning 266
                       L                      Short-term memory 135
D                                             spacing 147
                       LinkedIn 276           suicide 197
debt 233               Long-term memory 137
degrees 259                                   T                     96, 97
depression 197         M
                                              Test anxiety 155
E                      Major courses 262      the learning process
                       master's degrees 263
Eating disorders 198   meal 211               W
Electives 262          Memory 134
exercise 213           mental health 197      wellness 189
                       mental illness 196     Working memory 135
F                      minor 264              workplace knowledge 273
                       Mnemonics 144
Fieldwork 265
four-year degree 261
