Project Management for Instructional
Designers

David Wiley
Table of Contents

About This Book                                                                       1

1. Introduction to Project Management                                                 3

1.1. Project Management Defined                                                       11

1.2. Project Definition and Context                                                   15

1.3. Key Skills of the Project Manager                                                19

1.4. Introduction to the Project Management Knowledge Areas                           23

2. Project Profiling                                                                  31

2.1. Using a Project Profile                                                          37

2.2. Project Profiling Models                                                         41

2.3. Complex Systems and the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index                         43

2.4. Darnall-Preston Complexity Index Structure                                       47

2.5. Using the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index to Measure Organizational Complexity  55

3. Project Phases and Organization                                                    59

3.1. Project Phases and Organization                                                  65

3.2. Project Phases and Organization                                                  69

4. Understanding and Meeting Client Expectations                                      81

4.1. Including the Client                                                             87

4.2. Understanding Values and Expectations                                            91

4.3. Dealing with Problems                                                            95

5. Working with People on Projects                                                    101

5.1. Working with Individuals                                                         107

5.2. Working with Groups and Teams                                                    119

5.3. Creating a Project Culture                                                       129

6. Communication Technologies                                                         133

6.1. Types of Communication                                                           139

6.2. Selecting Software                                                               145

7. Starting a Project                                                                 155
7.1. Project Selection                                   161

7.2. Project Scope                                       169

7.3. Project Start-Up                                    173

7.4. Alignment Process                                   177

7.5. Communications Planning                             183

8. Project Time Management                               189

8.1. Types of Schedules                                  195

8.2. Elements of Time Management                         197

8.3. Critical Path and Float                             207

8.4. Managing the Schedule                               213

8.5. Project Scheduling Software                         219

9. Costs and Procurement                                 223

9.1. Estimating Costs                                    229

9.2. Managing the Budget                                 237

9.3. Identifying the Need for Procuring Services         247

9.4. Procurement of Goods                                251

9.5. Selecting the Type of Contract                      255

9.6. Procurement Process                                 261

10. Managing Project Quality                             267

10.1. Standards of Quality and Statistics                273

10.2. Development of Quality as a Competitive Advantage  281

10.3. Relevance of Quality Programs to Project Quality   289

10.4. Planning and Controlling Project Quality           293

10.5. Assuring Quality                                   299

11. Managing Project Risk                                301

11.1. Defining Risk                                      307

11.2. Risk Management Process                            311

11.3. Project Risk by Phases                             317

11.4. Project Risk and the Project Complexity Profile    323

12. Project Closure                                      327
12.1. Project Closure  333
David Wiley

Lumen Learning
Dr. David Wiley is the chief academic officer of Lumen Learning, an organization offering open educational
resources designed to increase student access and success. Dr. Wiley has founded or co-founded numerous
entities, including Lumen Learning, Mountain Heights Academy (an open high school), and Degreed. He was
named one of the 100 Most Creative People in Business by Fast Company, currently serves as Education Fellow
at Creative Commons, and leads the Open Education Group in Brigham Young University's instructional
psychology and technology graduate program. He has been a Shuttleworth Fellow, served as a Fellow of Internet
and Society at Stanford Law School, and was a Fellow of Social Entrepreneurship at BYU's Marriott School of
Management.

                      This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.

                      Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id.
About This Book

Project Management for Instructional Designers (PM4ID) is - as the name suggests - a book about project
management tailored specifically for instructional designers. This book is a revise / remix of a pre-existing, openly
licensed project management textbook which was donated to the commons by a benefactor that desires to be
attributed as Anonymous.

PM4ID includes many new features and improvements to the original book, including:

      Alignment of book chapters with the PMBOK, which supports readers in preparing for the Project Management
      Professional certification,
      A series of video cases of project managers working in the instructional design area, integrated into every chapter,
      Multiple versions of the book, including HTML, PDF, and a text-to-speech mp3 audio version of the book,
      New examples written specifically for readers coming from the instructional design perspective,
      and more.

The third edition of Project Management for Instructional Designers was adapted to EdTech Books as part of Royce
Kimmons' IPT 531: Introduction to Open Education class at Brigham Young University during Fall term 2022.
Contributors included:

      Bobbie Sandberg
      Royce Kimmons
      Rebecca Zundel

The second edition of Project Management for Instructional Designers was created by students in David Wiley's IPT
682: Introduction to Project Management class at Brigham Young University during Fall term 2012. The team included:

      Geri Clements
      Jeffery Drysdale
      Jenifer Francis
      Buck Harrison
      Joseph Rino
      Jared Robinson
      Aaron Snyder

The first edition of Project Management for Instructional Designers was created by students in David Wiley's IPT 682:
Introduction to Project Management class at Brigham Young University during Fall term 2011. The team included:

      Maya Amado
      Kevin Ashton
      Scott Ashton
      Jay Bostwick
      Vera Nan
      Tony Nisse
      Dan Randall

                                                                                         1
If you or your class would like to help improve Project Management for Instructional Designers, contact David Wiley at
david.wiley@gmail.com.

License and Rights

Project Management for Instructional Designers is published under the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
ShareAlike license. This license states that:
You are free:

      to Share -- to copy, distribute and transmit the work
      to Remix -- to adapt, revise, and improve the work
Under the following conditions:
      Attribution -- You must attribute the work in the manner specified by the author or licensor (but not in any way that
      suggests that they endorse you or your use of the work).
      Noncommercial -- You may not use this work for commercial purposes.
      Share Alike -- If you alter, transform, or build upon this work, you may distribute the resulting work only under the
      same or similar license to this one.
When attributing derivatives of Project Management for Instructional Designers, please use the following attribution:
Amado, M., Ashton, K., Ashton, S., Bostwick, J., Clements, G., Drysdale, J., Francis, J., Harrison, B., Nan, V., Nisse, A.,

         Randall, D., Rino, J., Robinson, J., Snyder, A., Wiley, D., & Anonymous. (DATE). Project Management for
         Instructional Designers. Retrieved from http://pm4id.org/. Licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution
         NonCommercial ShareAlike (BY-NC-SA) license.
The cover image for PM4ID is Let's Fly! by Hamed Saber.

                           This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                           Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/about_this_book.

                                                                                         2
  1

Introduction to Project Management

Overview

Welcome to Project Management for Instructional Designers. The book you are now reading is a work in progress. If you
are interested in contributing to the book, please contact David Wiley at Brigham Young University. As many of those
reading this book may be pursuing a career or further expertise in project management, it is important to outline how
this book fits with other texts or certification requirements of the field. This book is designed to provide an overview of
project management principles in instructional design, not as preparation for certification exams. However, in an effort
to bridge the practical application principles with the knowledge needed for certification, each chapter of this text will
begin with a reference to the foundational text from the Project Management Institute (PMI) entitled A Guide to the
Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK),1 as well as two of the main certification exams - the Project
Manager Professional Certification (PMP) and the Certified Associate in Project Management (CAPM). These
references are meant to aide any reader who may be using this text to supplement their pursuit of other professional
goals. The PMI, PMBOK, PMP, and CAPM are explained below.

Project Management Institute (PMI)

"PMI is one of the world's largest not-for-profit membership associations for the project management profession, with
more than 650,000 members and credential holders in more than 185 countries." They advocate project management
as a profession and have created "globally-recognized standards and credentials, [an] extensive research program, and .
. . professional development opportunities. These products and services are the basis of greater recognition and
acceptance of project management's successful role in governments, organizations, academia and industries." 2

A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge
(PMBOK)

The PMBOK is the recognized standard from PMI that shares established norms, methods, and processes that
constitute good practices of project managers. It is a document that has evolved through contributions of high-quality
practitioners. This text defines project management as well as other important concepts, and describes the relevant
processes for managing a project. It is this text that defines the content for which project managers will be held
accountable in certification exams.

Project Manager Professional Certification (PMP)

The Project Manager Professional (PMP) certification is one of the most well-recognized certifications for project
management. Companies increasingly require project manager applicants to have a PMP certification, thus making this

                                                                                         3
certification important in applying for jobs and setting yourself apart. Those who certify as a PMP show they are
educated, competent and experienced project managers. Certifying as a PMP can be done in two different ways.

Method 1

  1. A bachelor's degree
  2. 3 years of project management experience
  3. 4500 hours of leading projects
  4. 35 hours of project management education
  5. Pass the Test

Method 2

  1. High school degree
  2. 5 years of project management experience
  3. 7500 hours of leading projects
  4. 35 hours of project management education
  5. Pass the Test
The PMP test has 200 multiple-choice questions, 25 of the questions are experimental questions for future exams and
will not count toward your final score. A passing rate is usually around 106/175 (about 61%). The PMP test is very
specific and will require more effort than just reading the PMBOK book to pass the exam.3 Questions on the exam
assume that the project is being managed using the principles in the PMBOK. The test further assumes that projects
would operate perfectly within the parameters the book describes. Many questions will have good answers but you
must be able to select the best answer. The test is focused around the Project Management Process, as described in
the PMBOK. The following table breaks up the Project Management Process and shows the number of questions that
are generally affiliated with that topic on the exam.

Certified Associate in Project Management (CAPM)

The PMI provides an introductory certification for project managers called the Certified Associate in Project
Management or CAPM. The requirements for the CAPM are much less stringent than those for the PMP. The
prerequisites can be met in two different ways: (1) obtain 1,500 hours of project management experience, or (2)
complete 23 hours of project management instruction. Many post-secondary project management courses include
more than 23 instructional hours.4 In fact, if you are reading this book for a project management course, you will
probably meet the prerequisites for the exam through your class experience. The questions for the CAPM are organized
differently than those for the PMP. The exam blueprint provided by PMI is based on percentages of test questions
coming from each chapter of the PMBOK.

                                                                                         4
Because the examination blueprint comes directly from the PMBOK, effective exam preparation will include a detailed
study of the PMBOK and possibly another exam-preparation book.5

The format of this book is as follows:

      The content is organized in a roughly chronological pattern, corresponding to the order in which you will likely be
      called on to use the principles in this book. However, all of the information can be applied in any stage of a project.
      Each chapter has an Overview section which introduces the chapter topic and references the PMP and CAPM exam
      areas that correlate.

            This chapter aligns with Chapter 1 of the PMBOK and 4% of the CAPM questions come from this knowledge
            area. The content connects to the Initiating and Planning category of the PMP questions.
      The Overview sections also contain videos of three instructional design project managers who relate how the
      chapter's principles applied to their individual projects.
      The chapter sections will each contain:
            Learning Objectives - to help guide your reading in identifying key points.
            Glossary words - the first instance of key terms will be in bold and give their definition within the text. There is
            also a glossary section on the side for easy reference.
            Example scenarios - will be highlighted in tan boxes.
            Key Takeaways - will summarize the learning objective information.
We hope you find the book useful and informative.

                                                                                         5
Designers Share Their Experiences

   Dr. Andy Gibbons - Instructional Psychology and Technology - BYU

                                                                   Watch on YouTube
     My name is Andy Gibbons. I'm an instructional designer. I have been since about 1974. I worked eighteen years
     in industry, and the project that I'd like to talk about was for the U.S Navy, teaching helicopter pilots how to fly a
     particular anti-submarine warfare helicopter. And teaching operators called center operators who sit in the back
     of the aircraft looking for squiggles on a piece of paper that would indicate that they have found a submarine.
     The project was actually just about a year long, and it was full of interesting experiences.

                                                                                         6
Heather Bryce - Independent Studies - BYU

                                                              Watch on YouTube
My name is Heather Bryce, and I am the project manager for Brigham Young University Independent Study and I
have been working here for three years. The project I will be discussing today is Art 45.

                                                                                   7
   Dr. Larry Seawright - Center for Teaching and Learning - BYU

                                                                   Watch on YouTube
     I'm Doctor Larry Seawright. I'm Associate Director at the BYU Center for Teaching and Learning. I'm also project
     manager for a project we call the BYU Learning Suite, which is what I'm going to be talking about today.

[1] Project Management Institute (2008). A guide to the project management body of knowledge (PMBOK guide, fourth edition). United States of America:
Project Management Institute.
[2] http://www.pmi.org/About-Us.aspx
[3] Mulchay, R. (2011). PMP Exam Prep. United States of America: RMC Publications.
[4] Project Management Institute (2012). CAPM certification handbook. Available from
http://www.pmi.org/certification/~/media/pdf/certifications/pdc_capmhandbook.ashx
[5] Mulcahy, R. (2009). CAPM Exam Prep. United States of America: RMC Publications.

    Project Management Defined
    Project Definition and Context
    Key Skills of the Project Manager
    Introduction to the Project Management Knowledge Areas

                                                                                         8
This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/1-introduction-to-project-
management.

                                                          9
10
1.1

Project Management Defined

Project Management  Project Scope

   LEARNING OBJECTIVES

        1. Identify the Project Management Institute's definition of project management.
        2. Analyze and evaluate the role of client expectations in a project.
        3. Define project scope.

One of the priorities of the Project Management Institute (PMI) during the 1980s was to define project management and
develop it as a profession. Debate continues on whether project management is a profession with an enforceable code
of conduct and other traditional criteria for recognition as a profession. However, PMI's development of A Guide to the
Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK), and the project management certifications that derived from these
efforts, helped promote the understanding and development of the project management field. Defining project
management, and substantiating it as a profession, brought about the question of its purpose. Intense discussions
resulted in a compromise to define project management as "the application of knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques
to project activities to meet the project requirements."1

Be aware that PMI's definition is not the only view of what project management entails. Jack Meredith and Samuel
Mantel2 discussed project management in terms of producing project outcomes within the three objectives of cost,
schedule, and specifications. According to this view, project management is the application of everything a project
manager does to meet these parameters. This approach to defining project management shares PMI's focus on the
project outcomes in terms of requirements, but Meredith and Mantel also added a fourth aspect of project
management--the expectations of the client.

                                   11
                                                                 Image by petecocoon

If it is assumed that the client is the one who defines project requirements, then maybe project management is the
application of knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques to meet client requirements. This definition focuses on
expectations rather than project specifications. It is possible to meet all project specifications and not meet client
expectations. It is also possible to only accomplish one or more of the specifications, yet still meet or exceed a client's
expectations.3

PMI's definition of project management provides a good understanding of project management, but it does not help us
understand project success. For that, we must include the client.

District Curriculum Alignment Project

A school district in Colorado invested a substantial portion of the budget toward switching to a professional learning
community (PLC) model for faculty development. The district requested a project that would align the curriculum with
each subject and grade level and be used as benchmarks for to evaluate the PLC's work with students. The project
brought together teachers from across the district to design essential learning objectives, which would be taken back to
schools and PLCs. The project team created the essential learning objectives within the budget and time constraints
that were approved by the district, but teachers at the individual schools were unhappy that the learning objectives were
decided at the district level rather than at the school level. Even though this project met all of the original goals, the
district was still disappointed.
Meredith and Mantel discussed a tendency noted by Russ Darnall4 that expectations often increase during the life of a
project. Meredith and Mantel suggest that this is a form of scope increase. Project scope is reflected in a carefully
crafted document that reflects the performance specifications of the project deliverables. Defining the project scope
and managing scope change is a very different process from developing an understanding of a client's expectations
and managing those expectations. Darnall focused on defining and managing client expectations as a critical project
management skill that is distinct from scope development and management.

Client expectations encompass an emotional component that includes many client desires that are not easily captured
within a specification document. Although closely correlated with project specifications, client expectations are driven
by different needs. It is possible for a project team to exceed every project specification and end up with an unsatisfied
client.

                                                                                        12
The reverse is also true. A project can be late and over budget and the client can be satisfied. Although this may be
counterintuitive, the response of a client to the events of a project is complex and goes beyond the data related in
project specifications.

Volunteer Training Program

A museum planned to use volunteers as gallery interpreters to facilitate a more engaging guest experience. The
museum hired instructional designers to manage a project to plan, develop, and implement training for prospective
volunteers. The original project specifications called for the training to last four hours. Throughout the project, it
became clear to the project manager that the complexity of the learning objectives required more than four hours of
training. The change in scope was approved by the museum, resulting in a significant increase in the total cost of the
project. The museum, however, was satisfied with the project because it produced an effective training for volunteers.
Client satisfaction is often tied to expectations about project performance. Identifying and managing those
expectations is a primary responsibility of the project manager.

   KEY TAKEAWAYS

           According to PMI, project management is the application of knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques to
           meet project requirements.
           The role of the client is crucial. Some experts include meeting or exceeding client expectations as a
           definitive element of project management.
           Project scope is a document that defines the work required to complete the project successfully.

[1] Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK Guide), 4th ed.
(Newtown Square, PA: Project Management Institute, Inc., 2008), 6.
[2] Jack R. Meredith and Samuel J. Mantel, Jr., Project Management: A Managerial Approach(Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2006),
8.
[3] Russell W. Darnall, The World's Greatest Project (Newtown Square, PA: Project Management Institute, Inc., 1996),
48-54.
[4] Russell W. Darnall, The World's Greatest Project (Newtown Square, PA: Project Management Institute, Inc., 1996),
48-54.

                                                                                        13
This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/1-1-project-management-
defined.

                                                         14
1.2

Project Definition and Context

Organizational Priorities  Stakeholders

   LEARNING OBJECTIVES

        1. Describe two defining characteristics of a project.
        2. Understand project levels and organization priorities.
        3. Describe the organizational options for managing projects.

Before elaborating further on project management, let's first identify what a project is and how projects come about.
PMI defines a project by its two key characteristics: it is temporary and undertaken to create a product, service, or result
that is unique.1 Projects are undertaken by various organizations to better fulfill their purposes.

Organizational Priorities

Organizations fulfill societal functions (e.g. economic, religious, community support, government, etc.) Local factories,
churches, and hospitals are all organizations that provide some social or community need. Factories create wealth and
jobs, churches provide spiritual and common social needs for communities, and government organizations provide
regulations and services that allow for an orderly society. These organizations have different views of time and each
organization develops an operational approach to accomplishing the purpose of the organization over that time horizon.
For example, a religious group might begin construction of a cathedral that would take several lifetimes to complete,
government performance is reviewed at election time, and a publicly owned company must justify its use of money
each year in the annual report.

Organizations operate to effectively and efficiently produce the product or service that achieves the organization's
purpose and goals as defined by the key stakeholders--those who have a share or interest in the organization. An
organization seeks to develop stable and predictable work processes and then improve those work processes over time
through increased quality, reduced costs, and shorter delivery times. Total quality management, lean manufacturing,
and several other management philosophies and methodologies have focused on providing the tools and processes for
increasing the effectiveness and efficiency of the organization. Historically, these methodologies focused on creating
incremental and continuous improvement in work processes. More recently, organizations are increasingly focused on
step changes that take advantage of new technologies to create a significant improvement in the effectiveness or
efficiency of the organization.

                                                                                        15
Often, these initiatives to increase organizational effectiveness or efficiency are identified as projects. Economic
organizations might initiate a project to produce a new product, to introduce or revamp work processes to significantly
reduce product costs, or to merge with other organizations to reduce competition or lower costs and generate
additional profits. A social organization, such as a hospital, may build a new wing, introduce a new service, or design
new work processes to reduce costs. A government organization may introduce a new software program that handles
public records more efficiently, build a new road to reduce congestion, or combine departments to reduce costs.

Each of the initiatives meets our definition of a project. Each is a temporary endeavor and produces a unique product or
service. Projects are also defined within the context of larger projects as the following example illustrates.

National Energy Saving Education Plan

The National Energy Technology Laboratory laid out a plan for a national energy saving education plan that had a clear
and identifiable outcome--helping consumers efficiently find and use reliable, affordable, and environmentally sound
energy.2 The details of this plan will be revised and updated, but the general goals are likely to remain unchanged. To
accomplish these goals, the project requires the development of educational materials related to new technologies,
coordination of a large number of instructional designers, and skillful stakeholder management. Development of each
of the major components became a project for the instructional design teams within the larger project of providing
educational materials to consumers related to finding and using reliable, affordable, and environmentally sound energy.
Each project has to develop materials related to new technologies, and manage the stakeholders at the Department of
Energy.Each instructional design team becomes a project for that organization. The project is defined by the scope of
work. In the energy materials area, the scope of work included all activities associated with educating consumers on
ways to reduce use of fossil fuels and reliance on imported energy. Using our definition that a project is a temporary
endeavor that creates a unique product or service, implementation of the energy education materials would be a project
that consisted of other projects. These projects could develop into creating education materials related to wind power,
solar power, electricity transmission, biofuels, environmental protection, etc.

Organizing to Manage Projects

Because project management is different from operations (organizational) management, projects are handled best by
people who are trained in project management. This expertise can be obtained by hiring an outside consulting firm that
specializes in project management or by developing an in-house group.

Some organizations are designed to execute specific projects. Often entities contract with engineering and construction
companies to design and build their facilities, or hire software companies to develop a software solution. The major
work processes within these organizations are designed to support the acquisition and execution of those projects.
Similarly, there are instructional design firms who have the specialized skills to effectively and efficiently design
valuable instruction for their clients. The ability of these types of organizations to successfully manage projects in
house becomes a competitive advantage for them in the marketplace.

Organizations designed to produce products or services also use projects. Major activities outside the normal work of
the organization's department or functional units or major activities that cross functional boundaries become a project.
As economic pressures increase the speed in which organizations must change and adapt to new environmental
conditions, leaders are increasingly chartering projects to enable the organization to adapt more quickly. The
application of a project management approach increases the likelihood of success as organizations charter a project to
facilitate organizational change, to increase the development and introduction of new products or support the merger or
divesture of organizational units.

                                                                                        16
                                                                     Image by antgirl

Project management offices (PMOs) have emerged within organizations to facilitate development of organizational
knowledge, skills, and tools to internally charter and manage projects. The PMO varies in structure and responsibility
depending on the project management approach of the parent organization. On one end of the spectrum, the PMO has
complete responsibility for projects within an organization from the criteria and selection of appropriate projects to
accountability for project performance. In organizations that make a large investment in the PMO, a large number of
new product or process improvement projects are submitted, and the project office develops a portfolio of projects to
manage over a given period that maximizes the use of organizational resources and provides the greatest return to the
organization.

PMOs can provide various functions for an organization. Some possible functions include the following:

      Project management. Some organizations maintain the project manager within the PMO, assign project managers
      from other departments, procure contract project managers, or practice a combination of all three.
      Center of excellence. The project office can maintain the organization's project management policies and
      procedures, maintain a historical database, maintain best practices, and provide training and specialized expertise
      when needed.
      Portfolio management. The project office actually supervises the project managers and monitors project
      performance. Portfolio management also includes prioritizing projects on the basis of value to the organization and
      maintains an inventory of projects. Portfolio management balances the number and type of projects to create the
      greatest return from the entire portfolio of projects.
      Functional support. The project office maintains project management expertise to support the project. Estimating,
      project scheduling, and project cost analysis are examples of functional support.

                                                                                        17
   KEY TAKEAWAYS

           All projects are temporary and undertaken to create a product, service, or result that is unique.
           In an organization, project management can be used to make step changes to take advantage of new
           technologies or make significant improvements in effectiveness or efficiency.
           Projects can be handled by outside contractors or by an internal group in a PMO.
[1] Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK Guide), 4th ed.
(Newtown Square, PA: Project Management Institute, Inc., 2008), 5.
[2] National Energy Technology Laboratory, "Reliable, Affordable, and Environmentally Sound Energy for America's
Future," The Energy Lab, 2001,https://edtechbooks.org/-NTPw(accessed June 18, 2009).

                           This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                           Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/1-2-project-definition-and-
                           context.

                                                                                        18
1.3

Key Skills of the Project Manager

Operations Managers  Project Managers

   LEARNING OBJECTIVES

        1. Compare project management and operations management.
        2. Identify necessary leadership skills required of a project manager.

Often the difference between the project that succeeds and the project that fails is the leadership of the project
manager. Each project team is a group of individuals who needs motivation and coordination. Planning is vital, but the
ability to adapt to changes and work with people to overcome challenges is just as necessary. A project manager must
master the skills that are necessary to be successful in this environment. The unique and temporary nature of projects
creates a work environment that mandates a different management approach from that used by an operations
manager.

Operations Managers

One way to improve understanding of project management is to contrast project management with operations
management. All operations managers are charged with efficiently and effectively achieving the purpose of the
organization. Typically, managers of economic organizations focus on maximizing profits and stockholder value;
leaders of socio-religious organizations focus on effective and efficient delivery of a service to a community or
constituency; and governmental managers are focused on meeting goals established by government leaders. For our
purposes, each of these managers would be deemed the "operations manager".

More effective work processes will produce a better product or service, and a more efficient work process will reduce
costs. Operations managers analyze work processes and explore opportunities to make improvements. Operations
managers are process focused, oriented toward capturing and standardizing improvement to work processes and
creating an organizational culture focused on the long-term goals of the organization. Often, specific projects are
undertaken to improve their overall operational processes.

Operations managers create a culture which focuses on the long-term health of the organization and build teams over
time to standardize and improve work processes. They search for and nurture team members who will "fit in" and that
contribute to both the effectiveness of the team and the team culture. Operations managers are long-term focused and
oriented toward continuous improvement of existing processes over longer periods of time.

                                                                                        19
An operations manager may invest $10,000 to improve a work process that saves $3,000 a year. Over a five-year period,
the operations manager improved the profitability of the operations by $5,000 and will continue to save $3,000 every
year. The project manager of a one-year project could not generate the savings to justify this kind of process
improvement and would not invest resources to explore this type of savings. However, the project manager might head
the $10,000 project that the operations manager solicited to improve the work process of the organization.

Project Managers

Project managers focus on the goals of the project. Project success is connected to achieving the project goals within
the project timeline. Project managers apply project management tools and techniques to clearly define the project
goals, develop an execution plan to meet those goals, and meet the milestones and end date of the project. A project
manager needs a different set of skills to both define and successfully execute projects. Because projects are
temporary, they have a defined beginning and end. Project managers must manage start-up activities and project
closeout activities. The processes for developing teams, organizing work, and establishing priorities require a different
set of knowledge and skills because members of the project management team recognize that it is temporary.
Project managers create a team that is goal focused and energized around the success of the project. Project team
members know that the project assignment is temporary because the project, by definition, is temporary. Project team
members are often members of organizational teams that have a larger potential to affect long-term advancement
potential. They seldom report directly to the project manager and the effect of success or failure of the project might
not affect their reputations or careers the same way that the success or failure of one of their other job responsibilities
would. Therefore, project managers create clear goals and clear expectations for team members and tie project
success to the overall success of the organization. Project managers are goal directed and milestone oriented.

                                                              Image by geekstinkbreath
While there are many skills needed by a project manager that are the same as an operations manager, because project
managers generally operate in an environment that is more time sensitive and goal driven, the successful project
manager requires additional knowledge, skills, and abilities.

                                                                                        20
Albert Einsiedel1 discussed leader-sensitive projects and defined five characteristics of an effective project leader.
These characteristics were chosen based on some assumptions about projects. These characteristics include the
project environment, which is often a matrix organization that results in role ambiguity, role conflict, and role erosion.
The project environment is often a fluid environment where decisions are made with little information. In this
environment, the five characteristics of an effective project leader include the following:

      Credibility - the project manager is coming into an established organization and must have a reputation or
      presence of credibility to receive the respect and support of the client and team.
      Creativity as a problem solver - projects are never "business as usual".
      Tolerance for ambiguity - a project manager can often be unfamiliar with the kind of work the client does and
      needs to be able to adapt and move the project forward, even if all aspects of the company aren't understood
      perfectly.
      Flexible management style - a project manager is constantly dealing with new people and environments and must
      adjust accordingly. They do not have the luxury of an established rapport with their project associates.
      Effective communicating - because of the ambiguous nature of projects, good communication skills are crucial in
      understanding what is expected by the client and being able to convey that vision to the project team.

Hans Thamhain2 researched the training of project managers and, based on the finding, created a taxonomy wherein
the qualities of a project manager are categorized into the following three areas:

      Interpersonal skills. These skills include providing direction, communicating, assisting with problem solving, and
      dealing effectively with people without having authority.
      Technical expertise. Technical knowledge gives the project manager the creditability to provide leadership on a
      technically based project, the ability to understand important aspects of the project, and the ability to communicate
      in the language of the technicians.
      Administrative skills. These skills include planning, organizing, and /managing/ overseeing/coordinating the work.

Traditionally, the project manager has been trained in skills such as developing and managing the project scope,
estimating, scheduling, decision making, and team building. Although the level of skills needed by the project manager
depends largely on the complexity of the project, the people skills of the project manager are increasingly more
important. The skills to build a high-performing team, manage client expectations, and develop a clear vision of project
success are the type of skills needed by project managers on more complex projects. "To say Joe is a good project
manager except he lacks good people skills is like saying he's a good electrical engineer but doesn't really understand
electricity."3

   KEY TAKEAWAYS

           Operations managers are long-term focused and process oriented. Project managers are goal directed and
           milestone oriented.
           Project managers need the same skills as an operations manager, such as good communication, team
           building, planning, expediting, and political sensitivity.
           Project managers need additional skills in establishing credibility, creative problem solving, tolerance for
           ambiguity, flexible management, and very good people skills.

[1] Albert A. Einsiedel, "Profile of Effective Project Managers," Project Management Journal 18 (1987): 5.
[2] Hans J. Thamhain, "Developing Project Management Skills," Project Management Journal 22 (1991): 3.
[3] Russell W. Darnall, "The Emerging Role of the Project Manager," PMI Journal (1997): 64.

                                                                                        21
This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/1-3-key-skills-of-the-project-
manager.

                                                         22
1.4

Introduction to the Project Management Knowledge
Areas

Quality  Risk  Project Scope  Costs  Procurement

   LEARNING OBJECTIVES

        1. Identify the tasks performed in a project start-up.
        2. Describe the areas of project management knowledge as defined by the Project Management Institute.

Project Start-up and Integration

During project start-up, the project management team refines the scope of work and develops a preliminary schedule
and conceptual budget. The project team builds a plan for executing the project based on the project profile (project
profiles are defined more fully in chapter 2). The plan for developing and tracking the detailed schedule, the
procurement plan, and the plan for building the budget and estimating and tracking costs are developed during the
start-up. The plans for information technology, communication, and tracking client satisfaction are all developed during
the start-up phase of the project.

Flowcharts, diagrams, and responsibility matrices are tools to capture the work processes associated with executing
the project plan. The first draft of the project procedures manual captures the historic and intuitional knowledge that
team members bring to the project. The development and review of these procedures and work processes contribute to
the development of the organizational structure of the project.

This is typically an exciting time on a project where all things are possible. The project management team is working
many hours developing the initial plan, staffing the project, and building relationships with the client. The project
manager sets the tone of the project and sets expectations for each of the project team members. The project start-up
phase on complex projects can be chaotic, and until plans are developed, the project manager becomes the source of
information and direction. The project manager creates an environment that encourages team members to fully engage
in the project and encourages innovative approaches to developing the project plan.

Project Scope

The project scope is expressed in a document that defines the parameters--factors that define the project and
determine its behavior--what work is done within the boundaries of the project, and the work that is outside the project
boundaries. The scope of work (SOW) is typically a written document that defines what work will be accomplished by

                                                                                        23
the end of the project--the deliverables of the project. The project scope defines what will be done, and the project
execution plan defines how the work will be accomplished.

No template works for all projects. Some projects have a very detailed scope of work, and some have a short summary
document. The quality of the scope is measured by the ability of the project manager and project stakeholders to
develop and maintain a common understanding of what products or services the project will deliver. The size and detail
of the project scope is related to the complexity profile of the project. A more complex project often requires a more
detailed and comprehensive scope document.

According to the Project Management Institute, a complete statement of the scope should include the following: 1

      Description of the scope
      Product acceptance criteria
      Project deliverables
      Project exclusions
      Project constraints
      Project assumptions

The scope of work is the basis for agreement by all parties. A clear project scope document is also critical to managing
change on a project. Since the project scope reflects what work will be accomplished on the project, any change in
expectations that is not captured and documented creates the opportunity for confusion. One of the most common
trends in projects is the incremental expansion in the project scope, which is called scope creep. Scope creep threatens
the success of a project because the small increases in scope require additional resources that were not in the plan.
Increasing the scope of the project is a common occurrence, and adjustments are made to the project budget and
schedule to account for these changes. Scope creep occurs when these changes are not recognized or not managed.
The ability of a project manager to identify potential changes is often related to the quality of the scope documents.

Events occur that require the scope of the project to change. Changes in the marketplace may require change in a
product design or the timing of the product delivery. Changes in the client's management team or the financial health of
the client may also result in changes in the project scope. Changes in the project schedule, budget, or product quality
will have an effect on the project plan. Generally, the later in the project the change occurs, the greater the increase to
the project costs. Establishing a system for managing change during the project that captures changes to the project
scope and assures that these changes are authorized by the appropriate level of management in the client's
organization is the responsibility of the project manager. The project manager also analyzes the cost and schedule
impacts of these changes and adjusts the project plan to reflect the changes authorized by the client. Changes to the
scope can cause costs to increase or decrease.

Project Schedule and Time Management

The definition of project success often includes completing the project on time. The development and management of a
project schedule that will complete the project on time is a primary responsibility of the project manager, and
completing the project on time requires the development of a realistic plan and the effective management of the plan.
On smaller projects, project managers may lead the development of the project plan and build a schedule to meet that
plan. On larger and more complex projects, a project controls team that focuses on both costs and schedule planning
and controlling functions will assist the project management team in developing the plan and tracking progress against
the plan.

To develop the project schedule, the project team does an analysis of the project scope, which is incorporated into the
contract, and other information that helps the team define the project deliverables. Based on this information, the
project team develops a milestone schedule. The milestone schedule establishes key dates throughout the life of a
project that must be met for the project to finish on time. The key dates are often established to meet contractual
obligations or established intervals that will reflect appropriate progress for the project. For less complex projects, a

                                                                                        24
milestone schedule may be sufficient for tracking the progress of the project. For more complex projects, a more
detailed schedule is required.

To develop a more detailed schedule, the project team first develops a work breakdown structure (WBS)--a description
of tasks arranged in layers of detail. Although the project scope is the primary document for developing the WBS, the
WBS incorporates all project deliverables and reflects any documents or information that clarifies the project
deliverables. From the WBS, a project plan is developed. The project plan lists the activities that are needed to
accomplish the work identified in the WBS. The more detailed the WBS, the more activities that are identified to
accomplish the work.

After the project team identifies the activities, the team then sequences the activities according to the order in which the
activities are to be accomplished. An outcome from the work process is the project logic diagram. The logic diagram
represents the logical sequence of the activities needed to complete the project. The next step in the planning process
is to develop an estimation of the time it will take to accomplish each activity or the activity duration. Some activities
must be done sequentially, and some activities can be done concurrently. The planning process creates a project
schedule by scheduling activities in a way that effectively and efficiently uses project resources and completes the
project in the shortest time.

On larger projects, several paths are created that represent a sequence of activities from the beginning to the end of the
project. The longest path to the completion of the project is the critical path. If the critical path takes less time than is
allowed by the client to complete the project, the project has a positive total float or project slack. If the client's project
completion date precedes the calculated critical path end date, the project has negative float. Understanding and
managing activities on the critical path is an important project management skill.

To successfully manage a project, the project manager must also know how to accelerate a schedule to compensate
for unanticipated events that delay critical activities. Compressing - crashing - the schedule is a term used to describe
the techniques used to shorten the project schedule. During the life of the project, scheduling conflicts often occur, and
the project manager is responsible for reducing these conflicts while maintaining project quality and meeting cost
goals.

Project Costs

The definition of project success often includes completing the project within budget. Developing and controlling a
project budget that will accomplish the project objectives is a critical project management skill. Although clients expect
the project to be executed efficiently, cost pressures vary on projects. On some projects, the project completion or end
date is the largest contributor to the project complexity. The development of a new drug to address a critical health
issue, the production of a new product that will generate critical cash flow for a company, and the competitive
advantage for a company to be first in the marketplace with a new technology are examples of projects with schedule
pressures that override project costs.

The accuracy of the project budget is related to the amount of information known by the project team. In the early
stages of the project, the amount of information needed to develop a detailed budget is often missing. To address the
lack of information, the project team develops different levels of project budget estimates. The conceptual estimate (or
"ballpark estimate") is developed with the least amount of knowledge. The major input into the conceptual estimate is
expert knowledge or past experience. A project manager who has executed a similar project in the past can use those
costs to estimate the costs of the current project.

When more information is known, the project team can develop a rough order of magnitude (ROM) estimate. Additional
information such as the approximate square feet of a building, the production capacity of a plant, and the approximate
number of hours needed to develop a software program can provide a basis for providing an ROM estimate. After a
project design is more complete, a project detailed estimate can be developed. When the project team knows the
number of rooms, the type of materials, and the building location of a home, the project team can provide a detailed
estimate. A detailed estimate is not a bid.

                                                                                        25
The cost of the project is tracked relative to the progress of the work and the estimate for accomplishing that work.
Based on the cost estimates, the cost of the work performed is compared against the cost budgeted for that work. If
the cost is significantly higher or lower, the project team explores reasons for the difference between expected costs
and actual costs.

Project costs may deviate from the budget because the prices in the marketplace were different from what was
expected. For example, the estimated costs for lumber on a housing project may be higher than budgeted or the hourly
cost for labor may be lower than budgeted. Project costs may also deviate based on project performance. For example,
the project team estimated that the steel design for a bridge over the Hudson River would take 800 labor hours, but 846
hours were actually expended. The project team captures the deviation between costs budgeted for work and the actual
cost for work, revises the estimate as needed, and takes corrective action if the deviation appears to reflect a trend.

The project manager is responsible for assuring that the project team develops cost estimates based on the best
information available and revises those estimates as new or better information becomes available. The project
manager is also responsible for tracking costs against the budget and conducting an analysis when project costs
deviate significantly from the project estimate. The project manager then takes appropriate corrective action to assure
that project performance matches the revised project plan.

Procurement

The procurement effort on projects varies widely and depends on the type of project. It can range from less complex
projects where the project team identifies the materials, product specifications and a detailed delivery schedule to the
client; to the parent company providing procurement services via a liaison; to a procurement team being hired.

At the end of the project, equipment bought or rented for the execution of the work of the project are sold, returned to
rental organizations, or disposed of some other way.

The procurement process may involve commodities, vendors, suppliers, and partners. The awarding of a contract can
include price, ability to meet the project schedule, the fit for purpose of the product, and other considerations important
to the project.

Project Quality

Project quality focuses on the end product or service deliverables that reflect the purpose of the project. The project
manager is responsible for developing a project execution approach that provides for a clear understanding of the
expected project deliverables and the quality specifications. The project manager of a housing construction project not
only needs to understand which rooms in the house will be carpeted but also what grade of carpet is needed. A room
with a high volume of traffic will need a high-grade carpet.

The project manager is responsible for developing a project quality plan that defines the quality expectations and
assures that the specifications and expectations are met. Developing a good understanding of the project deliverables
through documenting specifications and expectations is critical to a good quality plan. The processes for assuring that
the specifications and expectations are met are integrated into the project execution plan. Just as the project budget
and completion dates may change over the life of a project, the project specifications may also change. Changes in
quality specifications are typically managed in the same process as cost or schedule changes. The impact of the
changes is analyzed for impact on cost and schedule, and with appropriate approvals, changes are made to the project
execution plan.

The PMBOK has an extensive chapter on project quality management. The material found in this chapter would be
similar to material found in a good operational management text. Although any of the quality management techniques
designed to make incremental improvement to work processes can be applied to a project work process, the character
of a project (unique and relatively short in duration) makes small improvements less attractive on projects.

                                                                                        26
Rework on projects, as with manufacturing operations, increases the cost of the product or service and often increases
the time needed to complete the reworked activities. Because of the duration constraints of a project, the development
of the appropriate skills, materials, and work process early in the project is critical to project success. On more complex
projects, time is allocated to developing a plan to understand and develop the appropriate levels of skills and work
processes.

Project management organizations that execute several similar types of projects may find the process improvement
tools useful in identifying and improving the baseline processes used on their projects. Process improvement tools may
also be helpful in identifying cost and schedule improvement opportunities. Opportunities for improvement must be
found quickly to influence project performance. The investment in time and resources to find improvements is greatest
during the early planning stages of the project. During later project stages, as pressures to meet project schedule goals
increase, the culture of the project is less conducive to making changes in work processes.

Another opportunity for applying process improvement tools is on projects that have repetitive processes. A housing
contractor that is building several identical houses may benefit from evaluating work processes in the first few houses
to explore the opportunities available to improve the work processes. The investment of $1,000 in a work process that
saves $200 per house is a good investment as long as the contractor is building more than five houses.

Project Team

Staffing the project with the right skills, at the right place, and at the right time is an important responsibility of the
project management team. The project usually has two types of team members: functional managers and process
managers. The functional managers and team focus on the technology of the project. On a training project, the
functional manager would include the professional trainers; on an information technology project, the software
development managers would be functional managers. The project management team also includes project process
managers. The project controls team would include process managers who have expertise in estimating, cost tracking,
planning, and scheduling. The project manager needs functional and process expertise to plan and execute a
successful project.

Because projects are temporary, the staffing plan for a project typically reflects both the long-term goals of skilled team
members needed for the project and short-term commitment that reflects the nature of the project. Exact start and end
dates for team members are often negotiated to best meet the needs of individuals and the project. The staffing plan is
also determined by the different phases of the project. Team members needed in the early or conceptual phases of the
project are often not needed during the later phases or project closeout phases. Team members needed during the
execution phase are often not needed during the conceptual or closeout phases. Each phase has staffing requirements,
and the staffing of a complex project requires detailed planning.

Typically a core project management team is dedicated to the project from start-up to closeout. This core team would
include the following members: project manager, project controls, project procurement, and key members of the
function management or experts in the technology of the project. Although longer projects may experience more team
turnover than shorter projects, it is important on all projects to have team members who can provide continuity through
the project phases.

Project team members can be assigned to the project from a number of different sources. The organization that
charters the project can use any number of staffing options, such as assigning managers and staff from functional
units within the organization, contracting with individuals or agencies to staff positions, temporarily hiring staff for the
project, or a combination of these. This staffing approach allows the project manager to create the project
organizational culture. Some project cultures are more structured and detail oriented, and some are less structured with
less formal roles and communication requirements. The type of culture the project manager creates depends greatly on
the type of project.

                                                                                        27
Communications

Completing a complex project successfully requires teamwork, and teamwork requires good communication among
team members. If those team members work in the same building, they can arrange regular meetings, simply stop by
each other's office space to get a quick answer, or even discuss a project informally at other office functions. Many
complex projects in today's global economy involve team members from widely separated locations, and the types of
meetings that work within the same building are not possible. Teams that use electronic methods of communicating
without face-to-face meetings are called virtual teams.
Communications technologies require a variety of compatible devices, software, and service providers, and
communication with a global virtual team can involve many different time zones. Establishing effective
communications requires a communications plan.

Project Risk

Risk exists on all projects. The role of the project management team is to understand the kinds and levels of risks on
the project and then to develop and implement plans to mitigate these risks. Risk represents the likelihood that an event
will happen during the life of the project that will negatively affect the achievement of project goals. The type and
amount of risk varies by industry type, complexity, and phase of the project. The project risk plan will also reflect the risk
profile of the project manager and key stakeholders. People have different comfort levels with risk, and some members
of the project team will be more risk adverse than others.
The first step in developing a risk management plan involves identifying potential project risks. Some risks are easy to
identify, while others are less obvious. Many industries or companies have risk checklists developed from past
experience. However, no risk checklist will include all potential risks. The value of a checklist is the stimulation of
discussion and thought about the potential risks on a project.
The project team then analyzes the identified risks and estimates the likelihood of the risks occurring. The team then
estimates the potential impact of project goals if the event does occur. The outcome from this process is a prioritized
list of estimated project risks with a value that represents the likelihood of occurrence and the potential impact on the
project.
The project team then develops a risk mitigation plan that reduces the likelihood of an event occurring or reduces the
impact on the project if the event does occur. The risk management plan is integrated into the project execution plan,
and mitigation activities are assigned to the appropriate project team member. The likelihood that all the potential
events identified in the risk analysis would occur is extremely rare. The likelihood that one or more events will happen is
high.
The project risk plan reflects the risk profile of the project and balances the investment of the mitigation against the
benefit for the project. The plan includes periodic risk plan reviews during the life of the project. The risk review
evaluates the effectiveness of the current plan and explores for possible risks not identified in earlier sessions.

                                                                                        28
   KEY TAKEAWAYS

           During the start-up phase, the project leader develops the project infrastructure used to design and execute
           the project. A team is formed to create agreement among project stakeholders on the goals, cost, and
           completion date. Plans for executing the project by managing the schedule, quality, and budget are created.
           The SOW establishes project parameters that define what will be done.
           The project schedule begins with a milestone schedule followed by a WBS and a project diagram. The
           longest path through the project diagram is the critical path, and the difference between the completion of
           the critical path and the project finish date is the float. Shortening the critical path is called crashing the
           project.
           Cost estimating begins with a conceptual or ballpark estimate that is followed by a ROM estimate. A
           project budget is determined from the cost of the tasks in the WBS. Costs are monitored during the project
           and estimates updated if the costs vary from expectations.
           The provider of procurement management depends on the size of the project and the organization.
           Commodities are purchased through vendors, suppliers or partners.
           Project quality begins with the specifications of materials and labor. A quality plan creates a process for
           assuring the requirements and specifications of the project are met. Quality improvement tools can be
           applied to projects if the company has several similar projects.
           Team members are selected to manage functions and processes. The staffing plan assigns people as
           needed. Sources of team members are company employees, contractors, new hires, and partners.
           The risk on a project reflects the number of things that can possibly happen that will have a negative effect
           on the project and the probability of those events happening.

[1] Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK Guide), 4th ed.
(Newtown Square, PA: Project Management Institute, Inc., 2008), 115-16.

                           This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                           Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/1-4-introduction-to-the-project-
                           management-knowledge-areas.

                                                                                        29
30
  2

Project Profiling

Overview

This chapter aligns with beginning sections of most of the chapters in the PMBOK, where attributes are identified in
specific ways. It is therefore difficult to quantify a proportion of the CAPM questions that come from this knowledge
area. The content connects to the Initiation and Planning category of the PMP questions.
A project profile attempts to provide a snapshot look at the project scope and requirements before work actually
begins. A well-crafted project profile can help when designing the project execution plan at a later stage, as well as in
determining the assignment of resources to the project.
A project profile usually contains some or all of the following:

      Projections on project size and cost
      Analysis of project complexity
      Analysis of required technology and resources
By the end of this chapter you should be equipped with the skills necessary to successfully gauge the difficulty of a
potential project as well as to forecast the required resources and time necessary through project completion.

                                                                                        31
Designers Share Their Experiences

   Dr. Andy Gibbons - Instructional Psychology and Technology - BYU

                                                                               Watch on YouTube

     This project was to train helicopter pilots and sensor operators. The contract came to us as a signed contract
     with the Navy. It came with a certain number of resources promised to us. We had a lot of subject matter expert
     support on the project. On other projects that wasn't the case, but on this one we really had plenty. The thing
     that was interesting is as we looked at the constraints on the project there was a constraint we didn't notice that
     later turned out to be a big factor. Turns out that there...in the...we didn't have a lot of access to people who were
     actually using it on a day-to-day basis...the training....would be using the training in daily operations. And so
     we....our subject matter experts were off in the west coast, and it turns out that the water is different on the
     west coast from on the east coast. And of course quality of the water, when you're flying a helicopter and
     looking for submarines is a very important factor. We developed the course as if it was for the West coast.
     When the training was shipped to the East Coast, it was different. They couldn't use it in the same way. Actually
     it took some revisions of the training to adjust for that problem. We didn't know at the beginning that that was a
     resource problem. And so it came up and bit us later.

                                                                                        32
Heather Bryce - Independent Studies - BYU

                                                                         Watch on YouTube

At the beginning of Art 45, we met to discuss the major requirements which would be editing, how long the
course is, how well written the course was-that will determine our editing time, video requirements, flash
requirements and art requirements. Obviously, Art 45 is an art class, drawing actually.

                                                                                  33
Dr. Larry Seawright - Center for Teaching and Learning - BYU

                                                                          Watch on YouTube

 The BYU Learning Suite is a learning management system that's going to replace the current system at the
 University. As such we have lots of stakeholders, so we had to do a lot of profiling. We had to check with all of
 the stake holders, faculty members, students, the University administration, and find out what all the various
 constituents needs were, and factor those in as we decided the scope of the project. How much could we do?
 How little could we do? We took a look at the existing product and the primary utilization of it. And decided that
 their mostly using this much, so this is how much we are going to start with. And then we verified that with all of
 the different stake holders.

Using a Project Profile
Project Profiling Models
Complex Systems and the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index
Darnall-Preston Complexity Index Structure
Using the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index to Measure Organizational Complexity

                                                                                   34
This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/2-project-profiling.

                                                         35
36
  2.1

Using a Project Profile

Budget  Project Manager  Project Profile

   LEARNING OBJECTIVES

        1. Identify project attributes that can be used for project profiling.
        2. Define project profiling.

A project manager with a long history of successful projects oftentimes fails on others. What causes this to happen?
Even though all projects are by definition unique, there are attributes (such as size, cost, subject matter, etc.) that are
common among projects that allow the characterization or profiling of a project. Different skills and approaches are
needed by the project manager for different projects. You can imagine that the ideal project manager for a large
construction project may not be a good fit for a software development project. The technical knowledge needed to
manage these projects is not the same and having the wrong technical knowledge may make the difference between a
successful project and project failure.

A large project that will be executed in at least three locations will have a very different profile from a small project that
will be executed in one location. These two attributes--size and location--provide information about the project that will
enable a manager in the parent organization to assign a project manager with the appropriate knowledge and skills. We
can then develop an execution approach to increase the likelihood of success.

                                          37
                                                                Image by robnguyen01
Organizations need good tools for understanding and matching the needs of a project with the project manager who
has the right skills and experience. Developing a project profile is one method for gaining an understanding of the
project and providing a systematic approach to developing an execution plan to select a project manager who has the
right kind of experience and skills.
Project profiling is the process of extracting a characterization from the known attributes of a project. The
characterization will provide a more comprehensive understanding of the project that should result in developing an
appropriate execution approach and the assignment of organizational resources. In different terms, project profiling is a
process that summarizes what is known about the attributes of a project and places the project into a category with
other projects that have similar characteristics. For example, you can characterize a project as a large project or a small
project; the size of the project becomes the profiling attribute. You can characterize a project as domestic or global,
making the location of the project the profiling characteristic.
A company that has twenty projects may determine that four of these projects are estimated to cost more than $1
million dollars and the remaining sixteen projects are estimated to cost much less. The company then communicates
that all projects over $1 million be considered a large project. The company now establishes a rule that large projects
will require a project manager with at least five years of management experience, it will have a vice president as
executive sponsor, and it will require formal quarterly reports. In this example, one characteristic is used to develop the
organization's project management approach to their twenty projects.

   KEY TAKEAWAYS

           Project profiles can be created based on attributes such as budget and size to determine a systematic
           approach to developing an execution plan and selecting a project manager.
           Project profiling is the process of extracting a characterization from the known attributes of a project.

                                                                                        38
This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/2-1-using-a-project-profile.

                                                         39
40
  2.2

Project Profiling Models

Planning  Project Tools  Management Tools

LEARNING OBJECTIVE

  1. Understand different methods of typing projects.

                                                                Image by PehMed2020

Shenhar and Dvir observed that the project execution approach was connected to the project type. The study identified
different management patterns associated with project type as well as different management tools and practices. As

                                                                                        41
the project system scope became more complex and the system scope of the project became larger, more
sophisticated management tools were put in place to reduce project uncertainty. As project technology increased,
project managers became more invested in processes to manage technical issues such as redesign and testing. As
projects increased in system scope, project managers became more invested in formal planning and control issues. In
later research, Shenhar2 developed recommendations for adjusting the project management approach based on the
project typology. For example, project managers will use more risk management techniques (see Chapter 11) when the
technological uncertainty is high.
Robert Youker3 identified basic differences in project types. Among the attributes he used were the uncertainty and risk,
level of sophistication of the workers, the level of detail in the planning, the newness of the technology, and the time
pressure. Youker also looked at project size, duration, geographic location, number of workers, cost, complexity,
urgency, and organizational design as attributes that help determine a project profile.

   KEY TAKEAWAYS

           There are many different typology methods to consider when characterizing a project in order to meet its
           specific needs and scope. Some things to consider might be technological uncertainty and complexity of
           scope, risk, worker sophistication, location, urgency, and organizational design.

[1] Aaron J. Shenhar and Dov Dvir, "Toward a Typological Theory of Project Management,"Research Policy 25 (1996):
607-32.
[2] Aaron J. Shenhar, Adapting Your Project Management Style: The Key to Project Success (Hoboken, NJ: Stevens
Institute of Technology, 1999).
[3] Robert Youker, "Defining the Hierarchy of Project Objectives," IPMA Conference (Slovenia: American Society for
Advancement of Project Management, 1998).

                           This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                           Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/2-2-project-profiling-models.

                                                                                        42
2.3

Complex Systems and the Darnall-Preston
Complexity Index

Complexity  Complex Systems

   LEARNING OBJECTIVES

        1. Describe the characteristics of complex systems.
        2. Explain the benefits of using the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index.

COMPLEX SYSTEMS

When is a project complex? The complexity of a system is usually determined by the number of parts or activities, the
degree of differentiation between the parts, and the structure of their connections. Heterogeneous and irregularly
configured systems are complex, such as organisms, airplanes, and junkyards. Order is the opposite of complex.
Ordered systems are homogenous and redundant, like an interstate toll booth or a production line in a factory. Complex
systems have multiple interacting components whose collective behavior cannot be simply inferred from the behavior
of the individual components.1

In addition to the number of parts, the degree of differentiation between parts and the number, type, and strength of
relationships between parts also influences the degree of complexity. For example, the transistors in a computer have
three connections to other parts of the computer, but each nerve cell in the human brain can be connected to thousands
of other cells in the brain, which is why the human brain is more complex than a computer. Complexity is context
dependent. A project is more or less complex in relation to the number of activities, the type and strength of
relationships to other project activities, and the degree and type of relationships to the project environment.

Projects are complex adaptive systems, which consist of a large number of parts or activities that interact with each
other in numerous and various ways. A complex adaptive system is adaptive if the activities adjust or react to the
events of the environment. Successful adaptive systems adjust in a way that facilitates or allows the system or project
to achieve its purpose.

The dependence of the project on the activities, the interdependence of the activities, and the specialization of the
activities underscore the relationship dependence of project activities. This relationship dependence is a key aspect of
complex adaptive systems. The nature of complex adaptive systems can be probed by investigating the impact of
change in one activity and the effect on other activities and the behavior of the whole. Activities must be studied and

                                                                                        43
understood as interrelated, connected parts of the whole. If you remove a computer chip from a computer and the
computer powers down, do not assume the purpose of the chip was to provide power to the computer. If you remove or
shorten a project kickoff activity, do not assume the project will finish earlier because of the dependence of later project
activities on project kickoff activities. Any change to the kickoff activities will impact other activities and the project as
a whole.

    Common Core Curriculum

     In 2009, the Council of Chief State and School Officers and the National Governors Association undertook the
     project of developing K-12 curricular standards that would be common across the adopting states. The project
     proved to have a level of complexity not traditionally seen in state curriculum development. The project catered
     to diverse stakeholders, including state legislatures, state departments of education, teachers, administrators,
     parents, colleges/universities, and businesses. The project included the creation of different committees who
     advised on steps in the process, requiring consensus across multiple states in different time zones with
     different educational values. The project complexity profile reflected the relationship dependence of project
     activities as well as the large number of interacting parts and stakeholders in the project.

Complex adaptive systems have three characteristics that are also reflected in complex projects.

Complex Adaptive Systems Tend to Self-Organize

Formal organizational charts indicate reporting relationships but are not very effective at displaying project
relationships. Projects organize around the work, phases, or activities. The organization of the project reacts to the
nature of the work at any given phase. During the start-up meeting of a large complex project, the project manager
facilitated the development of the project organization chart that included all the major partners, client leaders and key
team members. After the chart was complete, the project manager ripped the chart up in front of the entire project team
to demonstrate his key message, which was that there are formal reporting relationships, but the real leadership and
communication will change during the life of the project. In other words, the system will adapt to meet the needs of the
project at each phase.

Informally, the project team reorganizes information flows and priorities to support the current work of the project and a
good project manager facilitates this adaptive behavior of the project organization by minimizing the impact of formal
authority and processes.

Complex Systems Adapt to Changing Environments

A deterministic system is a system that will produce the same results if you start with the same conditions. The
outcome can be reliably predicted if you know the starting conditions. For example, if you fire a rifle several times at a
target, the hits on the target will be closely grouped if all the initial conditions are almost identical. A nonlinear system,
or chaotic system, can produce wildly different results even if the starting conditions are almost exactly the same. If
today's weather pattern is almost exactly the same as it was on a previous date, the weather a week later could be
entirely different. Projects are usually nonlinear systems. If we execute an identical complex project three different
times, we would deliver three different outcomes. We start with the assumption that the project is deterministic and use
scenarios and simulations to develop the most likely outcome, yet a small change such as the timing of someone's
vacation or a small change in the delivery date of equipment can change the entire trajectory of a project.

                                                                                        44
   Changing Environments

     A design company was hired to create training for employees of the client's new enterprise. The company
     managers felt that the outcome would be fairly predictable and assigned the management of the project to one
     of their lead designers. Two weeks into the project start-up, the company president realized the project needed
     a manager with more expertise and assigned a new person to manage the project. Then the client informed the
     company that they had changed the location for their new offices from Seattle to Houston. Since they had
     initially wanted the training to have location-specific nuances, the project needed to be reworked. During the
     second month of the project, the client encountered a legal suit which necessitated that the project be placed
     on hold. This project environment was unstable and the project plan and organization adjusted and evolved to
     respond to each of these changes.

All projects experience some forms of environment shift during the life of the project. This is one of the reasons project
managers develop an aggressive change management process. The purpose of the change management process is
not to stop change but to incorporate the change into the project planning and execution processes. Projects, like all
other complex adaptive systems, must respond to the evolving environment to succeed. Plan as if the project is
deterministic but be prepared for unpredictable changes.

Complex Systems Coevolve with Internal and External Changes

In addition to responding to changes in the project environment, the internal project organization and environment is in
a constant state of change. New people become members of the team, people quit, retire, and get sick. The office roof
starts leaking, headquarters rolls out a new computer program required for all workers, or the project's lead designer
cannot get her immigration visa extended. These are real examples of events that occurred on one project, and the
project team adjusted to each event. The adaptation to changes in the project's internal situation while also adapting to
the external environment reflects the coevolving nature of a complex adaptive system. An increase in the number of
events within the project and the project environment that are likely to change during the life of the project is reflected in
an increase in the complexity of a project.

DARNALL-PRESTON COMPLEXITY INDEX

Projects are more likely to fail in the beginning, not in the end. This generalized statement reflects the importance of
understanding the environment in which a project will be executed and the importance of developing an execution plan
that can be successfully implemented within this environment. Profiling a project correctly requires a system that is
relatively easy to use but that includes enough attributes to capture all the most important characteristics of a complex
project. The Darnall-Preston Complexity Index (DPCITM) is one model for understanding and profiling projects (and will
be explained further through the rest of this chapter). This index assesses the complexity level of key components of a
project and produces a unique project profile. The profile indicates the project complexity level, which provides a
benchmark for comparing projects and provides information about the characteristics of a project that can then be
addressed in the project execution plan. It achieves this objective by grouping eleven attributes into four broad
categories: internal, external, technological complexity, and environmental.

The DPCI provides project stakeholders with information about the project to define the experience, knowledge, skills,
and abilities needed by the project manager. The DPCI also has implications for the composition, organization, and
skills needed by the project leadership team. The DPCI provides information and a context for developing the project
execution plan and for assessing the probability of success.

Recovery costs can be extremely high for projects where the environment is misread or the execution plan does not
address critical issues of the project environment. In addition to cost overruns and delays in the project, execution plans

                                                                                        45
that are not aligned with the project environment can create barriers that make recovery difficult, and in some cases, the
business purpose of the project cannot be met. The DPCI is a tool to assist project stakeholders in developing a
comprehensive analysis of the project environment and a project execution plan more aligned with that environment,
both of which increase the likelihood of project success.
The foundation of a sound project execution plan is an assessment of the project environment. This assessment
provides the information on which the execution plan is built. In the absence of an accurate assessment of the project
environment, the project leadership makes assumptions and develops the execution plan around those assumptions.
The quantity and quality of those assumptions will significantly influence the effectiveness of the project execution
plan. The amount of information available to the project manager will increase over time and assumptions will be
replaced with better information and better estimates. As better tools are developed for evaluating the project
environment, better information will become available to the project manager.
The project environment includes all the conditions that can influence the outcome or success of the project, such as
the project size, technological complexity, cultural and language barriers, the political landscape, and resource
constraints. Understanding these influences and developing a project profile creates a foundation for building an
effective project execution plan.

   KEY TAKEAWAYS

           Complex systems have many different parts that interact with each other in different and often
           unpredictable ways. They adapt to changes in their external and internal environments.
           The Darnall-Preston Complexity Index (DPCI) assesses project attributes, enabling better-informed
           decisions in creating the project profile.

[1] Stephen Jay Gould, Full House: The Spread of Excellence from Plato to Darwin (New York: Three Rivers Press, 1996).

                           This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                           Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/2-3-complex-systems-and-the-
                           darnall-preston-complexity-index.

                                                                                        46
  2.4

Darnall-Preston Complexity Index Structure

Complexity  Internal  External  Environmental  Project Attributes  Technological

   LEARNING OBJECTIVES

        1. Describe each of the external attributes that contribute to project complexity.
        2. Describe each of the internal attributes that contribute to project complexity.
        3. Describe each of the technological attributes that contribute to project complexity.
        4. Describe each of the environmental attributes that contribute to project complexity.

The Darnall-Preston Complexity Index (DPCITM) is designed to develop a project profile that reflects different aspects of
the project that will influence the approach to leading and executing the project.
The DPCI is built on four categories of attributes:

  1. External. Environmental attributes that are in existence at the beginning of the project, such as size, duration, and
      available resources

  2. Internal. Clarity of project objectives, the clarity of scope, the organizational complexity, and stakeholder agreement
  3. Technological. Newness of the technology and familiarity of team members with the technology
  4. Environmental. Legal, cultural, political, and ecological
The DPCI was developed around four assumptions:
  1. All projects are unique.
  2. Projects have common characteristics.
  3. These characteristics can be grouped together to create a project profile.
  4. There is an optimum execution approach for each project profile and therefore an optimum set of skills and

      experience for the project manager and execution team.

EXTERNAL ATTRIBUTES

The external attributes include those issues that are typically established early in the project definition phase and are
usually outside the direct control of the project management team. The project size can be a product of the dollars
needed to execute the project or project cost. The cost of the project is estimated during the conceptual phase of the

                                                                                        47
project, and is established at the time the project is authorized. The duration or time allocated to complete the project
and the resources available are also attributes that are established when the project is authorized.

Size

Project size is a relative concept. How do we decide if something is large or small? A 150-pound person is big if the
person is ten years old. A 150-pound person is small if the person is a professional football lineman. The frame of
reference provides the context in which size is determined.

The size of a project is also relative. A $250 million oil refinery expansion is a relatively small project in an industry
where billion dollar projects are common. A $250 million pharmaceutical development project or software development
project would be considered a large project. The size of a project is determined by the context of the industry and the
experience of the team executing the project.

Design firms usually specialize in projects that fall within a defined range. Small firms usually execute small projects
and large firms usually execute larger projects. There is a size range for which the company experience, management
skills, tools, and work processes are primarily designed. This size range or comfort zone exists for both the company
and the members of the project team executing the project.

When a project team executes a project outside their comfort zone, stress is placed on both the tools and project team.
When a project is larger than the comfort zone of a company, stresses are placed on the ability to provide experience
and appropriate work processes, and the results are typically cost overruns and schedule delays. To mitigate this stress,
some companies will divide large projects into smaller projects and execute the smaller projects with separate
dedicated staff and resources. The key to success then becomes the coordination of the small projects to behave as if
they are one large project.

When a company is executing a project that is much smaller than the company norm, resources are often misused and
inappropriate work processes are utilized. The result often increases the project costs. Some companies with a history
of executing large projects have set up a small project group to execute smaller projects. These groups establish a
different culture, develop appropriate work processes, and use tools designed to execute smaller projects.

The more the project size is outside the comfort zone of the project, the more stress is created for the project. This is
true on both ends of the spectrum. Both smaller and larger projects that fall outside the comfort zone of the project
management team will create stress for the project. New skills, tools, and processes will need to be developed to
manage the project, and this activity will absorb management time and energy. The higher the stress level created by
executing a project outside the comfort zone of the organization, the greater the impact on the complexity level of the
project.

Duration

The duration of a project is often set by the parent organization that charters the project with a deadline that reflects the
business purpose of the project. The following are examples of projects with end dates that are established to meet the
organization's business purpose:

      A new software program for a university to be implemented in time for registering students in the fall
      A new product to be introduced to the marketplace at the industry's major conference
      A new high school to be constructed and open next fall

The project team also estimates the duration of the project and establishes a project end date based on normal work
(e.g., forty hours per week) and the availability of resources.

Sometimes the normal time needed to complete a project is longer than the time available.

                                                                                        48
   College Accreditation

     A university's college of nursing is working to develop an assessment system to measure learning outcomes as
     part of its efforts to meet accreditation requirements. The deadline is six weeks earlier than the time estimated
     to pilot, revise, and finalize the assessment system. New employees will have to be hired to complete the
     additional work needed and professors will be asked to use small chunks of instructional time to expedite the
     piloting of items. A new schedule is developed based on these changes to the execution approach, and now the
     project schedule has zero float.

The result of this six-week compression to the project schedule is additional stress on the project. Significant
management time and energy will be invested in tracking and managing schedule issues. Every issue that arises will
need to be resolved quickly and involve the project's senior manager to assure the project schedule does not slip. This
additional stress increases the overall project complexity.

Resource Availability

Projects require both human and tangible resources. The project requires people with the right experience, knowledge,
and skills to accomplish the assigned tasks. Some projects require specialized subcontractors with skills not found
within the project team. Each of these resources required by the project will be needed at the point in the project
schedule when the materials or skills are required. When these resources are scarce or not available, additional
management time and energy is needed.

   Criterion Referenced Tests

     When congress authorized the No Child Left Behind Act, states were required to develop large-scale
     assessments to measure how well students were performing according to the new standards. With many states
     trying to hire measurement experts to help develop these tests, a project manager for one state's
     implementation found that experts in testing and measurement were in short supply. The project manager
     dedicated significant time and resources to train people from within the project in educational assessment and
     measurement principles, so that the project of test development could continue.

When resources needed to execute the project are not readily available, the project leadership dedicates more
management time and energy to acquiring the resources or finding innovative solutions to accomplish the project goals
without the needed resources or with creative alternative solutions. The more time and energy the management team
must dedicate to searching for resources or alternatives, the more stress on the project. The more scarce and more
important the resources, the more stress is placed on the project.

INTERNAL ATTRIBUTES

The internal attributes are within the control or influence of the project manager, such as the clarity of objectives, clarity
of scope, the organizational complexity, and stakeholder agreement. Although the clarity of objectives, as with the other
attributes, can be improved during the life of the project, the project profile reflects the project at a given time. If the
project objectives are not clear during the evaluation of the project, this lack of clarity impacts the complexity of the
project.

                                                                                        49
Clarity of the Project Objectives

Project decisions are made based on how these decision help the project meet its objectives. If the objectives are
unclear, the team will not make the best decisions. The greater the confusion for the project team on the goals and
objectives of the project, the greater the impact on the complexity of the project.

   Confusion Over Objectives in Philadelphia

     A consultant was asked to evaluate the likelihood of success of a large project in Philadelphia. The consultant
     interviewed the project leadership and asked if the goals of the projects were clear. Each member of the
     leadership team responded that the goals and objectives were clear; however, when asked what the goals were,
     the answers varied greatly.

   Protected

     An educational evaluation project involved collecting outcome data from a large number of college students.
     The Institutional Review Board (IRB) application stated very clearly that individual students would not be
     identified with the data collected, that every effort would be made to make data generation and collection non-
     intrusive for students, and that students would not lose instructional time. Every major data decision passed
     through an evaluation of the impact on student instructional time and the protection of student confidentiality.
     Although these steps increased the complexity of the project, the clear goals warranted the extra efforts.

Clarity of Scope

The project scope defines what is inside the project and what is outside. Does the project to train five hundred
technicians for the Boeing 787 include recruiting and assessing potential employees? The project scope did include
recruitment and assessment, but hiring processes and drug testing belonged to Boeing. This scope was clear about
which responsibilities belonged to the contractor doing the training and which responsibilities belonged to the parent
organization.

Not all project scopes are this clear. The development of a clear project scope depends on information available about
what products and services will be required. A project to develop a vaccine for a new strain of flu may not include
sufficient information to develop the processes the team will utilize to understand the flu virus and develop a vaccine.
As the team develops more information, the scope can be further developed.

Leadership time and energy will be focused on developing scope clarity. The lack of clarity and the amount of time
needed by the leadership team to develop a clear scope will add to the project complexity.

Organizational Complexity

The structure of the project's client organization and the organizational decision-making processes influence the project
complexity. A project with one client as the central point for making decisions and providing client approvals and
technical information has only one relationship to manage and a streamlined communication process. Projects with a
team representing the client require more of the project manager's time and energy managing the client relationships
and communication process. The client team approach brings more expertise and often more comprehensive project
oversight, but it adds to the project complexity.

                                                                                        50
Stakeholder Agreement

Often there is more than one major stakeholder in the project. An increase in the number of stakeholders adds stress to
the project and influences the project's complexity level. The business or emotional investment of the stakeholder in the
project and the ability of the stakeholder to influence the project outcomes or execution approach will also influence the
stakeholder complexity of the project. In addition to the number of stakeholders and their level of investment, the
degree in which the project stakeholders agree or disagree also influences the complexity of the project.

A small educational project will typically have several stakeholders in addition to the client. School administrators,
teachers, students, parents, and even community and business leaders may have an interest in the project and can
influence the execution plan of the project. The number of stakeholders on the project, multiplied by their passion for
the subject and the potential for disagreement, increases the complexity of the project. Significant time and resources
of the project will be dedicated to identifying, understanding, and managing expectations.

TECHNOLOGICAL COMPLEXITY

The technology of a project refers to the product of the project and not the technology used to manage the project. This
technology is typically unique to the industry. A pharmaceutical project technology is the drug-making technology or
pharmacology. The technology for a project to build a new automobile plant is the car production process. The key
stress on the project is the newness of the technology. What aspects of the technology are known, and what aspects
are unknown? Does the project combine technologies on the project that have never been combined? Newer and more
complex technology requires greater expertise on the project team and increases the stress and complexity of the
project.

   Open Assessment Project

     A non-profit organization hired a project manager to oversee the development of a website to distribute openly-
     licensed assessment items for teachers. The project required building an interface that would allow teachers to
     access materials and receive training on how to write good items, have a mechanism for teachers to submit
     new items, and a way for teachers to give tests online so student data could be used to evaluate the strength of
     individual items. Most of the technology was tested and the project team brought in experts to help design and
     implement an interface to meet the requirements of the project. The technology of the project necessitated the
     project team to develop a new understanding of this technology and adapt work processes to the technology
     requirements.

PROJECT ENVIRONMENT

The project environment includes all the issues related to the environment that will influence the development and
execution of the project plan. An instructional design project in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania will have very different legal,
cultural, and political issues to address from one in So Paolo, Brazil. The environment attributes in Brazil require more
planning, resources, and leadership attention to successfully execute the project.

Legal

The legal issues on a project can be broad and include many different levels of government. Most local governments
have various permits, such as business licenses and building permits, required to do work. Some projects will have
security issues and will work with local law enforcement.

                                                                                        51
Workforce laws vary significantly in country, regional, and local jurisdictions. The hiring and management of workers
can be a complex and time-consuming issue for some projects. Companies not used to working in a union environment
will invest project resources in learning and adapting to the new environment. Scheduling holidays, supporting maternity
leave, and dealing with workforce reduction issues surrounding project closeout will vary in each environment, industry,
and project. Understanding and managing workforce issues on a project can be simple or very complex.

National, regional, and local taxes require a project tax approach or policy on most international projects and some
domestic projects. Duties for equipment and material brought into a country add complexity to the procurement plan.
Equipment used temporarily to execute the project, such as a crane, is treated differently than permanently installed
equipment, such as a pump. In some countries, a third party is hired to expedite the flow of materials through complex
custom processes.

Not every project will have significant legal issues. When legal issues are involved, they are typically significant and will
add to the complexity of the project. Understanding the legal issues that can affect the project and developing a plan to
address these issues will reduce the complexity of the project.

Cultural

Culture is a term that reflects the community's assumptions, norms, values, and artifacts. Community includes the
parent organization charting the project, the local community or communities where the project is executed, and the
region and country where the project is located. The project team must understand the community's culture and its
potential impact on the project. Culture also defines the meaning of work, truth, relationships, and how to communicate.
Projects executed in various cultures will often experience cultural conflict.

   Gender Difficulties in Argentina

     A project team from the United States was responsible for executing a project in Argentina. The U.S. leadership
     team included women in key leadership positions, and the Argentines refused to take direction from females.
     The U.S. team believed strongly in their leadership capability and refused to make changes. This conflict was
     settled by senior managers of both organizations, and rules were established that respected all team members
     in leadership roles. The conflict did not go away, but the team was able to successfully execute the project with
     the original team. Delays were experienced on the project that could be traced to this cultural conflict.

Many organizations have rule-based cultures. Institutions of higher learning, organizations related to judicial
organizations, and most government organizations are examples of rule-based organizations. The organizational
structure and culture inhibits risk taking through established rules and policies. Projects are goal based and focus on
plans and processes to achieve goals. Goal-based cultures promote assuming risk to achieve goals. Projects that are
closely tied to a rule-based parent organization will often find conflict with the parent organization's need to follow rules
and the project's need to accomplish goals. This conflict creates additional stress that adds to the project complexity.

On global projects, language, cultural conflict with the role of women, the religious role in daily activities, and even the
concept of time can becomes issues on the project. These issues require project leadership to resolve and they add to
the project complexity. In some countries and even different companies in the same country, meetings start on time,
and a person arriving five minutes late will cause major disruption. In other situations, meetings can start within thirty
minutes of the starting time without anyone objecting.

                                                                                        52
   Communication Problem in India

     A team of project experts was sent to India to evaluate a large instructional design project. The team arrived
     and reviewed the project documents which reported that the project was on time and meeting all project goals.
     After spending three days with various designers and team managers, the team discovered the project was
     significantly behind schedule. A culture existed on the project where workers told the project management what
     they expected to hear, and the difference between the progress of the project team and the progress reports
     became so large that the difference could not be reconciled during the original schedule of the project.

An increase in the number of cultures represented on the project team raises the cultural complexity and the complexity
of a project. Although this cultural diversity creates leadership challenges, it also presents opportunities. The diversity
of cultures presents various approaches to solving problems, and the project manager may find innovative solutions
easier to develop with a diverse project team.

Political

Every project operates within one or more communities that reflect organizational dynamics and power struggles. The
more important the project is to the organizational leadership, the more invested various organizational leaders will be
in the project. The more people that become invested in the project and the more influence these people exhibit on the
resources and activities of the project, the more time and energy will be expended by the project team in managing
these outside influences. This additional stress on project leadership time and resources adds complexity to the
project.

Ecological

Projects have the potential to impact the living conditions or the health of people, plants, and animals. In addition to the
potential impact to land, water, and air, the ecology includes the sights and sounds that can impact the quality of life. An
increasing number of clients expect the project team to minimize the impact of the project on the ecology. An ecology
that is more sensitive to disruption and a more disruptive technology will place greater stress on the project and
increase the project complexity. The addition of twenty-five people in existing office space or one that requires a
substantial increase in electrical use will all impact the ecology. The project team develops means and methods to
minimize the impact of the disruption in a manner consistent with the requirements as communicated by the client. The
effort that is needed to minimize the ecological impact will influence the complexity of the project.

   KEY TAKEAWAYS

           The external attributes are the relative size of the project, duration of the project, and the available
           resources.
           The internal attributes are the clarity of its scope, the complexity of the organization, and the agreement
           among stakeholders.
           The technological attributes are the technology of the product (not the technology used to manage the
           project), the newness of the technology, and the familiarity of the team with the technology.
           The environmental attributes are the legal issues, cultural conflicts, political interests, the impact of the
           project on the ecology, and the impact of the ecology on the project.

                                                                                        53
This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/2-4-darnall-preston-complexity-
index-structure.

                                                         54
2.5

Using the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index to
Measure Organizational Complexity

Complexity  Technological  Organizational

   LEARNING OBJECTIVES

        1. Analyze a project function for size, organizational complexity, technological newness, and technological
           familiarity and assign a complexity score.

Recall that the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index (DPCITM) ranks complexity in four categories: external, internal,
technological, and environmental. The information provided in this chapter can be used to rate a project's complexity in
the areas of size, organizational complexity, technological newness, and technology familiarity. Scores range from 1
(least complex) to 5 (most complex).

                           Image by Doblin/Monitor

                                                               55
Size

Recall that size is relative to the organization's comfort zone for projects. Refer to the following descriptions for tips on
arriving at a DPCI score for size:

  1. The project size is the most common size the organization does. The project manager and team members have
      done many similarly sized projects, and the tools they use to manage this size project are well tested and reliable.

  2. The project size is at the high or low end of the range of project sizes that the organization or team members have
      done before.

  3. The project size is about 20% higher or lower than projects the organization or some of the team members have
      done before. The project leader and a few key team leaders are familiar with this size project from work they have
      done elsewhere. Project management tools and processes will have to be adjusted but will probably work.

  4. The project size is about 50% higher or lower than projects the organization or most of the team members have
      done before. Project management tools and processes will have to be adjusted, and it is not certain that they will
      work well. New tools and procedures may be needed.

  5. Neither the organization nor the team members are experienced working on a project this size. It is several times
      larger or smaller than previous projects. It is too small or too large for the tools and techniques with which the team
      is familiar.

Organizational Complexity

Recall that system complexity is determined by the variety of types of elements and the number of connections there
are between elements. Review a chart of the organizational structure that depicts the reporting relationships, the
number of people involved, their familiarity with each other, and the amount of cross connections between reporting
relationships and functions. Refer to the following descriptions for tips on arriving at a DPCI score for size:

  1. The organizational structure is simple and involves few people. No new relationships need to be formed, and the
      people have worked together in these relationships before.

  2. The team includes people who report to operations managers instead of the project manager, and more people are
      involved.

  3. The organization chart has numerous segments, but most people are familiar with their roles and have worked in
      this type of role before.

  4. The number of people involved is large, and the functions are handled by many different people. There are several
      levels of reporting in the organization chart.

  5. The number of people is very large, and many of them do not know each other or have never met. Each major
      function requires a full-time person, and coordinating between functions requires frequent meetings among mid-
      and top-level managers.

Technology Newness

Recall that this category refers to the technology that is part of the project. It might be new technology that is being
implemented to make a step change in the efficiency of an operation. Refer to the following descriptions for tips on
arriving at a DPCI score for size:

                                                                                        56
  1. The technology is not new. It has been around for years and is reliable.
  2. The technology is only a few years old. Most of the initial bugs are out of it, but the fixes have not been thoroughly

      tested.
  3. The technology is recent, and only a few other organizations have experience with it. The providers promise that the

      next release or version will have the problems resolved.
  4. The technology is new and has just been released for general use. Problems are likely.
  5. The technology is in an early testing phase, and your organization is one of the test sites. Problems are expected.

Technology Familiarity

Recall that this category refers to the familiarity of the project team with the technology that is part of the project. Refer
to the following descriptions for tips on arriving at a DPCI score for size:

  1. The team members have all used the technology or have been involved with projects that used this technology.
      They are confident that they understand it and can handle problems related to it.

  2. The technology is new to some of the team members who are not in key positions. Standardized training is
      available, if necessary, to teach them what they need to know about it to do their jobs.

  3. Several team members have not worked with this technology, including some of the key team members.
      Standardized training is not available, and consultants might be needed.

  4. The technology is new but is similar to previous technologies with which the team leaders are familiar. An advisor
      from the product's development team may serve as a technology advisor.

  5. The technology is new, and no one has worked with it before. A specialist might be needed to avoid serious errors.

Assigning a Score

Assigning a score is not an absolutely accurate process. Your objective is to be approximately correct, and some people
are not comfortable with this type of estimate. Recall that one of the attributes of a successful project manager is the
ability to live with ambiguity. One method that will help when assigning a score is to consider the two extremes. For
each factor in the DPCI, consider what the simplest--least complex--scenario would look like, to which you would
assign a 1 on the DPCI scale. Next consider what the most complex scenario would be, which would describe a 5. Then,
compare actual projects to those two extremes. Accordingly, if it is about in the middle it rates a 3, and a 2 and a 4 are
moderately simple and moderately complex, respectively.

   KEY TAKEAWAYS

           Scores range from 1 to 5, where 1 is the lowest level of complexity and 5 is the highest. In each situation,
           consider what the two extremes would look like and then judge where the current situation lies between
           those extremes.

                                                                                        57
This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/2-5-using-the-darnall-preston-
complexity-index-to-measure-organizational-complexity.

                                                         58
  3

Project Phases and Organization

Overview

This chapter provides an overview of the entire project management process and applies to all the questions in the
CAPM and PMP. However, it aligns well with Chapter 2 of the PMBOK and 4% of the CAPM is specifically dedicated to
project life cycle and organization.
This chapter outlines the possible project organizational structures (both in terms of staff roles and communication
channels) as the project progresses through its phases, from initiation to closeout.

                                                                                        59
Designers Share Their Experiences

   Dr. Andy Gibbons - Instructional Psychology and Technology - BYU

                                                                   Watch on YouTube
     Well this turned out to be an interesting team. I was-this was my second project-training helicopter pilots and
     sensor operators and working with a very large client. This was my second project after graduate school. I had
     only been in the field for a year as a designer. The team ended up being about twenty, twenty-five people by the
     time we were through. The kinds of people that I worked with were first of all, subject matter experts who were
     given to us by the customer, which was the Navy. We also had-on our team we had-I had an assistant designer
     who was not trained, but was experienced. And was a former member of the Navy, and that really helped a lot
     because he understood the context that we were working with, and he understood the personalities. He
     frequently had to save us from peril. I mean, here is this fresh out-of-the-can instructional designer out of
     college, inexperienced in the ways of the world, and this guy-guy named Bob Hoffman saved my bacon a lot of
     times. We had other people. I had an assistant instructional designer who was a good writer, served writing
     functions. We had a video producer, because we had to produce twenty video segments while we were doing
     this. I had a host of artists. We had a very large art shop it turns out. There were different varieties of artists. We
     had a cartoonist, a guy named Johnny Hawk, who was very good. We had a serious technical-straight lines-
     you know with straight edge and everything. We had one of those. We had, one of the categories that we had
     that was very interesting to work with was what were called paste-up artists. In those days we didn't have
     desktop publishing at all. I mean, a word processor was still a Wang machine that came as a thing that sat
     beside your desk, it was huge. We didn't have, we couldn't create, design the layouts. And so they would have to
     use a special processor called a compositor to print out on glossy certain kind of paper, the text that was going
     to be placed on a page. And these paste-up artists would have to come with their X-ACTO knives and their
     straight edges, and cut out a piece of text and glue it to the piece of paper. It was a really interesting process.
     Nothing in my training in college told me that there was this kind of a person. And yet I end up, or any of these
     kinds of categories of artists, and yet within a year after college I was managing a host of these people. It was a
     very interesting experience.

                                                                                        60
Heather Bryce - Independent Studies - BYU

                                                              Watch on YouTube
Okay, well, we have editors. So we have fulltime employees and student employees. Our full-time employees
kind of oversee the different functions. We have an editing function. The editing supervisor supervises student
editors who take a first take and a second take on the courses. We also have a video supervisor who supervises
our videographers. We have a flash supervisor, who supervises the flash programmers. So, and then, obviously
an art director who supervises the artists. What I do as a project manager-I meet with the instructional
designer and the different supervisors of those departments. And we meet at the beginning of a course and
discuss what all the requirements will be for the course and collaborate. If there is an idea where originally the
instructional designer thought that it would be good as a video piece, as we talk and meet perhaps the flash
supervisor would have a better idea of how to best present it instructionally for the student. Something more
interactive than just watching a video. So that's how the roles are divided.

                                                                                  61
Dr. Larry Seawright - Center for Teaching and Learning - BYU

                                                               Watch on YouTube
 In a project like the BYU Learning Suite project, which is a learning content management system, there are quite
 a few roles that are encompassed in that-in the development process alone, not to mention everything else. In
 the needs gathering phase of that we have consultants who contribute to, along with the instructional
 designers, the building of the design of what we're going to produce. We have programmers who have to weigh
 in and say whether or not that is feasible. We have graphic designers who say "Gee if we have this kind of a
 format, then we're going to have to do this with the layout", and that kind of constricts us. Going back again to
 the stake holders we have faculty and students weighing in all along the way. And then of course we have the
 University administration giving us mandates. You have to do this and you have to do that. So the various roles
 as a project manager, you have to balance all those competing interests, and try to weigh, you know, when you
 get a mandate you have to weigh it against the realities of what you can do with the time, the scope, the money
 that you have. And then you take the resources, the people, the expertise that they have, and try to match it
 against all of those different competing agenda items. And you come up with a plan, and you try to execute
 against the plan.

Project Phases and Organization
Project Phases and Organization

                                                                                   62
This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/3-project-phases-and-
organization.

                                                         63
64
  3.1

Project Phases and Organization

Initiation  Planning  Execution  Closeout  Project Phases

   LEARNING OBJECTIVES

        1. Identify the phases of a project.
        2. Describe the types of activities in each phase of a project.

The Project Management Institute (PMI) identifies four major phases of a project as characteristics of the project life
cycle.1 These four life-cycle phases are initiation, planning, execution, and project closeout. The knowledge, skills, and
experience needed on the project can vary in each phase. During the early phases of a project, the project leadership
needs good conceptual skills, the ability to build a team, and the experience to build a project roadmap. During project
closeout, the project leadership provides a high degree of motivation and attention to details. On a large project, lasting
two or more years, it is common to see the project management team change leadership to provide skills that are
appropriate to the final phases of the project.

Initiation

The initiation phase, which PMI labels "starting the project," includes all the activities necessary to begin planning the
project. The initiation phase typically begins with the assignment of the project manager and ends when the project
team has sufficient information to begin developing a detailed schedule and budget. Activities during the initiation
phase include project kickoff meetings, identifying the project team, developing the resources needed to develop the
project plan, and identifying and acquiring the project management infrastructure (space, computers). On projects
where the scope of work for the project is not well defined, the project team will invest time and resources in developing
a clearer scope of work. On projects where the major project stakeholders are not aligned, the project team will expend
resources and time creating stakeholder alignment.

Unlike project milestones, some activities associated with project initiation may be delayed without delaying the end of
the project. For example, it is advantageous for the project to have the major project stakeholders aligned from the
beginning, but sometimes it is difficult to get the commitment from stakeholders to invest the time and resources to
engage in an alignment process. Sometimes it is only after stakeholders begin observing progress on a project that the
project manager can facilitate the stakeholder alignment processes.

                                                                                        65
                                                                     Image by iChris

Planning

The planning phase, which PMI labels "organizing and preparing," includes the development of more detailed schedules
and a budget. The planning also includes developing detailed staffing, procurement, and project controls plans. The
emphasis of the planning phase is to develop an understanding of how the project will be executed and a plan for
acquiring the resources needed to execute it. Although much of the planning activity takes place during the planning
phase, the project plan will continue to be adjusted to respond to new challenges and opportunities. Planning activities
occur during the entire life of the project.

Execution

The execution phase, labeled by PMI as "carrying out the work," includes the major activities needed to accomplish the
work of the project. On a construction project, this would include the design and construction activities. On an
information technology (IT) project, this would include the development of the software code. On a training project, this
would include the development and delivery of the training.

Closeout

The closeout phase--or using PMI's nomenclature, "closing of the project"--represents the final stage of a project.
Project staff is transferred off the project, project documents are archived, and the final few items or punch list is
completed. The project client takes control of the product of the project, and the project office is closed down.

The amount of resources and the skills needed to implement each phase of the project depends on the project profile.
Typically, a project with a higher-complexity profile requires more skills and resources during the initiation phase.
Projects with a profile that indicates problems with alignment among key stakeholders or political and legal issues will
require specialized resources to develop plans that address these issues early in the project. A project with a lower
complexity level will invest more resources in the execution phase to complete the project as effectively and efficiently
as possible.

                                                                                        66
Project Phases on a Large Multinational Project

A United States instructional design company won a contract to design and build the first distance-learning-based
college campus in northern Argentina. There was no existing infrastructure for either the educational or large internet-
based projects in this part of South America. During the initiation phase of the project, the project manager focused on
defining and finding a project leadership team with the knowledge, skills, and experience to manage a large complex
project in a remote area of the globe. The project team set up three offices. One was in Chile, where large distance
education project infrastructure existed. The other two were in Argentina. One was in Buenos Aries to establish
relationships and Argentinean expertise, and the second was in Catamarca--the largest town close to the campus site.
With offices in place, the project start-up team began developing procedures for getting work done, acquiring the
appropriate permits, and developing relationships with Chilean and Argentine partners.

During the planning phase, the project team developed an integrated project schedule that coordinated the activities of
the design, procurement, and design teams. The project controls team also developed a detailed budget that enabled
the project team to track project expenditures against the expected expenses. The project design team built on the
conceptual design and developed detailed drawings for use by the procurement team. The procurement team used the
drawings to begin ordering equipment and materials for the implementation team; to develop labor projections; to refine
the construction schedule; and to set up the campus site. Although planning is a never-ending process on a project, the
planning phase focused on developing sufficient details to allow various parts of the project team to coordinate their
work and to allow the project management team to make priority decisions.

The execution phase represents the work done to meet the requirements of the scope of work and fulfill the charter.
During the execution phase, the project team accomplished the work defined in the plan and made adjustments when
the project factors changed. Equipment and materials were delivered to the work site, labor was hired and trained, a
learning center site was built, and all the development activities, from the arrival of the first computer to the installation
of the final light switch, were accomplished.

The closeout phase included turning over the newly constructed campus to the operations team of the client. A punch
list of a few remaining items was developed and those items completed. The office in Catamarca was closed, the office
in Buenos Aries archived all the project documents, and the Chilean office was already working on the next project. The
accounting books were reconciled and closed, final reports written and distributed, and the project manager started on
a new project.

   KEY TAKEAWAYS

           The phases of a project are initiation, planning, execution, and closeout.
           The initiation phase, which PMI calls "starting the project," includes activities such as holding alignment
           and kickoff meetings, identifying the project team, developing the resources needed to develop the project
           plan, and identifying and acquiring the project management infrastructure.
           The planning phase, which PMI calls "organizing and preparing," includes developing detailed staffing,
           procurement, and project controls plans.
           The execution phase, which PMI calls "carrying out the work," includes the major activities needed to
           accomplish the work of the project.
           The closeout phase, which PMI calls "closing of the project," includes transferring staff, archiving
           documents, closing offices, completing punch list tasks, and turning over the results of the project to the
           client.

                                                                                        67
[1] Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK Guide), 4th ed.
(Newtown Square, PA: Project Management Institute, Inc., 2008), 11-16.

                           This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                           Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/3-1-project-phases-and-
                           organization.

                                                                                        68
  3.2

Project Phases and Organization

Organizational Chart  Organizational Structure  Project Complexity

   LEARNING OBJECTIVES

        1. Identify the various functions represented on a project.
        2. Analyze and evaluate the influence of organizational structure on project functions.
        3. Design a project organizational chart for various project complexity profiles.

There is no single organizational approach to projects. Each project is organized to accomplish the work effectively and
efficiently. Several factors influence the organizational approach to execute a project. The complexity profile of a
project, the culture of the parent organization, the preferences of the project manager, the knowledge and skills of the
team, and whether the project management office is in-house or outsourced are some factors that influence the
project's organization.

                                                69
                                                                  Image by nicholasjon
In developing the project organizational structure, the project manager considers the span of control for each manager.
The span of control represents the number of people reporting to a manager. For example, the project manager does
not want all of the artists on a project reporting to the art director and assigns lead artists to report to the art director
with groups of artists who work on particular aspects of the design reporting to their group's lead artists.
The art director can organize the art department reporting structure so that the various lead artists would report to him
or her. For example, the lead artists for various aspects of an instructional design project would report to the art
director. On a larger, more complex project, the art director may establish area team leaders and have the art leads for
each area report to an area art lead. If the project is geographically dispersed, with areas of the art department in
different cities working on the project, then structuring the art function by area provides better coordination and control
(see Figure 3.1).
Figure 3.1
Decreasing Span of Control by Increasing Levels of Reporting

                                                                                        70
The organization on the left has seventy-one artists reporting to the same person. The organization on the right creates
two additional positions and reduces the span of control to thirty-seven and thirty-four, respectively.
Most projects have similar functions that are important to successfully managing the project. Included among these are
the following:

      Sponsor
      Project manager
      Controls
      Procurement
      Technical management
      Quality
      Administration
Figure 3.2
Typical Project Organization

                                                                                        71
On smaller projects, more than one function can be managed by one person. On larger projects, large teams may be
needed to accomplish the work within the function.

Project Sponsor

The project sponsor is outside the day-to-day operations of the project and has the organizational authority to provide
resources and overcome barriers for the project. The project sponsor is typically a leader in the parent organization with
an interest in the outcome of the project. As a leader in the parent organization, the project sponsor can provide input
into the project scope and other documents that define project success. The guidance and support from the project
sponsor enhances the ability of the project to successfully meet the parent organization's objectives.

Southern Training Center Organization

A training organization in South Carolina assigned a project sponsor to every project. For smaller projects, the regional
manager fulfilled the role of project sponsor. On larger, more complex projects, the operations manager was the project
sponsor. The vice president was the project sponsor of the three or four most complex projects, and the president was
the project sponsor only on projects with a high degree of political risk. This approach to assigning project sponsors
assured that each project had an organizational advocate that could address barriers and provide direction and
resources. The project sponsor, in this organization, developed a relationship with a senior representative of the client
organization, reviewed monthly reports, and conducted thorough quarterly reviews.

Project Manager

Project managers often have the breadth of responsibility associated with corporate chief executive officers (CEOs).
The project manager facilitates the start-up of a project and develops the staff, resources, and work processes to
accomplish the work of the project. He or she manages the project effectively and efficiently and oversees the closeout
phase. Some projects are larger than major divisions of some organizations, with the project manager responsible for a
larger budget and managing more risk than most of the organizational leaders. A mining company that builds a new

                                                                                        72
mine in South Africa, an automobile manufacturer that creates a new truck design, and a pharmaceutical company that
moves a new drug from testing to production are examples of projects that may consume more resources in a given
year than any of the organization's operating divisions.

The function of the project manager can vary depending on the complexity profile and the organizational structure.
Defining and managing client expectations and start-up activities, developing the scope, and managing change are
functions of the project manager. On some projects, the project manager may provide direction to the technical team on
the project. On other projects, the technical leadership might come from the technical division of the parent
organization.

Although the functional responsibilities of the project manager may vary, the primary role is consistent on every project.
The primary role of the project manager is to lead, to provide a vision of success, to connect everyone involved in the
project to that vision, and to provide the means and methods to achieve success. The project manager creates a goal-
directed and time-focused project culture. The project manager provides leadership.

Project Control

In general, project controls is both the planning function and the function that tracks progress against the plan. Project
control provides critical information to all the other functions of the project and works closely with the project manager
to evaluate the cost and scheduling impact of various options during the life of a project.

Sometimes accounting functions such as payroll, budgeting, and cash management are included within project
controls. On larger projects, accounting functions are typically separate because the accounting culture tracks
expenses to the nearest penny, and cost estimating and tracking by project controls can often be off by hundreds and
sometimes thousands of dollars. The lack of definitive information necessitates the development of cost estimates
within ranges that are often inconsistent with accounting practices. Separating these two functions allows each to
operate within their own accuracy comfort zone. The following are typical activities included within the project controls
function:

      Estimating
      Tracking costs
      Analyzing trends and making projections
      Planning and scheduling
      Managing change
      Tracking progress against schedule

The project controls team gathers this information from all the functions on the project and develops reports that
enable each functional manager to understand the project plan and progress against the plan at both the project level
and the functional level. On large complex projects, some project managers will assign project controls professionals to
work within the major functions as well as the project management office. This approach allows each function to plan
and track the function's work in more detail. The project controls manager then coordinates activities across functions.

Project Procurement

The approach to purchasing the supplies and equipment needed by the project is related to the complexity profile of the
project and is, therefore, elaborated on in this chapter; however, the procurement process is discussed in more detail in
Chapter 9. A small project with a low complexity level may be able to use the procurement services of the parent
organization. In an organization where project resources reside in various departments, the departments may provide
the supplies and equipment each team member of the project may need.

                                                                                        73
Southern College Procurement Organization

A college in South Carolina chartered a number of projects to increase the energy efficiency of the college. The project
team included members from various college departments. Each department paid for the time, travel expenses, and
supplies needed by the team member from their department. Each team member continued to use the computers and
administrative support in their department for project work. The costs for this support was not included in the project
budget nor tracked as a project expense. Equipment purchased by the project that was installed to reduce the energy
consumption of the college was purchased through the college procurement department and charged to the project.
More complex projects with greater procurement activity may have a procurement person assigned to the project. This
same South Carolina college retrofitted a warehouse to create a new training center for industry. A procurement person
was assigned to the project to manage the contract with the construction firm remodeling the space, the purchase and
installation of the new training equipment, and the purchase of the supplies needed by the project team. All the
procurement activity was charged to the project. The procurement person reported to the project manager for better
communication on what the project needed and participated as a member of the project team to understand and
provide input into the costs and scheduling decisions. She also reported to the college procurement manager for
developing and implementing project procurement processes that met college procurement policies and procedures.
Figure 3.3
Figure 3.3 The Procurement Manager is Part of the Project Team

On larger, more complex projects, the procurement team has several responsibilities. The team is responsible for
procuring the supplies and equipment (such as office supplies and computers) needed for the project team and the
supplies and equipment (such as the training equipment) needed to execute the project. On an instructional filming
project, the procurement team would rent set fixtures, office supplies, and computers for the project team to outfit a film
crew on location. The procurement team would also purchase or acquire costumes, make-up artists, catering services,
camera operators, and other materials needed for filming.

Procurement for Distance Learning Project in South America

On the large distance learning project in South America, during the initiation phase of the project, the procurement
department arranged for office space and supplies for the design teams in Canada, Chile, and Argentina and offices at
the site in Argentina. As the design progressed, the procurement team managed bids for the computer equipment and
bids for the preparation of the campus site. The procurement team managed the logistics associated with transporting

                                                                                        74
equipment from Europe, North America, and Asia to the job site in rural Argentina. After the completion of the project,
the procurement team managed the deposal of project property.
On large, complex projects, the procurement team manages at least three types of relationships with companies doing
business with the project.

Commodity Procurement

The largest number of purchased items for most projects is commodity items. Commodities are items that can be
bought off the shelf with no special modification for the project. These items are typically bid and the lowest prices that
can meet the schedule of the project will win the contract. The procurement team assures the company that wins the
bid can perform to the contact specifications and then monitors the progress of the company in meeting the projects
requirements. Software for the project and the computers or other technology leased to the project are examples of
commodities. The key to success in managing commodity suppliers is the process for developing the bids and
evaluating and awarding the contracts.

Procurement from Vendors

The second type of relationship is the vendor relationship. The terms supplier and vendor are often used
interchangeably. In this text, suppliers provide commodities, and vendors provide custom services or goods. Suppliers
bid on specialized equipment for the project. Programmers will specify the performance requirements of the equipment,
and suppliers that have equipment that meets the requirements will bid on the project. The programming team will
assist in the evaluation of the bids to assure compliance with specifications. The lowest bid may not win the contract.
Sometimes the long-term maintenance costs and reliability of the equipment may indicate a high price for the
equipment. The key to success is the development of clear performance specifications, good communication with
potential bidders to allow bidders to develop innovative concepts for meeting the performance requirements, and a
bidding process that focuses on the goals of the project.

Partnerships

The third type of project procurement relationship is the partnership. Sometimes the partnership is legally defined as a
partnership, and sometimes the success of each partner is so closely tied together that the relationship operates as a
partnership. On the South American project, the project team partnered with an Argentinean instructional design
company to access the local education practices and relationship with local software vendors. This was a legal
partnership with shared profits. The partner also designed and procured some programmed instructional materials on
which the success of the project and the company designing the overall project depended. With this type of relationship,
a senior manager on the project is assigned to coordinate activities with the partner, and processes are put in place to
develop shared goals, align work processes, and manage change.
Figure 3.4
Procurement Manager Relationships

                                                                                        75
Technical Management

The technical management on the project is the management of the technology inherent in the project--not the
technology used by the team to manage the project. The technical complexity on a project can vary significantly. The
technological challenges required to build a submarine navigation training system are significantly different from those
required to build an instructional unit for first grade math. The technological complexity of the project will influence the
organizational approach to the project. The technological complexity for a project reflects two aspects: the newness of
the technology and the team's familiarity with the technology. The newness refers to the degree to which the technology
has been accepted in the industry. The more accepted the technology is in the industry usually means that more
knowledge and experience will be available to the team. Familiarity refers to the experience the project team has with
the technology. The less familiarity the team has with the technology, the more energy and resources the team will
expend on managing the technological aspect of the project. For projects with high levels of project technology, a
specialist may be hired to advise the technology manager.

Project Quality

Project quality is often part of the technical manager's responsibility. On large projects or projects with a high degree of
technical complexity, the quality is sometimes a separate function. The project quality manager focuses on the quality
of the project work processes and not the quality of the client's product. For example, if the project is to design and
construct training for insurance agents, the quality manager focuses on the project work processes and meeting the
technical specification of the instructional materials created by the project team. The project quality manager is not
responsible for the quality of the instructional materials that the team produces. If the design team's computers, and
other support equipment and materials function to the defined project specifications, the quality of the instructional

                                                                                        76
designer team's output is the responsibility of the company's quality department, and it may take several months for the
company to refine the work processes to meet the design specifications of the instructional materials.
On an instructional design project, the quality manager may test the programmers to assure the programmers have the
skills and that the code meets project specifications. On a training project, the quality manager may review the training
curriculum and the qualification of the instructors to assure the training provides the knowledge and skills specified by
the client. On a drug development project, the quality manager may develop processes to assure the water and other
raw material meet specifications and every process in the development process is properly documented.

Project Administration

The administrative function provides project specific support such as the following:
      Accounting services
      Legal services
      Property management
      Human resources (HR) management
      Other support functions found in most organizations

In most organizations, support for these functions is provided by the parent organization. For example, people assigned
to the project will get human resources (HR) support from the HR department of the parent organization. Salary,
benefits, and HR policies for employees assigned to the project will be supported out of the HR department. The parent
organization will provide accounting functions such as determining the cost of cash, taxes, year-end project reports,
and property disposal at the end of the project.
The project manager on smaller, less complex projects will have sufficient knowledge about these issues to coordinate
with the parent organization's functional leaders. On more complex projects, the project may have an administrative
manager responsible for coordinating the administrative functions of the projects. On larger, more complex projects, an
administrative function may be established as part of the project team, with many of the functions assigning a resource
to the project. In all cases, the administrative function on a project is closely related to the legal and organizational
responsibilities of the parent organization and close coordination is important.
Figure 3.5
Organization for Major International Project

                                                                                        77
KEY TAKEAWAYS

      Key job functions on a project include the sponsor, project manager, controls, procurement, technical,
      quality, and administration.
      The project sponsor has the organizational authority to provide guidance and resources and can overcome
      barriers for the project.
      The project manager is the project leader with broad responsibilities for all phases of the project and for
      meeting project goals and client expectations.
      The project controls manager is responsible for controlling the project processes, including cost estimating
      and tracking, developing schedules, tracking progress against schedules, managing changes to the
      schedule or budget, and analyzing trends.
      The procurement manager is responsible for obtaining the services and materials needed to complete the
      project. This is accomplished by purchasing commodities, managing contractors who provide services and
      products, and working with partners.
      The technical manager deals with the issues related to the technology of the project.
      The quality manager monitors the project's processes--not the quality of the product of the project--and
      takes steps to assure they are done correctly and meet specifications.
      Project administration manages accounting, legal, property, and human resources.

                                                                                  78
This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/3-2-project-phases-and-
organization.

                                                         79
80
  4

Understanding and Meeting Client Expectations

Overview

This chapter aligns with the beginning of Chapter 3 of the PMBOK where stakeholders are addressed and 11% of the
CAPM questions come from this knowledge area. The content connects to the Initiation and Planning category of the
PMP questions.
Project management, especially within instructional design, revolves around understanding and meeting client
expectations. Even the most efficiently completed project will not count as a success if the client and other important
stakeholders are unhappy with the results. Accordingly, every successful project will necessarily have a plan or strategy
of some sort in place for making the client happy. Depending on the complexity level of the project, this strategy to meet
the client's expectations can range from having a general discussion with the project leadership team to developing a
formal plan that is tracked during the life of the project. Since project stakeholders can often exert considerable
influence over the success of the project with expertise, political influence, and additional resources, an essential
element of such a plan will be on how to motivate the client to contribute to the team's success throughout the life of
the project.

                                                                                        81
Designers Share Their Experiences

   Dr. Andy Gibbons - Instructional Psychology and Technology - BYU

                                                                   Watch on YouTube
     Miscommunication did happen on this project. We were working with people who were trained in how to
     operate helicopters, how to fly them and how to operate the electronic equipment in the back of the helicopter.
     We found that, well first of all, the first communication challenge that we came up against was the
     communication of the content itself. I wasn't trained in helicopter piloting. I had no idea what a sensor operator
     was until I shook hands with one. I had no idea how the technical worked. I had no idea how the strategic part of
     this, how you actually play the chess game of finding a submarine that is under the water. And yet at the surface
     that's what these people were trained to do. So the first communication problem that we had was the subject
     matter. The second was the simple day-to-day communications with people who, in some cases, were highly
     motivated towards our project, and in some cases weren't. Learning to manage people's motivations became a
     very important challenge for us. There were people who just wouldn't show up for work when they were
     scheduled to work. Not on my staff but on the Navy's staff. Because they would have a check-ride in a simulator
     or they'd be doing something else, and we were low priority for them. Probably the biggest miscommunication
     problem that we had--had to do with an entire section of the subject matter. We mistook that what we were
     trying, what we were supposed to do was train people how to fly this helicopter and how to operate the sensors
     in the back of the helicopter. It turns out that, and we did our task analysis, a very thorough task analysis, reams
     of paper, showing all the things that needed to be trained and these resulted in instructional goals, however
     there was kind of a meta-performance that these people were engaged in. It was not just flying the helicopter,
     and not just operating the sensor equipment in the back. It was using the combination of pilot and sensor
     operator skills as a team to fly across the top of the water, looking for, first of all to detect a submarine and once
     you had detected it finding a way to keep track of it and to keep tracking. Of course the submarine is trying to
     escape. So there is this whole strategic, or what they call the tactical section of the training, and we found out
     about two-thirds of the way through the project that the subject matter expert team had not told us about this
     part of it, and we had not noticed it, it was kind of a stupid mistake on our part. So I looked at the subject matter,
     the head subject matter expert and said, we need to do a little bit more task analysis and add some things to
     the curriculum. Of course, by then, the budget had been set on a certain number of things to be created. And so,

                                                                                        82
when I said to him that means we're probably going to have to create some more instructional pieces. He said,
well no, and he started finding excuses not to do that part of the course. Well once again the people on the East
coast, because they had clear water, were much more expert it turns out. And when the training hit the East
coast training site, the first thing they did was they opened up the box, and they took out the training. And they
looked for this part on these tactical exercises. And it wasn't in the course. And so they immediately packed up
the box and sent it back and said this course is useless for us. We need the tactical part. And what happened,
the long and the short of it was, the U.S. Navy had to make another contract, and design more training. And the
subject matter expert turned out to be wrong. He should have said, yeah we're going to develop more training.
And so, that's how that worked out.

Heather Bryce - Independent Studies - BYU

                                                              Watch on YouTube
Well, we did have some miscommunication. The instructional designer was brand new, and so, wasn't as
familiar with our processes as other instructional designers. So when we originally meet, we have all the
supervisors meet together for collaborative meetings. Which, these types of meetings can be very expensive
when you have a lot of full-time people meeting together. The instructional designer continued to have
meetings, but normally what we would do is, we would have meetings with perhaps the student employee who
is actually doing the work and not everybody who is involved at the supervisor level. So we had a lot of meetings
with people that didn't necessarily need to be there that were probably extra meetings, and that of course made
the project become quite expensive in meeting time. So that was a miscommunication on my part in
communicating with the instructional designer that all those meetings weren't necessary. So the cost on this
course grew quite quickly, but at the same time it was also good because there was a lot of collaboration, more
than we would have on a normal course within the department. So, it was not a good thing as far as the course
expense, but the course ended up being a really amazing project. The final product was amazing and actually
won an award.

                                                                                  83
Dr. Larry Seawright - Center for Teaching and Learning - BYU

                                                               Watch on YouTube
 Oh gee, where do I start. In the Learning Suite project, where we are building such a large and complex system
 that interacts with faculty and students, it accesses University databases that are password protected, that are
 roll protected. One of the key issues is communication of those requirements to our IT organization. Early on,
 one of the miscommunications that we had concerned some of the services we needed built, and it just never
 got done. So here we are progressing right along with the development, and so then we call up this person and
 say, "Is the service ready?" "What service?" Well, we actually never told them which service it was. So you know,
 it was a miscommunication on our part, but it was, you know, we didn't tell them exactly what to build, and they
 have a completely different process. We're not a professional in IT organization that normally builds gigantic
 applications like this. We're the Center for Teaching and Learning, so we're a bunch of PhDs who specialize in
 design and development of instruction materials and we just kind of happen to fall into building this Learning
 Suite because we made something called the Syllabus. That is the biggest part of the problem, is we're not IT
 folks. So I am the associate director and the project director. Kind of, well it's not two hats, its multiple hats that
 I'm wearing because I do other things. I'm also the Center's evaluator. Etc. Etc. So you see, you know, with a
 smaller organization we do a lot of things. In big centralized IT organizations where they have not just one, but
 multiple project managers, that greatly facilitates project management on a scale where you could develop
 Microsoft Project plans and enterprise wide project plans in lots of detail, spreadsheets, etc. etc. We have a
 whiteboard where we track things. So the miscommunication happened because of our limited resources. You
 know, we do what we can, we try to be as professional as we can, but sometimes we fail to communicate in the
 way that the other party expects. So that was the primary difficulty. So you always want to try to verify that what
 you ask for got communicated. It got through the request process in a way that they could hear it.

Including the Client

                                                                                   84
Understanding Values and Expectations
Dealing with Problems

                       This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                       Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/4-understanding-and-meeting-
                       client-expectations.

                                                                                   85
86
  4.1

Including the Client

client  Project Phases  Project Teams

   LEARNING OBJECTIVES

        1. Describe what the client needs to know about the management style during different phases of a project.
        2. Identify advantages and disadvantages of including the client on project teams.

To appreciate the skill and effort expended by the project team in achieving the objectives of the project, the client
needs to know more about what the team does.

Educate the Client from the Beginning

Often the client does not have project management experience and, therefore, does not understand project phases and
the requirements of the different phases. A less-experienced client may become frustrated at the changes in the
management approach required for the different phases of the project. For example, during the early phases, the project
leadership is encouraging creative approaches to accomplishing the project goals. As the project proceeds and the
project plan becomes more firm, the project leadership focuses on accomplishing the project goals. The types of
meetings, the agenda of the meetings, and the general project atmosphere change as the project moves from the
planning phase to the production mode of the execution phase of the project.

                                       87
                                                                Image by PehMed2020

During the last phases on a project, project team members are often tired and beginning to anticipate the transition that
will take place at the end of the project. The motivational approach that worked during the early phases of the project is
less effective during the final phases, and the project manager applies different approaches to motivating the project
team. These changes can be disconcerting on a person's first project. By explaining what to expect and planning with
the client a process to minimize the impact of these changes, the project manager prepares the client for these events
and reduces the frustration.

Include the Client on Selected Project Teams

The client translates the needs of the organization through chartering the project and defining the project scope to the
project manager and the project team. The client also has a supervision role. This supervision is often accomplished
through regular project reviews and reports from the project team. Depending on the complexity level of the project, the
reviews can vary significantly. On less complex projects, the review might be conducted in a one-hour meeting with a
one-page summary document serving as the project progress report. On more complex projects, a full-day meeting
might be necessary for the project progress to be fully understood, and the project report may be one hundred pages or
more.

In addition to providing the formal overview of the project, most clients would like to actively participate in the success
of the project. This is a delicate balance. The participation of the client can have undue influence on project decisions.
The advantage of including the client in project activities is to gain the client's personal investment in the project plan, to
create a better understanding for the client of the problems the project encounters during the life of the project, and to
gain the insights and contributions of the client in problem solving.

Involving the client in teams where the client's special knowledge can add value to the team discussions and activities
contributes both to the success of the team and the satisfaction of the client. During the development of a chemical-
plant employee training in Tennessee, the project team struggled with a very tight project schedule. A team was
established to explore ways to reduce the approval process for the drawings of the instructional design. It was taking
two weeks for the design review, and even though this was within the normal time frame for design reviews, the project
management team believed there were opportunities to reduce this time and shorten the length of the project.

The client's engineering manager participated in the brainstorming sessions that explored ways to reduce the design
review time. Several good ideas were developed and put into place. The client's engineering manager took these ideas

                                                                                        88
back to the client's team and instituted many of the same ideas. There were two positive results: (1) a shortened
schedule that saved two weeks by the end of the design, (2) a client that was emotionally engaged in the positive
outcomes and contributed to the project success.

   KEY TAKEAWAYS

           The project manager's style changes with each phase of the project. The client might not have experience
           with project phases and needs to be guided through the different phases, the purposes of each phase, and
           the different management styles those entail.
           Client participation in project teams can have undue influence on decisions, but this is offset by the buy-in
           of the client and the insights the client can offer when special knowledge is needed or schedules need to
           be changed.

                           This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                           Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/4-1-including-the-client.

                                                                                        89
90
4.2

Understanding Values and Expectations

client expectations  differing values  fair dealings

   Learning Objectives

        1. Identify methods for determining client expectations.
        2. Identify methods for clarifying values and determining differences.
        3. Describe the importance of dealing fairly with the client.

Two of the sources of dissatisfaction in personal and business interactions are unmet expectations and a
misunderstanding or ignorance of the values held by the other party. The project manager needs to avoid having an
unsatisfied client due to a clash of values or a failure to meet expectations.

Clarify Expectations

Client expectations are expressed in chartering documents such as the scope of work, the project purpose statement,
and the list of project deliverables. Other expectations exist that are more difficult to express in written documents.

Managing Expectations

One project client had such a difficult time with the billing processes on her previous project that significant project
management time and resources were expended on reconciling billing issues. This client has an expectation in the next
project that project accounting and billing processes operate effectively and efficiently.Another client had been
constantly surprised by changes and unplanned events happening on the project. This client wanted to participate early
in the discussion of problems that arise during the life of the project and contribute to finding solutions and minimizing
the negative impact on project performance.

Understanding and capturing these expectations in a written document is an important step in effectively meeting client
expectations. Often it is the next question that enables a project manager to discover the less obvious expectations.
The next question is the one the project manager asks after the initial response to inquiries about expectations. In our
example, the client may express that he or she wants project billings to be accurate and timely. This is an easily
understandable expectation, but when the project manager asked the next question--"Can you tell me more about what
you mean?"--the client revealed the problems on her previous project, and the project team developed a better
understanding of the client's concern. The project team developed measures for tracking project billings that measured
both timeliness and accuracy. This process enabled the project team to understand the client's concern, develop work

                                                                                        91
processes that demonstrated a response, and provide data to the client on the timeliness and the accuracy of the billing
processes.
For the client that expected to hear about problems early and participate in the problem-solving discussions, the project
team shared the project action item register and highlighted issues the team felt may be important to the client. The
project manager also discussed potential concerns with the client during their weekly project update.
After the project team captures the client expectations, the team then develops a method for tracking performance
against expectations. In our example, the project team defined accuracy and timeliness in measurable terms and
tracked the team performance. The project team developed a survey to track the client's perception of inclusion in the
problem-solving process and tracked the client's response. These measures were then presented in the project review
meetings with other measures of project performance such as cost and schedule.
As the project team meets and exceeds the client expectations, these expectations tend to change. If the goal is 85%
accuracy on all project billings, and the project team begins to perform with an average of 95% accuracy or higher and
never falls below 90%, then the client begins to expect 95% accuracy. This is a realistic expectation of the client; it also
changes the expectation so that meeting the client's expectation becomes harder. Even if expectations change, it is
important to maintain the original goal. This reminds the client at the end of the project that the project team not only
met expectations but also raised them during the life of the project.

Clarify Values

Values are desirable principles or qualities.1 Disagreements based on differences in values are extremely difficult to
resolve because compromising means compromising your values. Organizations often have developed a list of
corporate values. Sometimes these are real and sometimes they are more important to the corporate brand. The project
manager needs to understand the real organizational and personal values of the team members related to the project.

                                                                                        92
                                             Image by Ministerio Secretaria General de Gobierno

Communication Values

A large project in Washington had a client that valued prompt communication. All the members of the client's team had
the latest phone technology and took calls during project meetings. The project team saw this behavior as rude and
interfering with the effectiveness of the project. The client was very comfortable in this chaotic environment and valued
constant communication because it provided them with a competitive advantage in their marketplace by enabling quick
identification and response to opportunities. The same behavior was preventing the project team from developing a
common understanding and agreeing on a project plan because they could not focus on the needs of the project long
enough to develop this common understanding. The project manager and the lead client recognized the potential
conflict for the project and developed a list of project meetings that would be "cell-less," which meant that the team
members would turn cell phones off for that meeting. Other meetings would follow the cultural standards of the client.

Developing a mutual understanding of the personal and organizational values and dealing with differences during the
early phases of the project will significantly reduce the potential for insolvable conflicts. This becomes more important
on a large, complex project where the likelihood of a diverse project team is high, and the team may have to deal with
different laws, customs, and cultural values. Developing an understanding of these differences and developing an
appreciation for the value of this diversity for project team members can prevent conflict later in the project.

Deal Fairly with the Client

During the life of the project, the project manager will often have the opportunity to take advantage of the client, either
because a clause in the contract is not written accurately or because the project manager has access to more detailed
information. For example, a client finds a mistake in the original documents provided to the project team. The project
team analyzes the new information to access the potential impact on the project cost and schedule. A skilled project
manager can demonstrate a negative impact and increase project profits by requesting a change order. A skilled project

                                                                                        93
manager can also usually find an innovative approach to finding a solution without increasing the cost or schedule. In
most cases, the client wants to be treated fairly. Fairness is characterized by impartiality and honesty that is free from
self-interest, prejudice, or favoritism.2 If the client interprets the change order as fair, then the project manager has the
opportunity to create a satisfied client. If the client believes the behavior of the project manager is unfair, then it is
difficult to create a satisfied client.

   Key Takeaways

           To identify client expectations, review written documents, but have a dialogue with the client to uncover
           unwritten expectations by asking questions and listening. Manage increasing expectations by reminding
           the client of the original objectives.
           Understand the stated corporate values by reviewing written documents and client actions related to those
           stated values.. Attempt to avoid conflicts of values by identifying the differences before they become
           problems.
           Do not take advantage of clients' mistakes, but help them meet their objectives in spite of their errors. Live
           your own values of fairness.

References

Merriam-Webster Unabridged Online Dictionary, s.v. "values," http://unabridged.merriam-webster.com/cgi-bin/collegiate
         (accessed June 18, 2009).

Merriam-Webster Unabridged Online Dictionary, s.v. "fairness," http://unabridged.merriam-webster.com/cgi-
         bin/collegiate?va=fairness&x=0&y=0 (accessed June 18, 2009).

                           This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                           Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/4-2-understanding-values-and-
                           expectations.

                                                                                        94
  4.3

Dealing with Problems

Decisions  Procedures  Responsibilities  Standards

   LEARNING OBJECTIVES

        1. Describe standards and procedures for dealing with problems.
        2. Describe the advantages of dealing with difficult issues as soon as they arise.
        3. Describe the importance of establishing methods for revising major decisions.

Projects always experience unexpected problems that produce stress. Dealing with problems with competence is vital
to maintaining a good relationship with clients.

Establish Standards and Procedures for Decisions

There are competing interests on projects, and the larger and more complex the project, the greater the number of
issues and concerns that need to be addressed.

Competing Interests

It's 7:30 in the morning and the client called and wants you to have coffee in an hour with the new CEO, who flew in last
night, to give him an update on the project. The instructional designers were supposed to be on site at 7:00, but they
have still not arrived. A news reporter called and said she has an unnamed source who claims that there are sexual-
harassment policy violations in your team.You decide to postpone a team meeting about project scheduling and cancel
lunch plans with your daughter. It's going to be a busy day.
On large, complex projects, hundreds of decisions are made every day. Most of the decisions focus on the day-to-day
operation of the project. Early in the project, decisions focus on choosing between alternative options for accomplishing
project goals and determining how the project will be executed. Later, the focus is typically on solving problems. The
project team develops solutions to deal with the barriers that emerge and develops alternative plans to meet project
goals. The authority to make decisions is typically established early in the project and identified in a responsibility
matrix--a table of people and types of problems that might require decisions--as shown in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1
The Responsibility Matrix

                                                                                        95
The responsibility matrix identifies roles and client involvement.
Decisions that influence the outcome of the project, such as a delay to the project completion date or an increase in the
project costs, typically involve the client. Some clients prefer to make the final decision, with the project manager
developing alternative solutions with a cost-benefit analysis of each of the alternatives. Others prefer to be involved in
discussions to better understand the barriers, developing alternative solutions and making decisions in a team
environment. Understanding the client's decision-making preference and developing procedures and processes that
support that preference is important to meeting client expectations.
Develop processes and methods that encourage both the client and team members to identify issues and concerns
early and develop processes for dealing with them effectively. Define how and when decisions are made.

                                                          Image by World Economic Forum
On projects with a low complexity level, the project manager and team leaders can make decisions informally, with
short meetings or phone calls. Weekly or monthly staff meetings are appropriate for more important decisions. Even
though the decision-making process may be simpler on less complex projects, it is still important to understand the
client's expectation for inclusion in the decision-making process and recording decisions and changes in project plans.
On more complex projects, the use of action item registers, weekly staff meetings, responsibility matrices, and other
tools foster the decision making on a timely basis. For project teams operating in diverse locations, Internet-based tools
for recording and tracking action items are beneficial in capturing issues and concerns.

Inform Client of Difficult Issues Early

Project managers typically have a high degree of confidence in their ability to deal with issues and concerns as they
arise. Let's say the delivery of some equipment is delayed a week, causing changes in the project schedule, or the beta
test of a software program identified far more problems than expected. If the project manager knows the problems, the
project has a plan for recovering, the team developed a solution and will be back on track soon, should the project

                                                                                        96
manager inform the client? The answer seems like an easy yes, yet many project managers often believe there is no
reason to bother the client with a problem they have under control.

Then suppose a second delay occurs on the equipment delivery or the fixes for the beta test are more costly than
expected. Now the problems have elevated to the point the client needs to be informed. The greater the distance
between the time of the event and the time the client knows about the events, the greater the client's frustration and
mistrust. Including the client in the processes for handling project issues or concerns, as well as recovery planning,
enables the client to develop confidence that problems will be addressed successfully. Including the client early in the
process for dealing with problems enables the client to contribute with solutions and builds confidence that there is
open and clear communication.

New Estimates Increase Cost Projections

On a large, complex project in South America, the project team was re-estimating the project cost and schedule
projections after the project design was complete. The team was also conducting a new risk analysis, and the results of
the cost and schedule projections, together with the risk analysis, provided the client with better cash flow projections.
Early in the process, the project team understood that the cost projections would greatly increase and the final project
cost would be significantly above the contingency set aside for the project.The client looked for an early indication of
the results of the analysis, and the project manager kept reporting it was too early to know. The project team debated
how much contingency the project needed and how to inform the client. When the client was told the results of the cost
projections, the response was a combination of frustration and anger. The project manager was removed from the
project and a new project manager assigned.

In the example above, when first indications suggested that estimates were low and several items in the budget needed
extra funds, the project manager should have had conversations with the client. Including one or more members of the
client's team in the reevaluation effort would have kept the client informed of the progress regularly and built trust in the
new numbers. The project team could have offered suggestions and contributed to possible solutions for addressing
the concerns that were developing, as costs were higher than expected. Dealing openly and early with the client is
critical to client satisfaction.

Clients are often involved in major decisions on the project. For example, if the project invested another million dollars,
the project could be completed a month early. The client will conduct the cost-benefit analysis and decide if the extra
expense is worth the gain in time. Once this decision is made, the necessary changes are made in the execution plan
and new goals are established through the change management process. Later, for reasons outside the control of the
project, the project will not experience the time savings from the additional investment of funds. It is important to revisit
the decision. A culture that encourages project team members to bring up the need for revisiting decisions and a
mechanism that makes it easy to surface issues and concerns will increase the likelihood that these issues will come to
the attention of the management team.

Establishing a culture and a mechanism for revisiting project decisions is important for meeting client expectations.

Emergency Button

An experienced project manager came up with a clever idea to enable his clients to capture the attention of the project
team. He gave the client's team a bright red index card and said, "This is your emergency button." The card was a
symbol. It empowered the client with the ability to capture the complete attention of the project team. When the client
presented the red button, the project manager instantly stopped current activities and focused on the client. The red
button meant the project leadership focused on understanding the issue or concern presented by the client and
developing project priorities to meet the client's concerns.Although the red button was rarely used, it gave a sense of
power to the client and communicated that the client was important. One project manager used the "red button" on four
projects, and on two of the projects the card was never used. On one project, the client used the card to get the project
ready for a visit from the client's boss, and on the fourth project, the client used the card often. Although the project
manager believed the card was overused to get the total attention of the project leadership team, he never regretted

                                                                                        97
providing the client with the card. The "red button" card provided them a method to distinguish the really important
needs of the client.

Revisiting Major Decisions and Issues

The project environment moves fast, and decisions are made and implemented to keep pace. Decisions made in the
conceptual phase of the project may not be effective during the design phase. It is not that the decisions made were
necessarily wrong, based on the data at the time they were understandable. However, with new information, it is
sometimes important to revisit and change decisions made earlier in the project. As obvious as this might sound, many
project teams are reluctant to challenge earlier decisions. Without a mechanism in place to revisit decisions, the early
decisions may be seen as final. This sense of finality may limit progress and prevent the project from completing on
time, as well as potentially having a project that is irrelevant as soon as it is introduced.
Sometimes people ask that decisions be revisited just because they did not like the decision that was made.

Not Revisiting Decisions

On an educational training manual project, the visual design schedule was changed to support the completion of the
activities on the critical path by a project milestone date. The change increased the number of hours needed to
complete the work because of the change in work processes. The project manager accepted the costs of the change to
achieve the milestone date, but the manager of the visual design team objected because the change would cause their
part of the job to exceed the budgeted amount. The project manager decided not to revisit the decision because no new
information was available that would cause the decision to change.
Mechanisms for revisiting decisions are similar to project change orders. With a change order, a request to revisit a
decision must be initiated by someone on the team. The formality of methods used by the project to revisit a decision
depends on the complexity profile of the project. On less complex projects, an informal discussion in project meetings
can develop the awareness that a decision needs to be revisited. On more complex projects, the action item register
and the weekly project meetings provide a venue for revisiting decisions.

Vendor Decision Revisited

On a major project creating a new marketing manual for a large university, the priority was completing the manual in
time for recruiters to visit athletes and other high school students throughout the country. The client was involved in the
process to select major policy wording, and after an expedited bidding process, an instructional design vendor was
selected for a critical piece of the manual layout.Later, members of the project team learned that this vendor was
overcommitted, and there was a high risk that the vendor would not be able to meet the schedule dates. Even though it
was the client's decision to hire the vendor, the project leadership had established that this kind of issue needed to be
readdressed with the client and warned the client of the possible risk and suggested changing plans. The client decided
to proceed. Weeks later, the vendor began missing critical dates just as the project team predicted.Since the issue had
been revisited, the client took the blame. Changes were made that brought the project back on track and the project
finished on time and within budget, making the client even more impressed with the project team.

                                                                                        98
KEY TAKEAWAYS

      Determine who should be included in decisions for each category using a decision matrix.
      Additional information that is developed during the design and planning phase can require that decisions
      made during the conceptual phase need to be reconsidered.
      Decide at what level of problem the client should be involved by discussing the threshold with the client.
      Involve the client early in the process and provide a mechanism to give them a chance to contribute to the
      solution before the problem gets worse.
      Decide what criteria to use to determine when a decision should be revisited.

                      This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                      Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/4-3-dealing-with-problems.

                                                                                  99
100
  5

Working with People on Projects

Overview

This chapter aligns with Chapters 3 and 9 of the PMBOK and 18% of the CAPM questions come from these chapters.
The content connects to the Planning and Executing category of the PMP questions.
Few skills are more essential to the project manager than the ability to lead, inspire, and manage people effectively. By
effectively managing relationship dynamics and enhancing communication among team members, a project manager
can contribute enormously to the success of any given endeavor. Moreover, as project scope and complexity increase,
these skills become increasingly important lest the project fall into a tangle of petty factions and unclear expectations.
Some of the key skills include:

  1. The ability to work well with individuals. This includes skills such as responsiveness to the needs and motivations
      of team members and the ability to effectively negotiate and resolve disputes.

  2. The ability to create effective team dynamics. The project manager must take the lead in ensuring that trust and
      accountability are engendered, developing goals, effectively managing meetings, and monitoring team progress.

  3. The ability to create a project culture. Successful project cultures are characterized by a strong shared vision of
      success and a consistent set of values that guide members of the project team in their independent decision
      making.

The concepts discussed in this chapter are not meant to be an exhaustive description of the skills required to
successfully work with people on a project, but instead are meant only as a starting point. Some students of social
dynamics mistakenly think that they can learn people skills solely from what they read in a book. This notion would be
tantamount to an aspiring violinist hoping to learn the instrument by reading about music theory without ever physically
touching the instrument! The principles that follow are the groundwork as you begin to build your own mental map of
what effective people management and leadership looks like.
Note for ID: Effective people management is perhaps more important within instructional design than it is within a more
prototypical setting, such as within a software company or building construction business. Instructional design projects
are often characterized by small teams, vaguely specified client deliverables, the requirement to work closely with many
individuals who do not have a vested interest in the outcome of the project, such as the subject matter experts (SMEs),
and oftentimes a limited budget. Although no specific domain of project management has a monopoly on difficulty, the
instructional design project manager has his or her own unique set of challenges and needs - especially when it comes
to working with people.

                                                                                       101
Designers Share Their Experiences

   Dr. Andy Gibbons - Instructional Psychology and Technology - BYU

                                                                   Watch on YouTube
     Well on this project where we were--we were training our diverse group. We were training submarine, excuse
     me, we were training helicopter pilots and we were training sensor operators who sit in the back and are
     completely different. One group was officers. One group was not officers, they were enlisted people. So, there
     was a great diversity of people we had to communicate with. I was very fortunate in this project because of
     some staffing. You know, it was not skill on my part or good choices on my part. We had two people whose
     personalities really spelled the success of the project. One was an untrained instructional designer. He was a
     Harvard graduate, he had his Bachelors from Harvard, and yet he wasn't employed in a law firm, you know, he
     wasn't advancing in his career. He was kind of in-between trying to decide what he wanted to do, but he had this
     wonderful outgoing personality, people just loved being around him, they wanted to talk to him all the time. And
     so he was kind of the heartbeat of the project. He was the glue that made all this diverse group of people, he
     was a motivator, he was exciting to be around. The second person was a Navy, former Navy, was a retiree. He
     had been in the Navy for so long and we were working with Navy personnel, both officers and enlisted people.
     He had been a fairly high ranking enlisted person. And he knew how not to take "guff" from enlisted people. He
     knew how to address officers, and he was on the technical side of things. He was very skilled with people within
     the military world. Without those two guys this would have been the biggest disaster. This project would have
     not worked, so personalities were incredibly important.

                                                                                       102
Heather Bryce - Independent Studies - BYU

                                                              Watch on YouTube
Well on Art 45, it's unusual because the instructor is actually an artist. Then we have an art director. Our flash
supervisor has an art background, and he also has his masters in Instructional Design. And then we have our
videographer who is artistic. So we had a lot of artistic personalities on this project. I think most of our team is
used to working together, so I think the synergy was really great there, they had great ideas supporting because
they're aware of what each role can do. I think the only, probably one thing that made this course, this project a
little more interesting was our art director and our flash supervisor are both artists, and then of course the
author is an artist. So they sometimes differed on how things should be presented. So I was really, they did a
fantastic job in finding compromise. Because at the end of the day with our courses we have the final say with
what is in a course. The author will give us the material, but we have the final say in how to present it. I think we
found a nice way. Some things we went with the way that the author wanted to present certain concepts. And
other ways, we went with the ways that our team thought it should be presented and I thought it was a good
compromise.

                                                                                 103
Dr. Larry Seawright - Center for Teaching and Learning - BYU

                                                               Watch on YouTube
 Our Center, we have about 20 full-time employees, and we have a wide variety of personality types. We have
 some folks who spend a lot of years in industry and kind of got tired of doing that. That would be me. I worked
 for IBM, Intel, Xerox, companies like that. And then went back, got a Ph.D., and now I'm working at the University.
 So we have folks that have a lot of industry experience, and we have people who have just come up through the
 University. Ph.D., you know, maybe a few years working as high school teachers, get a Ph.D. and now they're
 working with us. And so their experience with real world kinds of applications is kind of limited. Sometimes you
 get clashes there because you have people who have been used to running in industry large teams, and they
 have lots of resources and they expect things to be done like this. When I worked at Intel for example, there
 were lots of meetings where, you know, folks were yelling at each other. Literally yelling at each other in the
 meeting, and then you walk out the door and you talk about, you know, see you at the tee at four o'clock. Like
 they're bitter enemies, but they're best of friends. But that's the corporate mentality, the corporate culture. Here,
 the culture is let's all get along, and so when we had these personalities that have different, very different
 backgrounds it takes a little massaging. So as project manager it's my job is to smooth some ruffled feathers
 here, and to keep the kind of egos from getting bruised and keep doing the great work that they're doing without
 taking offence at what appear to be slights. And that is all communication when it comes down to it. Folks say
 things and we don't understand it because of different contexts. So frequently you have to have separate
 meetings. This is what this person meant and this is what this person meant so we can all get along right? A
 large part of what the role of a project manager is, is to make sure that those kind of communication issues get
 smoothed over. Not covered up, but smoothed over and clarified so that the project can keep moving forward.

Working with Individuals
Working with Groups and Teams

                                                                                  104
Creating a Project Culture
                       This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                       Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/5-working-with-people-on-
                       projects.

                                                                                  105
106
  5.1

Working with Individuals

Leadership  Personality Types  Emotional Intelligence       Negotiation

   Learning Objectives

        1. Describe emotional intelligence.
        2. Describe personality types and tools used to describe them.
        3. Describe the relationship between leadership style and personality types.
        4. Describe people skills that are necessary for negotiation and conflict resolution.
        5. Describe how work is delegated.
        6. Describe individual goals that are related to personality types.

Working with other people involves dealing with them both logically and emotionally. A successful working relationship
between individuals begins with appreciating the importance of emotions and how they relate to personality types,
leadership styles, negotiations, and setting goals.

Emotional Intelligence

Emotions are both a mental and physiological response to environmental and internal stimuli. Leaders need to
understand and value their emotions to appropriately respond to the client, project team, and project environment.
Daniel Coleman1 discussed emotional intelligence quotient (EQ) as a factor more important than IQ in predicting
leadership success. According to Robert Cooper and Ayman Sawaf, "Emotional intelligence is the ability to sense,
understand, and effectively apply the power and acumens of emotions as a source of human energy, information,
connection, and influence."2

Emotional intelligence includes the following:

      Self-awareness
      Self-regulation
      Empathy
      Relationship management

                                                       107
                                                          Image by Infusionsoft

Emotions are important to generating energy around a concept, to building commitment to goals, and to developing
high-performing teams. Emotional intelligence is an important part of the project manager's ability to build trust among
the team members and with the client. It is an important factor in establishing credibility and an open dialogue with
project stakeholders. Emotional intelligence is critical for project managers, and the more complex the project profile,
the more important the project manager's EQ becomes to project success.

Personality Types

Personality types refer to the differences among people in such matters as what motivates them, how they process
information, how they handle conflict, etc. Understanding people's personality types is acknowledged as an asset in
interacting and communicating with them more effectively. Understanding your personality type as a project manager
will assist you in evaluating your tendencies and strengths in different situations. Understanding others' personality
types can also help you coordinate the skills of your individual team members and address the various needs of your
client.

The Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) is one of most widely used tools for exploring personal preference, with more
than two million people taking the MBTI each year. The MBTI is often referred to as simply the Myers-Briggs. It is a tool
that can be used in project management training to develop awareness of preferences for processing information and
relationships with other people.

Based on the theories of psychologist Carl Jung, the Myers-Briggs uses a questionnaire to gather information on the
ways individuals prefer to use their perception and judgment. Perception represents the way people become aware of
people and their environment. Judgment represents the evaluation of what is perceived. People perceive things
differently and reach different conclusions based on the same environmental input. Understanding and accounting for
these differences is critical to successful project leadership.

                                                                                       108
The Myers-Briggs identifies sixteen personality types based on four preferences derived from the questionnaire. The
preferences are between pairs of opposite characteristics and include the following:

      Extroversion (E)-Introversion (I)
      Sensing (S)-Intuition (N)
      Thinking (T)-Feeling (F)
      Judging (J)-Perceiving (P)

Sixteen Myers-Briggs types can be derived from the four dichotomies. Each of the sixteen types describes a preference:
for focusing on the inner or outer world (E-I), for approaching and internalizing information (S-I), for making decisions (T-
F), and for planning (J-P). For example, an ISTJ is a Myers-Briggs type who prefers to focus on the inner world and basic
information, prefers logic, and likes to decide quickly.

It is important to note that there is no best type and that effective interpretation of the Myers-Briggs requires training.
The purpose of the Myers-Briggs is to understand and appreciate the differences among people. This understanding
can be helpful in building the project team, in developing common goals, and communicating with project stakeholders.
For example, different people process information differently. Extraverts prefer face-to-face meetings as the primary
means of communicating, while introverts prefer written communication. Sensing types focus on facts, and intuitive
types want the big picture.

On larger, more complex projects, some project managers will use the Myers-Briggs as a team-building tool during
project start-up. This is typically a facilitated work session where team members take the Myers-Briggs and share with
the team how they process information, what communication approaches they prefer, and what decision-making
preferences they have. This allows the team to identify potential areas of conflict, develop communication strategies,
and build an appreciation for the diversity of the team.

Another theory of personality typing is the DISC method, which rates people's personalities by testing a person's
preferences in word associations in the following four areas:

      Dominance/Drive--relates to control, power, and assertiveness
      Inducement/Influence--relates to social situations and communication
      Submission/Steadiness--relates to patience, persistence, and thoughtfulness
      Compliance/Conscientiousness--relates to structure and organization

Personality Type Badges

One project team in South Carolina used color-coded badges for the first few weeks of the project to indicate Myers-
Briggs type. For this team, this was a way to explore how different team members processed information, made
decisions, and took action.
Understanding the differences among people is a critical leadership skill. This includes understanding how people
process information, how different experiences will influence the way people perceive the environment, and how people
develop filters that allow certain information to be incorporated while other information is excluded. The more complex
the project, the more important the understanding of how people process information, make decisions, and deal with
conflict. There are multiple personality-type tests that have been developed and explore different aspects of people's
personalities. It might be prudent to explore the different tests available and utilize the one(s) that are most beneficial
for your team.

Leadership Styles

Leadership style is a function of both the personal characteristics of the leader and the environment in which the
leadership must occur, and a topic which several researchers have attempted to understand. Robert Tannenbaum and
Warren Schmidt3 described leaders as either autocratic or democratic. Harold Leavitt4 described leaders as pathfinders
(visionaries), problem solvers (analytical), or implementers (team oriented). James MacGregor Burns5 conceived

                                                                                       109
leaders as either transactional (focused on actions and decisions) or transformational (focused on the long-term needs
of the group and organization).

Fred Fiedler6 introduced his contingency theory, which is the ability of leaders to adapt their leadership approach to the
environment. Most leaders have a dominant leadership style that is most comfortable for them. For example, most
engineers spend years training in analytical problem solving and often develop an analytical approach to leadership.

A leadership style reflects personal characteristics and life experiences. Although a project manager's leadership style
may be predominantly a pathfinder (using Leavitt's taxonomy), most project managers become problem solvers or
implementers when they perceive the need for these leadership approaches. The leadership approach incorporates the
dominant leadership style and Fiedler's contingency focus on adapting to the project environment.

No particular leadership approach is specifically appropriate for managing a project. Due to the unique circumstances
inherent in each project, the leadership approach and the management skills required to be successful vary depending
on the complexity profile of the project. However, the Project Management Institute published research that studied
project management leadership traits7 and concluded that good communication skills and the ability to build
harmonious relationships and motivate others are essential. Beyond this broad set of leadership skills, the successful
leadership approach will depend on the profile of the project. For example, a transactional project manager with a
strong command-and-control leadership approach may be very successful on a small software development project or
a construction project, where tasks are clear, roles are well understood, and the project environment is cohesive. This
same project manager is less likely to be successful on a larger, more complex project with a diverse project team and
complicated work processes.

Matching the appropriate leadership style and approach to the complexity profile of the project is a critical element of
project success. Even experienced project managers are less likely to be successful if their leadership approach does
not match the complexity profile of the project.

Each project phase may also require a different leadership approach. During the start-up phase of a project, when new
team members are first assigned to the project, the project may require a command-and-control leadership approach.
Later, as the project moves into the conceptual phase, creativity becomes important, and the project management takes
on a more transformational type leadership approach. Most experienced project managers are able to adjust their
leadership approach to the needs of the project phase. Occasionally, on very large and complex projects some
companies will bring in different project managers for various phases of a project. Changing project managers may
bring the right level of experience and the appropriate leadership approach, but is also disruptive to a project. Senior
management must balance the benefit of matching the right leadership approach with the cost of disrupting
established relationships.

Multinational Textbook Publishing Project

On a project to publish a new textbook at a major publisher, a project manager led a team that included members from
partners that were included in a joint venture. The editorial manager was Greek, the business manager was German, and
other members of the team were from various locations in the United States and Europe. In addition to the traditional
potential for conflict that arises from team members from different cultures, the editorial manager and business
manager were responsible for protecting the interest of their company in the joint venture.

The project manager held two alignment or team-building meetings. The first was a two-day meeting held at a local
resort and included only the members of the project leadership team. An outside facilitator was hired to facilitate
discussion, and the topic of cultural conflict and organizational goal conflict quickly emerged. The team discussed
several methods for developing understanding and addressing conflicts that would increase the likelihood of finding
mutual agreement.

The second team-building session was a one-day meeting that included the executive sponsors from the various
partners in the joint venture. With the project team aligned, the project manager was able to develop support for the

                                                                                       110
publication project's strategy and commitment from the executives of the joint venture. In addition to building
processes that would enable the team to address difficult cultural differences, the project manager focused on building
trust with each of the team members. The project manager knew that building trust with the team was as critical to the
success of the project as the technical project management skills and devoted significant management time to building
and maintaining this trust.

Leadership Skills

Einsiedel8 discussed qualities of successful project managers. The project manager must be perceived to be credible
by the project team and key stakeholders. The project manager can solve problems. A successful project manager has
a high degree of tolerance for ambiguity. On projects, the environment changes frequently, and the project manager
must apply the appropriate leadership approach for each situation.

The successful project manager must have good communication skills. Barry Posner9connected project management
skills to solving problems. All project problems were connected to skills needed by the project manager:

      Breakdown in communication represented the lack of communication skills.
      Uncommitted team members represented the lack of team-building skills.
      Role confusion represented the lack of organizational skills.

The research indicates that project managers need a large numbers of skills. These skills include administrative skills,
organizational skills, and technical skills associated with the technology of the project. The types of skills and the depth
of the skills needed are closely connected to the complexity profile of the project. Typically on smaller, less complex
projects, project managers need a greater degree of technical skills. On larger, more complex projects, project
managers need more organizational skills to deal with the complexity. On smaller projects, the project manager is
intimately involved in developing the project schedule, cost estimates, and quality standards. On larger projects,
functional managers are typically responsible for managing these aspects of the project, and the project manager
provides the organizational framework for the work to be successful.

Listening

One of the most important communication skills of the project manager is the ability to actively listen. Active listening
is placing oneself in the speaker's position as much as possible, understanding the communication from the point of
view of the speaker, listening to the body language and other environmental cues, and striving not just to hear, but to
understand. Active listening takes focus and practice to become effective. Active listening enables a project manager to
go beyond the basic information that is being shared and to develop a more complete understanding of the information.

Client's Body Language Indicates Problems at a Board Meeting

A client just returned from a trip to Australia where he reviewed the progress of the project with his company's board of
directors. The project manager listened and took notes on the five concerns expressed by the board of directors to the
client.

The project manager observed that the client's body language showed more tension than usual. This was a cue to listen
very carefully. The project manager nodded occasionally and clearly demonstrated he was listening through his posture,
small agreeable sounds, and body language. The project manager then began to provide feedback on what was said
using phrases like "What I hear you say is..." or "It sounds like...." The project manager was clarifying the message that
was communicated by the client.

The project manager then asked more probing questions and reflected on what was said. "It sounds as if it was a very
tough board meeting." "Is there something going on beyond the events of the project?" From these observations and
questions, the project manager discovered that the board of directors meeting did not go well. The company had
experienced losses on other projects, and budget cuts meant fewer resources for the project and an expectation that

                                                                                       111
the project would finish earlier than planned. The project manager also discovered that the client's future with the
company would depend on the success of the project. The project manager asked, "Do you think we will need to do
things differently?" They began to develop a plan to address the board of directors' concerns.

Through active listening, the project manager was able to develop an understanding of the issues that emerged from
the board meeting and participate in developing solutions. Active listening and the trusting environment established by
the project manager enabled the client to safely share information he had not planned on sharing and to participate in
creating a workable plan that resulted in a successful project.
In the example above, the project manager used the following techniques:

  1. Listening intently to the words of the client and observing the client's body language
  2. Nodding and expressing interest in the client without forming rebuttals
  3. Providing feedback and asking for clarity while repeating a summary of the information back to the client
  4. Expressing understanding and empathy for the client.

Active listening was important in establishing a common understanding from which an effective project plan could be
developed.

Negotiation

When multiple people are involved in an endeavor, differences in opinions and desired outcomes naturally occur.
Negotiation is a process for developing a mutually acceptable outcome when the desired outcome for each party
conflicts.. A project manager will often negotiate with a client, with team members, with vendors, and with other project
stakeholders. Negotiation is an important skill in developing support for the project and preventing frustration among all
parties involved, which could delay or cause project failure.

Vijay Verma10 suggests that negotiations involve four principles:

  1. Separate people from the problem. Framing the discussions in terms of desired outcomes enables the negotiations
      to focus on finding new outcomes.

  2. Focus on common interests. By avoiding the focus on differences, both parties are more open to finding solutions
      that are acceptable.

  3. Generate options that advance shared interests. Once the common interests are understood, solutions that do not
      match with either party's interests can be discarded, and solutions that may serve both parties' interests can be
      more deeply explored.

  4. Develop results based on standard criteria. The standard criterion is the success of the project. This implies that
      the parties develop a common definition of project success.

For the project manager to successfully negotiate issues on the project, he or she should first seek to understand the
position of the other party. If negotiating with a client, what is the concern or desired outcome of the client? What are
the business drivers and personal drivers that are important to the client? Without this understanding, it is difficult to
find a solution that will satisfy the client. The project manager should also seek to understand what outcomes are
desirable to the project. Typically, more than one outcome is acceptable. Without knowing what outcomes are
acceptable, it is difficult to find a solution that will produce that outcome.

One of the most common issues in formal negotiations is finding a mutually acceptable price for a service or product.
Understanding the market value for a product or service will provide a range for developing a negotiations strategy. The
price paid on the last project or similar projects provides information on the market value. Seeking expert opinions from
sources who would know the market is another source of information. Based on this information, the project manager
can then develop an expected range from the lowest price that would be expected within the current market to the
highest price.

                                                                                       112
Additional factors will also affect the negotiated price. The project manager may be willing to pay a higher price to
assure an expedited delivery or a lower price if delivery can be made at the convenience of the supplier or if payment is
made before the product is delivered. Developing as many options as possible provides a broader range of choices and
increases the possibility of developing a mutually beneficial outcome.

The goal of negotiations is not to achieve the lowest costs, although that is a major consideration, but to achieve the
greatest value for the project. If the supplier believes that the negotiations process is fair and the price is fair, the project
is more likely to receive higher value from the supplier. The relationship with the supplier can be greatly influenced by
the negotiation process and a project manager that attempts to drive the price unreasonably low or below the market
value will create an element of distrust in the relationship that may have negative consequences for the project. A
positive negotiation experience may create a positive relationship that may be beneficial, especially if the project begins
to fall behind schedule and the supplier is in a position to help keep the project on schedule.

   Negotiation on a Textbook Adoption Project

     After difficult negotiations on an open textbook adoption project in Indiana, the project management team met
     with the publisher and asked, "Now that the negotiations are complete, how can we help you get more
     adoptions?" Although this question surprised the publisher, the team had discussed how information would
     flow, and confusion in expectations and unexpected changes always cost the supplier more money. The team
     developed mechanisms for assuring good information and providing early information on possible changes and
     tracked the effect of these efforts during the life of the project.

     These efforts and the increased trust enabled the publisher to increase adoptions on the project, and the
     publisher made special efforts to meet every project expectation. During the life of the project, the publisher
     shared several ideas about how to reduce total project costs and increase efficiencies. The positive outcome
     was the product of good partner management by the project team, but the relationship could not have been
     successful without good faith negotiations.

Conflict Resolution

Conflict on a project is to be expected because of the level of stress, lack of information during early phases of the
project, personal differences, role conflicts, and limited resources. Although good planning, communication, and team
building can reduce the amount of conflict, conflict will still emerge. How the project manager deals with the conflict
results in the conflict being destructive or an opportunity to build energy, creativity, and innovation.
David Whetton and Kim Cameron11 developed a response-to-conflict model that reflected the importance of the issue
balanced against the importance of the relationship. The model presented five responses to conflict:

  1. Avoiding
  2. Forcing
  3. Collaborating
  4. Compromising
  5. Accommodating

Each of these approaches can be effective and useful depending on the situation. Project managers will use each of
these conflict resolution approaches depending on the project manager's personal approach and an assessment of the
situation.

                                                                                       113
Most project managers have a default approach that has emerged over time and is comfortable. For example, some
project managers find the use of the project manager's power the easiest and quickest way to resolve problems. "Do it
because I said to" is the mantra for project managers who use forcing as the default approach to resolve conflict. Some
project managers find accommodating with the client the most effective approach to dealing with client conflict.

The effectiveness of a conflict resolution approach will often depend on the situation. The forcing approach often
succeeds in a situation where a quick resolution is needed, and the investment in the decision by the parties involved is
low.

Resolving an Office Space Conflict

Two senior managers both want the office with the window. The project manager intercedes with little discussion and
assigns the window office to the manager with the most seniority. The situation was a low-level conflict with no long-
range consequences for the project and a solution all parties could accept.

Sometimes office size and location is culturally important, and this situation would take more investment to resolve.

Conflict Over a Change Order

In another example, the client rejected a request for a change order because she thought the change should have been
foreseen by the project team and incorporated into the original scope of work. The project controls manager believed
the client was using her power to avoid an expensive change order and suggested the project team refuse to do the
work without a change order from the client.

This is a more complex situation, with personal commitments to each side of the conflict and consequences for the
project. The project manager needs a conflict resolution approach that increases the likelihood of a mutually acceptable
solution for the project.One conflict resolution approach involves evaluating the situation, developing a common
understanding of the problem, developing alternative solutions, and mutually selecting a solution. Evaluating the
situation typically includes gathering data. In our example of a change order conflict, gathering data would include a
review of the original scope of work and possibly of people's understandings, which might go beyond the written
scope.The second step in developing a resolution to the conflict is to restate, paraphrase, and reframe the problem
behind the conflict to develop a common understanding of the problem. In our example, the common understanding
may explore the change management process and determine that the current change management process may not
achieve the client's goal of minimizing project changes. This phase is often the most difficult and may take an
investment of time and energy to develop a common understanding of the problem.

After the problem has been restated and agreed on, alternative approaches are developed. This is a creative process
that often means developing a new approach or changing the project plan. The result is a resolution to the conflict that
is mutually agreeable to all team members. If all team members believe every effort was made to find a solution that
achieved the project charter and met as many of the team member's goals as possible, there will be a greater
commitment to the agreed-on solution.

Project Goals Accomplished

In our example, the project team found a new way to accomplish the project goals without a change to the project
scope. On this project, the solution seemed obvious after some creative discussions, but in most conflict situations,
even the most obvious solutions can be elusive.

Delegation

Delegating responsibility and work to others is a critical project management skill. The responsibility for executing the
project belongs to the project manager. Often other team members on the project will have a functional responsibility
on the project and report to a functional manager in the parent organization. For example, the procurement leader for a
major project may also report to the organization's vice president for procurement. Although the procurement plan for
the project must meet the organization's procurement policies, the procurement leader on the project will take day-to-

                                                                                       114
day direction from the project manager. The amount of direction given to the procurement leader, or others on the
project, is the decision of the project manager.

If the project manager delegates too little authority to others to make decisions and take action, the lack of a timely
decision or lack of action will cause delays on the project. Delegating too much authority to others who do not have the
knowledge, skills, or information will typically cause problems that result in delay or increased cost to the project.
Finding the right balance of delegation is a critical project management skill.

When developing the project team, the project manager selects team members with the knowledge, skills, and abilities
to accomplish the work required for the project to be successful. Typically, the more knowledge, skills, abilities, and
experience a project team member brings to the project, the more that team member will be paid. To keep the project
personnel costs lower, the project manager will develop a project team with the level of experience and the knowledge,
skills, and abilities to accomplish the work.

On smaller, less complex projects, the project manager can provide daily guidance to project team members and be
consulted on all major decisions. On larger, more complex projects, there are too many important decisions made every
day for the project manager to be involved at the same level, and project team leaders are delegated decision-making
authority. Larger projects, with a more complex profile will typically pay more because of the need for the knowledge
and experience. On larger, more complex projects, the project manager will develop a more experienced and
knowledgeable team that will enable the project manager to delegate more responsibility to these team members.

   Learning Project in Peru

     An instructional design project in Peru was falling behind schedule, and a new manager was assigned over the
     design team that was the most behind schedule. He was an experienced project manager from the United
     States with a reputation for meeting aggressive schedules. However, he failed to see that as a culture, Peruvians
     do a great deal more socializing than teams in the U.S. The project manager's communication with the team
     was then limited because he did not go out and spend more time with them, and his team did not develop trust
     or respect for him. Due to these cultural differences, the project fell further behind, and another personnel
     change had to be made at a significant cost of time, trust and money.

The project manager must have the skills to evaluate the knowledge, skills, and abilities of project team members and
evaluate the complexity and difficulty of the project assignment. Often project managers want project team members
they have worked with in the past. Because the project manager knows the skill level of the team member, project
assignments can be made quickly with less supervision than with a new team member with whom the project manager
has little or no experience.

Delegation is the art of creating a project organizational structure with the work organized into units that can be
managed. Delegation is the process of understanding the knowledge, skills, and abilities needed to manage that work
and then matching the team members with the right skills to do that work. Good project managers are good delegators.

Adjusting Leadership Styles

In the realm of personality traits, remember that they reflect individual's preferences, not their limitations. It is important
to understand that each individual can still function in situations for which they are not best suited. It is also important
to realize that you can change your leadership style according to the needs of your team and the particular project's
attributes and scope.

                                                                                       115
For example, a project leader who is more Thinking (T) than Feeling (F) (according to the Myers-Briggs model) would
need to work harder to be considerate of how a team member who is more Feeling (F) might react if they were singled
out in a meeting because they were behind schedule. If a person knows their preferences and which personality types
are most successful in each type of project or project phase, they can set goals for improvement in their ability to
perform in those areas that are not their natural preference.
Another individual goal is to examine which conflict resolution styles are least comfortable and work to improve those
styles so that they can be used when they are more appropriate than your default style.

   KEY TAKEAWAYS

           Emotional intelligence is the ability to sense, understand, and effectively apply emotions.
           Two common tools for describing personality types are DISC (Dominance, Influence, Steadiness, and
           Conscientiousness) and the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI). The MBTI is the most common. It rates
           personalities on the position between extremes of four paired terms: Extroversion (E)-Introversion (I),
           Sensing (S)-Intuition (I), Thinking (T)-Feeling (F), and Judging (J)-Perceiving (P).
           Leadership styles are usually related to the personality of the leader. The type of leadership style that is
           most effective depends on the complexity and the phase of the project.
           Negotiation and conflict resolution require skill at listening and an understanding of emotional intelligence
           and personality types.
           Delegation is the art of creating a project organizational structure that can be managed and then matching
           the team members with the right skills to do that work.
           Individual goals can be set for improving abilities that are not natural personality strengths to deal with
           projects and project phases.

[1] Daniel Goleman, Emotional Intelligence (New York: Bantam Books, 1995).
[2] Robert K. Cooper and Ayman Sawaf, Executive EQ, Emotional Intelligence in Leadership and Organizations (New
York: Perigree Book, 1997), xiii.
[3] Robert Tannenbaum and Warren Schmidt, "How to Choose a Leadership Pattern," Harvard Business Review 36
(1958): 95-101.
[4] Harold Leavitt, Corporate Pathfinders (New York: Dow-Jones-Irwin and Penguin Books, 1986).
[5] James MacGregor Burns, Leadership (New York: Harper & Row, 1978).
[6] Fred E. Fiedler, "Validation and Extension of the Contingency Model of Leadership Effectiveness," Psychological
Bulletin 76, no. 2 (1971): 128-48.
[7] Qian Shi and Jianguo Chen, The Human Side of Project Management: Leadership Skills (Newtown Square, PA:
Project Management Institute, Inc., 2006), 4-11.
[8] Albert A. Einsiedel, "Profile of Effective Project Managers," Project Management Journal 18 (1987): 5.
[9] Barry Z. Posner, "What It Takes to Be a Good Project Manager," Project Management Journal 18 (1987): 32-46.
[10] Vijay K. Verma, Human Resource Skills for the Project Manager (Sylvia, NC: PMI Publications, 1996), 145-75.

                                                                                       116
[11] David Whetton and Kim Cameron, Developing Management Skills (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education,
2005).

                           This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                           Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/5-1-working-with-individuals.

                                                                                       117
118
5.2

Working with Groups and Teams

Trust  Team Meetings

   Learning Objectives

        1. Describe the value of trust and how it relates to contracts and complex projects.
        2. Identify four types of trust.
        3. Describe how a project manager can build trust.
        4. Identify three common meeting types and then describe how they differ.
        5. Identity types of teams.
        6. Describe the HUMM method of measuring project performance.
        7. Describe the importance of developing a project story.

A team is a collaboration of people with different personalities that is led by a person with a favored leadership style.
Managing the interactions of these personalities and styles as a group is an important aspect of project management.

Trust

Trust is the foundation for all relationships within a project. Without a minimum level of trust, communication breaks
down, and eventually the project suffers in the form of costs increasing and schedules slipping. Often, when reviewing a
project where the performance problems have captured the attention of upper management, the evidence of problems
is the increase in project costs and the slippage in the project schedule. The underlying cause is usually blamed on
communication breakdown. With deeper investigation, the communication breakdown is associated with a breakdown
in trust.

                      119
                                             Image by Brunel University

On projects, trust is the filter through which we screen information that is shared and the filter we use to screen
information we receive. The more trust that exists, the easier it is for information to flow through the filters. As trust
diminishes, the filters become stronger and information has a harder time getting through, and projects that are highly
dependent on an information-rich environment will suffer from information deprivation.

Contracts and Trust Relationships

The project typically begins with a charter or contract. A contract is a legal agreement that includes penalties for any
behavior or results not achieved. Contracts are based on an adversarial paradigm and do not lend themselves to
creating an environment of trust. Contracts and charters are necessary to clearly establish the scope of the project,
among other things, but they are not conducive to establishing a trusting project culture.

A relationship of mutual trust is less formal but vitally important. When a person or team enters into a relationship of
mutual trust, each person's reputation and self-respect are the drivers in meeting the intent of the relationship. A
relationship of mutual trust within the context of a project is a commitment to an open and honest relationship. There is
nothing that enforces the commitments in the relationship except the integrity of the people involved. Smaller, less
complex projects can operate within the boundaries of a legal contract, but larger, more complex projects must develop
a relationship of mutual trust to be successful.

Types of Trust

Svenn Lindskold (1978) describes four kinds of trust:

  1. Objective credibility. A personal characteristic that reflects the truthfulness of an individual that can be checked
      against observable facts.

  2. Attribution of benevolence. A form of trust that is built on the examination of the person's motives and the
      conclusion that they are not hostile.

  3. Nonmanipulative trust. A form of trust that correlates to a person's self-interest and the predictability of a person's
      behavior in acting consistent in that self-interest.

  4. High cost of lying. The type of trust that emerges when persons in authority raise the cost of lying so high that
      people will not lie because the penalty will be too high.

                                                                                       120
Creating Trust

Building trust on a project begins with the project manager. On complex projects, the assignment of a project manager
with a high trust reputation can help establish the trust level needed. The project manager can also establish the cost of
lying in a way that communicates an expectation and a value for trust on the project. Project managers can also assure
that the official goals (stated goals) and operational goals (goals that are reinforced) are aligned. The project manager
can create an atmosphere where informal communication is expected and reinforced.

The informal communication is important to establishing personal trust among team members and with the client.
Allotting time during project start-up meetings to allow team members to develop a personal relationship is important
to establishing the team trust. The informal discussion allows for a deeper understanding of the whole person and
creates an atmosphere where trust can emerge.

High Cost of Lying in a Charleston Project

On a project in Charleston, South Carolina, the client was asking for more and more backup to information from the
project. The project manager visited the client to better understand the reporting requirements and discovered the client
did not trust the reports coming from the project and wanted validating material for each report. After some candid
discussion, the project manager discovered that one of the project team members had provided information to the
client that was inaccurate. The team member had made a mistake but had not corrected it with the client, hoping that
the information would get lost in the stream of information from the project.The project manager removed the team
member from the project for two main reasons. The project manager established that the cost of lying was high. The
removal communicated to the project team an expectation of honesty. The project manager also reinforced a covenant
with the client that reinforced the trust in the information the project provided. The requests for additional information
declined, and the trust relationship between project personnel and the client remained high.

Small events that reduce trust often take place on a project without anyone remembering what happened to create the
environment of distrust. Taking fast and decisive action to establish a high cost of lying, communicating the
expectation of honesty, and creating an atmosphere of trust are critical steps a project manager can take to ensure the
success of complex projects.

Project managers can also establish expectations of team members to respect individual differences and skills, look
and react to the positives, recognize each other's accomplishments, and value people's self-esteem to increase a sense
of the benevolent intent.

Managing Team Meetings

Team meetings are conducted differently depending on the purpose of the meeting, the leadership style that is
appropriate for the meeting, and the personality types of the members of the team.

Action Item Meetings

Action item meetings are short meetings to develop a common understanding of what the short-term priorities are for
the project, individual roles, and expectations for specific activities. This type of meeting is for sharing, not problem
solving. Any problems that emerge from the discussion are assigned to a person, and another meeting is established to
address the issue. Action item meetings focus on short-term activities, usually less than a week in duration.

The action item meeting is fact based and information oriented. It is a left-brain-type focus. The action item meeting
has very little dialogue except to ask clarification questions. If discussion is needed or disagreement is not easily
resolved, another problem-solving meeting is established to deal with that issue. On smaller topics, that meeting might
take place immediately after the action item meeting and only include those people with an interest in the outcome of
the discussion.

                                                                                       121
The project manager keeps the successful action item meeting short in duration and focused on only those items of
information needed for the short-term project plan. The project manager will restate the common understandings of
what activities are priorities and who will be responsible for the activities. Often these meetings can include a review of
safety procedures or security procedures when these issues are important to the project. The leadership approach to
action item meetings focuses on data, actions, and commitments. Although the project manager may observe stresses
between project team members or other issues, they are not addressed in this meeting. These are fact-based meetings.
If issues begin to arise between people, the project manager will develop other opportunities to address these issues in
another forum. Using the Myers-Briggs descriptions, team members who favor thinking more than feeling and judging
more than perceiving are more comfortable with this type of meeting.

Management Meetings

Management meetings are longer in duration and are focused on planning. They are oriented toward developing plans,
tracking progress of existing plans, and making adjustments to plans in response to new information.

These meetings include focused discussion on generating a common understanding of the progress of the existing
plan. This discussion is based on quantitative information provided on the progress of the schedule and other data, but
the discussion is qualitative in evaluating the data to develop a more complete understanding of the data. The
experience and opinions of the project leaders are solicited, and disagreement about meaning of the data is even
encouraged to develop a deeper understanding of the data. Through this discussion, a common understanding of the
status of the project should emerge, and the project manager invites discussion, includes people to offer their thoughts,
and assures that disagreements are positive discussions about interpretation of the information and that
disagreements do not become personal.

Management meetings also focus on developing midterm goals. For larger, more complex projects, the goals may be
monthly or even quarterly. For smaller or less complex projects, weekly goals will provide the focus. The project
manager focuses the discussion on the broad priorities for the next period and includes all the functional leaders in the
discussion. The goals that emerge from the discussion should represent a common understanding of the priorities of
the project for the next term.

For example, during the early phases of a project, the team is focused on developing a conceptual understanding of the
project. A major milestone on complex projects is typically the completion of the conceptual plan. The project manager
would lead a discussion on what needs to be accomplished to meet the project milestone and asks what potential
barriers exist and what key resources are needed. From the discussion, the project team develops a few key goals that
integrate the various functions of the project team and focus the team on priorities.

The following are some examples of goals during the conceptual phase:

      Developing a list of the procurement long lead items and defining critical dates
      Developing a human resources plan that identifies critical positions
      Developing and building agreement with the client on the project scope of work

Each of these goals is measurable and time framed. They can be developed as positive motivators and will take the
project leaders and most of the project team to accomplish. They develop a general understanding of the priorities and
are easy to remember.

Management meetings are a combination of left-brain thinking, which is fact based, and right-brain thinking, which is
creative and innovative. Using the Myers-Briggs terminology, team members who prefer feeling over thinking and
perceiving over judging can contribute ideas and perspectives on the project that the more fact-oriented members
might miss.

The project manager allows and encourages conversation in developing and evaluating the goals but focuses the
discussion on the goals and obstacles. Management meetings take on a different focus during the month. Meetings at

                                                                                       122
the beginning of the month spend time addressing the progress and potential barriers to the goals developed the
previous month. During the middle of the month, the project manager leads the team to develop next month's goals as
the team also works on the current month's goals. Toward the end of the month as the goals for the month are
accomplished, the meeting focuses more on the next month, enabling the team to remain goal focused during the life of
the project.

Management meetings are also an opportunity to discover obstacles to goal achievement. The project team reallocates
resources or develops alternative methods for accomplishing the goals. As the project team discusses the progress of
project goals, the project manager explores possible obstacles and encourages exposing potential problems in
achieving goals. The project manager focuses the team on finding solutions and avoids searching for blame.

The project manager uses a facilitative leadership approach, encouraging the management team to contribute their
ideas, and builds consensus on what goals will bring the appropriate focus. The project manager keeps the focus on
developing the goals, tracking progress, identifying barriers, and making adjustments to accomplish the management
goals. Although there are typically meetings for scheduling and procurement and other meetings where goals are
established and problems solved, the management meeting and the goal development process create alignment
among the project leadership on the items critical to the project's success.

Leadership Meetings

Leadership meetings are held less frequently and are longer in length. These meetings are used by the project manager
to reflect on the project, to explore the larger issues of the project, and to back away from the day-to-day problem
solving. The project manager will create a safe environment for sharing thoughts and evaluations of issues that are less
data oriented. This is a right-brained, creative meeting that focuses on the people issues of the project: the relationship
with the client, vendors, and project team. Team members who favor feeling, perceiving, and intuition often contribute
valuable insights in this type of meeting. The team might also share perceptions by upper management and perceptions
of the community in which the project is being executed. Where the time frame for action item meetings is in weeks and
management meetings is in months, the time frame for leadership meetings is longer and takes in the entire length and
impact of the project.

The project manager's meeting management skill includes creating the right meeting atmosphere for the team
discussion that is needed. For discussions based on data and facts, the project manager creates the action item type
meeting. The conversation is focused on sharing information and clarification. The conversation for leadership
meetings is the opposite. Discussion is more open ended and focused on creativity and innovation. Because each type
of meeting requires a different meeting atmosphere, mixing the purposes of a meeting will make it difficult for the
project manager to develop and maintain the appropriate kind of conversation.

Skilled project managers know what type of meeting is needed and how to develop an atmosphere to support the
meeting type. Meetings of the action item type are focused on information sharing with little discussion. They require
efficient communication of plans, progress, and other information team members need to plan and execute daily work.
Management type meetings are focused on developing and progressing goals. Leadership meetings are more reflective
and focused on the project mission and culture.

These three types of meetings do not cover all the types of project meetings. Specific problem-solving, vendor
evaluation, and scheduling meetings are examples of typical project meetings. Understanding what kinds of meetings
are needed on the project and creating the right focus for each meeting type is a critical project management skill.

Types of Teams

Teams can outperform individual team members in several situations. The effort and time invested in developing a
team and the work of the team are large investments of project resources, and the payback is critical to project

                                                                                       123
success. Determining when a team is needed and then chartering and supporting the development and work of the
team are other critical project management abilities.

Teams are effective in several project situations:

      When no one person has the knowledge, skills, and abilities to either understand or solve the problem
      When a commitment to the solution is needed by large portions of the project team
      When the problem and solution cross project functions
      When innovation is required

Individuals can outperform teams on some occasions. An individual tackling a problem consumes fewer resources than
a team and can operate more efficiently--as long as the solution meets the project's needs. A person is most
appropriate in the following situations:

      When speed is important
      When one person has the knowledge, skills, and resources to solve the problem
      When the activities involved in solving the problem are very detailed
      When the actual document needs to be written (Teams can provide input, but writing is a solitary task.)

In addition to knowing when a team is appropriate, the project manager must also understand what type of team will
function best.

Functional Teams

A functional team refers to the team approach related to the project functions. The engineering team, the procurement
team, and the project controls team are examples of functional teams within the project. On a project with a low
complexity profile that includes low technological challenges, good team member experience, and a clear scope of
work, the project manager can utilize well-defined functional teams with clear expectations, direction, and strong
vertical communication.

Cross-Functional Teams

Cross-functional teams address issues and work processes that include two or more of the functional teams. The team
members are selected to bring their functional expertise to addressing project opportunities.

Cross-Functional Teamwork on Video Production Project

A cross-functional project team in Tennessee was assigned to develop a project approach to drafting, shooting, and
editing educational videos without storing the videos on the school server. Although the complexity of this goal is
primarily related to creating the videos and procuring editing equipment, the planning involved coordination of the script
drafting, procurement of equipment and talent, and project controls. Team members from each of these functions
developed and tracked a plan to meet the project goal. Because they communicated so frequently and clearly, the cross-
functional team was successful in designing a process and executing the plan in a way that saved three weeks on the
video schedule and several thousand dollars in cost by hosting off-site.

Problem-Solving Teams

Problem-solving teams are assigned to address specific issues that arise during the life of the project. The project
leadership includes members that have the expertise to address the problem. The team is chartered to address that
problem and then disband.

Qualitative Assessment of Project Performance

Project managers should provide an opportunity to ask such questions as "What is your gut feeling about how the
project going?" and "How do you think our client perceives the project?" This creates the opportunity for reflection and

                                                                                       124
dialogue around larger issues on the project. The project manager creates an atmosphere for the team to go beyond the
data and search for meaning. This type of discussion and reflection is very difficult in the stress of day-to-day problem
solving.

The project manager has several tools for developing good quantitative information--based on numbers and
measurements--such as the project schedules, budgets and budget reports, risk analysis, and goal tracking. This
quantitative information is essential to understanding the current status and trends on the project. Just as important is
the development of qualitative information--comparisons of qualities--such as judgments made by expert team
members that go beyond the quantitative data provided in a report. Some would label this the "gut feeling" or intuition of
experienced project managers.

The Humm Factor is a survey tool developed by Russ Darnall to capture the thoughts of project participants (Caudron,
1995). It derived its name from a project manager who always claimed he could tell you more by listening to the hum of
the project than reading all the project reports. "Do you feel the project is doing the things it needs to do to stay on
schedule?" and "Is the project team focused on project goals?" are the types of questions that can be included in the
Humm Factor. It is distributed on a weekly or less frequent basis depending on the complexity profile of the project. A
project with a high level of complexity due to team-based and cultural issues will be surveyed more frequently.

The qualitative responses are converted to a quantitative value as a score from 1 to 10. Responses are tracked by
individuals and the total project, resulting in qualitative comparisons over time. The project team reviews the ratings
regularly, looking for trends that indicate an issue may be emerging on the project that might need exploring.

Humm Survey Uncovers Concerns

On a project in South Carolina, the project surveyed the project leadership with a Humm Survey each week. The Humm
Factor indicated an increasing worry about the schedule beginning to slip when the schedule reports indicated that
everything was according to plan. When the project manager began trying to understand why the Humm Factor was
showing concerns about the schedule, he discovered an apprehension about the performance of a critical project
supplier. When he asked team members, they responded, "It was the way they answered the phone or the hesitation
when providing information--something didn't feel right."

The procurement manager visited the supplier and discovered the company was experiencing financial problems and
had serious cash flow problems. The project manager was able to develop a plan to help the supplier through the
period, and the supplier eventually recovered. The project was able to meet performance goals. The Humm Factor
Survey provided a tool for members of the project team to express concerns that were based on very soft data, and the
project team was able to discover a potential problem.

Another project team used the Humm Factor to survey the client monthly. The completed surveys went to a person who
was not on the project team to provide anonymity to the responses. The responses were discussed at the monthly
project review meetings, and the project manager summarized the results and addressed all the concerns expressed in
the report. "I don't feel my concerns are being heard" was one response that began increasing during the project, and
the project manager spent a significant portion of the next project review meeting attempting to understand what this
meant. The team discovered that as the project progressed toward major milestones, the project team became more
focused on solving daily problems, spent more time in meetings, and their workday was becoming longer. The result
was fewer contacts with the clients, slower responses in returning phone calls, and much fewer coffee breaks where
team members could casually discuss the project with the client.

The result of the conversation led to better understanding by both the project team and client team of the change in
behavior based on the current phase of the project and the commitment to developing more frequent informal
discussion about the project.

                                                                                       125
Developing a Project Story

Every project develops a story. It is the short explanation that project team members give when asked about the project.
This is also called the elevator speech, which is the explanation a person would give if he or she were in the elevator
with the CEO and the CEO asked him or her to describe the project. Project stories often express important aspects of
the project and can create a positive picture of the project or one that is less appealing.

A project story will develop, and creating a positive project story is a project management skill that helps the project. A
positive project story is inviting to people and helps with the recruitment of talent to the project. A positive project story
also helps when services are needed from functional departments within the company and in developing management
support for the project. The project manager actively sets out to create the project story. Creating a positive story
entails identifying the unique aspects of the project and building a positive outcome.

Building a Reputation for Project Completion Speed

A project manager in South Carolina always challenged people with speed. He identified the last project with similar
characteristics and challenged the team to beat the time by weeks or months. The story became, "If you want a project
done on time, this is the project team you need." The project manager created a spirit of competition and fun. The
project manager was a high-energy person, and the idea of finding a way to finish a project early seemed a natural
outcome.

Every project manager can find the unique aspect of the project and build a sense of specialness about the project. The
project becomes a good place to work, provides the team with a sense of accomplishment, and becomes the story
created by the project manager.

   Key Takeaways

           Trust is important to reduce delays caused by excessive filtering and fact checking. Contracts are specific
           about the project scope, but personal relationships of mutual trust are necessary on complex projects.
           Four types of trust are objective credibility, attribution of benevolence, nonmanipulation, and a high cost of
           lying.
           To create trust, the project manager needs a reputation for trustworthiness and needs to align official goals
           with operational goals, establish a high cost of lying, and create an atmosphere of respect and benevolent
           intent.
           Meeting types are action item, management, and leadership. Action item meetings focus on specific short-
           term priorities. Management meetings focus on planning, and leadership meetings focus on larger issues.
           The types of teams are functional, cross-functional, and problem solving.
           The Humm Factor measures project performance and uses a questionnaire to identify qualitative
           information about project performance.
           A short statement of the purpose and character of the project is useful in recruiting and obtaining support
           for a project.

References

Svenn Lindskold, "Trust Development, the GRIT Proposal, and the Effects of Conciliatory Acts on Conflict and
         Corporation," Psychological Bulletin 85, no. 4 (1978): 772-93.

                                                                                       126
Shari Caudron, "Industry's Unsung Heroes," Industry Week, December 4, 1995, 12-16.
                           This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                           Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/5-2-working-with-groups-and-
                           teams.

                                                                                       127
128
  5.3

Creating a Project Culture

Innovation  Learning  Culture  Project

   LEARNING OBJECTIVES

        1. Describe how project culture is developed and enforced.
        2. Describe how differences in culture between stakeholders can influence the project.
        3. Describe the role of innovation on projects.

Project managers have a unique opportunity during the start-up of a project. They create a project culture, something
organizational managers seldom have a chance to do. In most organizations, the corporate or organizational culture
has developed over the life of the organization, and people associated with the organization understand what is valued,
what has status, and what behaviors are expected. Edgar Schein defined culture as a pattern of basic assumptions
formed by a group on how to perceive and address problems associated with both internal adaptation and external
integration.1 Schein also described organizational culture as an abstract concept that constrains, stabilizes, and
provides structure to the organization. At the same time, culture is being constantly enacted, created, and shaped by
leadership behavior.

Characteristics of Project Culture

A project culture represents the shared norms, beliefs, values, and assumptions of the project team. Understanding the
unique aspects of a project culture and developing an appropriate culture to match the complexity profile of the project
are important project management abilities.

Culture is developed through the communication of

      the priority
      the given status
      the alignment of official and operational rules

Official rules are the rules that are stated, and operational rules are the rules that are enforced. Project managers who
align official and operational rules are more effective in developing a clear and strong project culture because the
project rules are among the first aspects of the project culture to which team members are exposed when assigned to
the project.

                                                                                       129
Operational Rules on a Multisite Project

During an instructional design project that required individuals to collaborate remotely, an official rule had been
established that individuals would backup their work in a location other than the shared folders they were using every
week. It did not take long, however, for everyone involved to see that one member was actively backing up all work.
Believing that was sufficient, the operational rule became simply leaving the backing up to a single individual. They
assumed that official rules could be ignored if they were difficult to obey.

When this individual fell ill, however, no one picked up the slack and followed the official rule. When some files were
corrupted, the team found that their most recent backups were weeks old, resulting in redoing a lot of work. The
difference between the official rules and the operational rules of the project created a culture that made communication
of the priorities more difficult.

In addition to official and operational rules, the project leadership communicates what is important by the use of
symbols, storytelling, rituals, rewards or punishments, and taboos.

Creating a Culture of Collaboration

A project manager met with his team prior to the beginning of an instructional design project. The team was excited
about the prestigious project and the potential for career advancement involved. With this increased competitive aspect
came the danger of selfishness and backstabbing. The project leadership team told stories of previous projects where
people were fired for breaking down the team efforts and often shared inspirational examples of how teamwork created
unprecedented successes--an example of storytelling. Every project meeting started with teambuilding exercises--a
ritual--and any display of hostility or separatism was forbidden--taboo--and was quickly and strongly cut off by the
project leadership if it occurred.
Culture guides behavior and communicates what is important and is useful for establishing priorities. On projects that
have a strong culture of trust, team members feel free to challenge anyone who breaks a confidence, even managers.
The culture of integrity is stronger than the cultural aspects of the power of management.

Culture of Stakeholders

When project stakeholders do not share a common culture, project management must adapt its organizations and work
processes to cope with cultural differences. The following are three major aspects of cultural difference that can affect
a project:

  1. Communications
  2. Negotiations
  3. Decision making

Communication is perhaps the most visible manifestation of culture. Project managers encounter cultural differences in
communication in language, context, and candor. Different languages are clearly the highest barrier to communication.
When project stakeholders do not share the same language, communication slows down and is often filtered to share
only information that is deemed critical. The barrier to communication can influence project execution where quick and
accurate exchange of ideas and information is critical.

The interpretation of information reflects the extent that context and candor influence cultural expressions of ideas and
understanding of information. In some cultures, an affirmative answer to a question does not always mean yes. The
cultural influence can create confusion on a project where project stakeholders share more than one culture.

Culture Affects Communication in Mumbai

A project management consultant from the United States was asked to evaluate the effectiveness of a management
team executing a project in Mumbai, India. The project team reported that the project was on schedule and within
budget. After a project review meeting where each of the team leads reported that the design of the project was on
schedule, the consultant began informal discussions with individuals. He began to discover that several critical aspects

                                                                                       130
of the project were behind schedule and lacked a mitigating strategy. The information on the project flowed through a
cultural expectation to provide positive information. The project was eventually cancelled by the U.S.-based corporation
when the market and political risks increased.
Not all cultural differences are related to international projects. Corporate cultures and even regional differences can
create cultural confusion on a project.

Cultural Differences between American Regions

Be aware that cultural differences don't only occur if you have a multinational team. On a major project in South
America that included project team leaders from seven different countries, the greatest cultural difference that affected
the project communication was between two project leaders from the United States. Two team members--one from
New Orleans and one from Brooklyn--had more difficulty communicating than team members from Lebanon and
Australia.

                                        Image by UK Department for Business, Innovation and Skills

Innovation on Projects

The requirement of innovation on projects is influenced by the nature of the project. Some projects are chartered to
develop a solution to a problem, and innovation is a central ingredient of project success. The lack of availability of
education to the world at large prompted the open education movement, a highly innovative endeavor, which resulted in
the textbook you are now reading. Innovation is also important to developing methods of lowering costs or shortening
the schedule. Traditional project management thinking provides a trade-off between cost, quality, and schedule. A
project sponsor can typically shorten the project schedule with an investment of more money or a lowering of quality.
Finding innovative solutions can sometimes lower costs while also saving time and maintaining the quality.

Innovation on a Textbook Project

A project manager brought together a team of professors, graduate students, and undergraduates to develop a
mathematics textbook. One of the major goals of the team was to present the information in a compelling way. To
encourage innovation the project manager was lenient with the dress code, noise levels, and even space (there were
members of the team that liked to wander). This created a comfortable atmosphere where participants felt welcome to
take risks and suggest a variety of ideas. This approach was not, however, in line with the expectations of the university
in which they were housed. The project manager had to decide if he wanted to maintain the lenient atmosphere or ask

                                                                                       131
the team to abide by the expectations of the university. Feeling that the innovation of the project would suffer by
changing the dynamic the group had established, the project manager chose to rent office space off-campus.
Innovation is a creative process that requires both fun and focus. Stress is a biological reaction to perceived threats.
Stress, at appropriate levels, can make the work environment interesting and even challenging. Many people working on
projects enjoy a high-stress, exciting environment. When the stress level is too high, the biological reaction increases
blood flow to the emotional parts of the brain and decreases the blood flow to the creative parts of the brain, making
creative problem solving more difficult. Fun reduces the amount of stress on the project. Project managers recognize
the benefits of balancing the stress level on the project with the need to create an atmosphere that enables creative
thought.

Stress Managed on a Website Design Project

When a project manager visited the team tasked with designing the website for a project, she found that most of the
members were feeling a great deal of stress. As she probed to find the reason behind the stress, she found that in
addition to designing, the team was increasingly facing the need to build the website as well. As few of them had the
necessary skills, they were wasting time that could be spent designing trying to learn building skills. Once the project
manager was able to identify the stress as well as its cause, she was able to provide the team with the support it
needed to be successful.
Exploring opportunities to create savings takes an investment of time and energy, and on a time-sensitive project, the
project manager must create the motivation and the opportunity for creative thinking.

   KEY TAKEAWAYS

           Project culture is developed by communicating priority, status, and the alignment of official and operational
           rules. It is enforced through use of symbols, storytelling, rituals, rewards or punishments, and taboos.
           Differences in culture between stakeholders can affect communications, negotiations, and decision
           making.
           Innovation can be the main focus of the project, or it can be used to achieve improvement in goals that are
           usually mutually exclusive, such as lowering costs and shortening schedule.

[1] Edgar Schein, "Organizational Culture," American Psychologist 45 (1990): 109-19.

                           This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                           Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/5-3-creating-a-project-culture.

                                                                                       132
  6

Communication Technologies

Overview

This chapter aligns with Chapters 4 and 10 of the PMBOK and 18% of the CAPM questions come from this knowledge
area. The content connects to the Planning, Executing and Monitoring & Controlling category of the PMP questions.
Almost by definition, projects require teamwork, and team members must communicate with each other for a variety of
reasons and by a number of possible methods. For instance, team members frequently need to update each other on
their progress and may employ such means of communication as email, project management software, or social
media. Available technology can greatly facilitate such tasks and assure timely and accurate communication between
team members.
Such technologies include:

      Communication technologies
            Email
            Short Message Services (SMS), commonly referred to as texting
            Video conferencing and chat services, like Skype
            Blogs and wikis, like WordPress and Mediawiki
            Microblogging services like TwitterDocument and calendar sharing services like Google Docs
            Postal and shipping services

      Desktop software tools
            Microsoft Office or Open Office Suite
            Visual design and mockup software like Balsamiq
            Project management software like Microsoft Project or OpenProject

Choosing which communication resource(s) to use on any given project is a critical decision and should be driven by
the needs of the project. Generally speaking, simple projects will require fewer communication resources, while larger,
multifaceted projects may require more specialized or complex tools and software.
Software tools are constantly changing. Wikipedia maintains a relatively up-to-date listing of various project
management programs and their features.

                                                                                       133
Designers Share Their Experiences

  Dr. Andy Gibbons - Instructional Psychology and Technology - BYU

                                                                  Watch on YouTube
    Well, we were training fairly technical subject matter, it was how to fly a helicopter and how to operate the
    sensitive electronic equipment in the back, sensors. So that the technologies that we were working with, that we
    were training people to use were very sophisticated technologies. Unfortunately, we had almost zero
    technologies. As a designer this was the 1975-76 time frame. The word "processor" was just being invented.
    We didn't have word processors. Everything was typed by hand, by secretaries. We had an overworked secretary
    who was constantly typing things. And a lot of hand written documents had to pass. Our design document was
    typed, and if you made a mistake on a page you would have to re-type the whole page if it was a major mistake,
    or an addition. So sometimes the documents ended up looking kind of funny. You'd have a document with just a
    small paragraph at the top. What I'm trying to depict here is we didn't even have the word processor. We didn't
    even have the desktop publishing that we have today. We had video technology, but we didn't have some of the
    video editing technologies that we have. So it was almost a razor blade kind of an operation where stuff would
    end up literally on the cutting room floor, tape would end up that way. Although we did, one of the things, the
    Navy did give us use of their editing base. So once we had identified the takes that we wanted to edit into our
    video materials, they--we could do a re-roll kind of thing. But it was, compared to the tools that we have today, if
    we had had the tools today, then, that we have today the project would have been made much easier. And
    frankly, my staff would have been cut by half if I had had word processing and design.

                                                                                      134
Heather Bryce - Independent Studies - BYU

                                                              Watch on YouTube
My name is Heather Bryce, and I am the project manager for Brigham Young University Independent Study
andWe used video and Flash, I don't know if you count video as a technology, but definitely Flash as a
technology. And the Flash in this course is absolutely amazing. I can show you some examples. We did a virtual
sketchbook as a way to introduce vocabulary. So instead of just memorizing what perspective is, they could
actually see what an artist sketch would look like and how they would use perspective. Flash is particularly
important in this course because it really allowed the student that interactive experience that you need in a
drawing course. So that was probably the most important technology used on this project.

                                                                                 135
Dr. Larry Seawright - Center for Teaching and Learning - BYU

                                                              Watch on YouTube
Technology issues in the Learning Suite are probably the biggest concern that anyone has. Because the
technologies we are using are off-the-shelf. We're looking at using essentially PHP and MySQL databases
although we'll probably migrate to Oracle simply because that is kind of University standard. Because the
product we're building, the BYU Learning Suite, is a University supported product. As we build that and hand it
over to the University IT folks to operate, their saying "Hmm, our supported platform is Oracle." So we'll have to
migrate that over time, over to Oracle. But right now, you know, we're doing simple things. PHP programming,
MySQL. Just really, kind of straight forward web pages that we build little dialogue boxes, we get inputs and we
store it somewhere. So, it's not a very complicated system. The key to it really is the decision that the University
IT folks made several years ago to, in the past, University data systems were locked up very tightly. And they
have to be. It is our paycheck information, it's all the FERPA data that needs to be protected for students, all that
private stuff. But the University decided that they wouldn't be the only ones to build the applications that would
then get access to the data. They decided to build a web service interface so that folks like us can write an
application that goes through the web service and securely gets the data. And that's how we're able to build the
Learning Suite. So we're able to access the University Gradebook, the University academic information systems,
the personnel files so that we can know who's on campus and who is not, who is authorized to use this system,
the library, the bookstore. All those things are enabled by a simply thing that we call web service. It's just an
abstraction layer that separates the data from the program here. It's also a really great thing because it allows
us down the road. Right now we're using a third party, grade book. In a year or so we will have our own grade
book written. And because of this application interface layer that separates us from the actual data we'll be able
to swap out that backend grade book, and the interface for the students and faculty, unchanged. Except you'll
see "new features". Because it's our grade book and we have other stuff. So that's kind of the technologies that
we're using. It is really enabled by some very forward thinking decisions on the part of the University IT folks
who, you know, came to the conclusion that, you know, maybe we're not the best folks to write applications.

                                                                                 136
 We're really good though at management and deployment of things. So you build the systems, turn them over to
 us and we'll run them for you. So that's kind of where we are right now.
Types of Communication
Selecting Software

                       This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                       Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/6-communication-technologies.

                                                                                  137
138
  6.1

Types of Communication

Learning  Synchronous  Communication  Objectives  Asynchronous

   LEARNING OBJECTIVES

        1. Identify characteristics and examples of synchronous communication.
        2. Identify characteristics and examples of asynchronous communication.
        3. Identify questions to answer when considering new communications technologies.

Completing a complex project successfully requires good communication among team members. If those team
members work in the same building, they can arrange regular meetings, simply stop by each other's office space to get
a quick answer, or even discuss a project informally at other office functions. Many projects are performed by teams
that interact primarily through electronic communication and are, therefore, called virtual teams.1 To avoid
miscommunication that can harm trust and to include team members in a project culture, the project team needs a plan
for communicating reliably and in a timely manner. This planning begins with understanding two major categories of
communication.

                                      139
                        Image by World Economic Forum

Synchronous Communications

If all the parties to the communication are taking part in the exchange at the same time, the communication is
synchronous. A telephone or Skype conference call is an example of synchronous communication. The following are
examples of synchronous communications:

     Live meeting. Gathering of team members at the same location.
     Conference call. A telephone call between two or more individuals where several people participate.
     Audio conference. Like a conference call, but conducted online using software like Skype.
     Computer-assisted conference. Audio conference with a connection between computers that can display a
      document or spreadsheet that can be edited by both parties.
     Video conference. Similar to an audio conference but with live video of the participants. Some laptop computers
      have built-in cameras to facilitate video conferencing.
     IM (instant messaging). Exchange of text or voice messages using pop-up windows on the participants' computer
      screens.
     Texting. Exchange of text messages between mobile phones, pagers, or personal digital assistants (PDAs)--
      devices that hold a calendar, a contact list, a task list, and other support programs

Modern communication technologies make it possible to assemble project teams from anywhere in the world. Most
people work during daylight hours, which can make synchronous meetings difficult if the participants are in different
time zones. However, it can be an advantage in some circumstances; for example, if something must be done by the
start of business tomorrow, team members in Asia can work on the problem during their normal work hours while team
members in North America get some sleep.

                                                                                       140
Remember Time Zones

It is important to remember time zones and calculate the difference between yours and your associates' correctly so as
to not miss important meetings or deadlines. Cities and countries to the north or south of each other all observe the
same local time. Be aware that many well-educated people in the United States think of South America as directly south
of North America. As you can see in Figure 6.1, most of South America is one or two time zones east of the United
States. A helpful site to convert local time to another time zone is http://www.timezoneconverter.com/cgi-bin/tzc.tzc

Figure 6.1 World Time Zones

                                                        Image by TimeZonesBoy
Time zones are calculated in reference to the time zone of the Royal Observatory in Greenwich, England. The time at
that location is Greenwich Mean Time (GMT). More recent references designate it as Coordinated Universal Time (UTC)
instead of GMT. The time zones advance from Greenwich in an easterly direction. However, at the international dateline
(about the midpoint around the world from Greenwich), you subtract the time zone from GMT. To prevent confusion
between a.m. and p.m., times are often given using a twenty-four-hour clock. For example, midnight is indicated as
00:00, noon is 12:00 and 1 p.m. is 13:00.

Conference Call between New York and Paris

A project manager for an online course development project in New York is five time zones west of the reference zone,
so the time is given as UTC-5 (or GMT-5). If it is noon in the reference zone, it is 7 a.m. (five hours earlier) in New York.
The manager would like to contact a project team member in Paris, France. Paris is one time zone east of the reference
zone (UTC+1 or GMT+1). If it is noon (12:00) in the reference zone, it is 1 p.m. (13:00) in Paris.This means that there is a
six-hour difference between New York and Paris. If the project manager waits until after lunch to place the call (1 p.m. in
New York), it will be too late in the day in Paris (7 p.m.) to reach someone.

Asynchronous Communications

Getting a team together at the same time can be a challenge--especially if they are spread out across time zones. Many
types of communication do not require that the parties are present at the same time. This type of communication is
asynchronous. There are several choices of asynchronous communications.

                                                                                       141
Mail and Package Delivery

Many companies prefer that final contracts are personally signed by an authorized representative of each party to the
agreement. If several signatures are required, this can take weeks to get all the signatures if the contracts are
transferred by a postal service. If this process is holding up the start of the project, you can use an overnight delivery
service to minimize the time spent transferring the documents.

Fax

Fax machines have been around a long time and enjoy a high level of trust for transmitting documents accurately.
Although it might seem archaic to still use fax transmissions, in many countries a fax of a signed contract is legal, but a
computer-scanned image is not.

E-Mail

Electronic mail (e-mail) is widely used to coordinate projects and to communicate between team members. It has
several valuable characteristics for project management:

      Information can be sent to a list of team members.
      Messages can be saved to document the process in case of a misunderstanding or miscommunication.
      Files can be attached and distributed.

Project Blog

A blog is an online journal that can be private, shared by invitation, or made available to the world. Some project
managers keep a journal in which they summarize the day's challenges and triumphs and the decisions they made.
They return to this journal at a later date to review their decision-making process after the results of those decisions are
known to see if they can learn from their mistakes. Many decisions in project management are made with incomplete
knowledge, and reflecting on previous decisions to develop this decision-making skill is important to growth as a
project manager.

Really Simple Syndication (RSS)

Some projects are directly affected by external factors such as political elections, economic trends, corporate mergers,
technological or scientific breakthroughs, or weather. To keep informed about these factors, you can subscribe to online
news sources. A technology that facilitates this process is Really Simple Syndication (RSS). Web pages with RSS news
feeds have labeled links.

If the user clicks on the RSS feed, news from the website is automatically sent to the user's news reader, such as
Google Reader. The news reader can be set to filter the news for key words to limit the stories to those that are relevant
to the project.

Assessing New Communication Technologies

New technologies for communicating electronically appear with increasing frequency. Using a new technology that is
unfamiliar to the team increases the technology complexity, which can cause delays and increase costs. To decide if a
new technology should be included in a communications plan, seek answers to the following questions:

      Does the new communication technology provide a competitive advantage for the project by reducing cost, saving
      time, or preventing mistakes?
      Does the project team have the expertise to learn the new technology quickly?
      Does the company offer support such as help desk and equipment service for new communication technology?
      What is the cost of training and implementation in terms of time as well as money?

                                                                                       142
   KEY TAKEAWAYS

           Synchronous communications take place when all the parties are present at the same time. Examples are
           telephone calls and video conferencing.
           Asynchronous communications take place when the parties are not present at the same time. Examples
           are e-mail and blogs.
           Determine if a new technology can save time, reduce cost, or prevent mistakes and if the increased
           complexity can be handled by the team and support staff for an affordable cost in time and money.

[1] Business Dictionary, s.v. "Virtual Team,"https://edtechbooks.org/-CMsx (accessed January 27, 2010).

                           This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                           Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/6-1-types-of-communication.

                                                                                       143
144
6.2

Selecting Software

Complexity  Software

   Learning Objectives

        1. Identify the types of software that are appropriate for projects of low complexity.
        2. Identify the types of software that are appropriate for projects of medium complexity.
        3. Identify the types of software that are appropriate for projects of high complexity.
        4. Describe strategies for sharing documents that can be edited by a team.

Part of a communications plan is determining the type of computer software that will be used to create documents,
spreadsheets, diagrams, and reports. The choice of software is related to the complexity of the project.

                      Image by Eastern Arizona College

                                                                145
Simple Projects

Basic projects can be managed using some of the features available in general-purpose software that is available in
most offices.

Word Processing

Even the most basic project will generate numerous documents using word processing software. A communications
plan can specify standards for these documents that make it easier to create, edit, combine, store, and retrieve the
documents. Document standards include the following:

      Specifying the file format
      Using consistent styles
      Using templates for commonly used forms.

File Format

Word processing software programs display a document on a computer's screen and allow the user to enter and edit
text. When the file is saved to a storage device, the text and all the various formatting such as font and font size are
converted to a code for efficient storage. The code varies from one word processing program to another and even
between releases of the same program.

The most common word processing program, by a wide margin, is Microsoft Word (MS Word). Several releases of MS
Word run on the Windows operating system and on the Macintosh operating system. Versions of MS Word released
prior to 2007 save files in a proprietary format. The format is indicated by a period and a three-letter extension--.doc--
that is automatically attached to the file when it is saved. Beginning with MS Word 2007 for Windows and MS Word
2008 for Macintosh, files are saved using a different format that is indicated by a period and a four-letter extension
--.docx--that identify the newer format.

Styles

The combination of formatting, including font, font size, font color, shading, and other attributes used to display a
segment of text and to identify its level of importance, is called a style. A style can be given a name and applied
repeatedly to different portions of a document. Predefined styles are available in MS Word 2007 on the ribbon, on the
Home tab, in the Styles group, as shown in Figure 6.10, "Style Choices". Users can define their own styles and give them
names. Some organizations prefer that all of their documents have similar fonts and styles for headings, body text, and
figure captions.

Templates

If a particular type of document will be used repeatedly, it might be worth the time to create an example document--a
template--that is formatted using the appropriate styles with blanks or placeholder text where the user can insert the
information that describes a particular situation. A variety of templates are already available for download at no
additional cost. For example, when a new document is created in Microsoft Word 2007, there is an option to choose a
template such as the invoice template shown in Figure 6.2.

Figure 6.2

Standardized Document Used as a Template

                                                                                       146
The template may be customized and used repeatedly for all the documents of that type, or the organization can design
its own.

Spreadsheets

Spreadsheets are a display of data in row and column format--in which financial or numerical data can be manipulated.
The intersection of the rows and columns are cells into which numbers, text, dates, and formulas can be entered. The
formulas can utilize values found in other cells and display the results in the cell in place of the formula. If the value in a
cell to which the formula refers is changed, all the formulas that use that cell's value are immediately recalculated. This
feature makes it convenient to examine several options quickly. Spreadsheets are often used to manage data on simple
projects instead of a dedicated database or project management software.

The most common spreadsheet program, by a wide margin, is Microsoft Excel (MS Excel). There have been several
releases of MS Excel that run on the Windows operating system and on the Macintosh operating system. Versions of
MS Excel released prior to 2007 save files in a proprietary format. The format is indicated by a period and a three-letter
extension--.xls--that is automatically attached to the file when it is saved. Beginning with MS Excel 2007 for Windows
and MS Excel 2008 for Macintosh, files are saved using a different format that is indicated by a period and a four-letter
extension--.xlsx--that identifies the newer format.

If the data in the spreadsheet is arranged in simple rows of the same type of data, it can be manipulated to provide
reports for basic projects. If one or more of the columns in a table contain labels, identification numbers, or other
descriptions, those labels can be used to specify sorting and filtering options. For example, if the spreadsheet has a list
of expenses, the rows of data can be sorted in decreasing or increasing value by one of the data types such as the due
date or the amount of the expense. The display can be restricted--filtered--to display only those rows that meet criteria
specified by the user. For example, the table could be filtered to display the expenses for a particular department that
were incurred between two dates. This ability facilitates the preparation of monthly progress reports and budgets.

Graphics for Bar Charts and Milestones

Spreadsheets can be used for basic progress reports that show activities, dates, and horizontal bars that represent the
duration of an activity. A sequence of dates can be created as column labels by entering the first two dates in the
sequence, selecting both dates, and then dragging the fill handle--a small square in the lower right corner of the
selected cell.

                                                                                       147
The duration of each activity and the relationships between activities can be illustrated using the drawing shapes. A
long rectangle can represent a bar whose length represents the duration of the activity. Events or significant dates in the
project are identified with a diamond. The diamond can be created by using a small square shape and rotating it.
Arrows can be drawn between the shapes to indicate their relationships, as shown in Figure 6.3.
Figure 6.3
Diagram of Activities

This type of diagram is useful for projects with low complexity where a simple chart of a few activities will suffice.

Software for Moderately Complex Projects

More complex projects involve more people who are often separated geographically and who contribute to the same
documents. Complex projects have more tasks with more complex relationships. To manage those tasks and
relationships, using dedicated project management software and more sophisticated diagramming software is justified.

Sharing Team Documents

If more than one person on a team will be contributing to a document, the document must be accessible to them. To
manage documents that are created by a team, it is necessary to control the edits so that work is not lost or confused.

Version Control and File Storage

Previously, files such as word processing documents and spreadsheets may be stored on an individual's computer and
copies sent to participants who then make changes and return the revised version to the person who is responsible for
the final version of the document. Today, file sharing services like Dropbox are used to provide team members access to
the canonical copy of a document in a single location. A user can still lose a lot of work if a newer version of a
document is replaced with an older version. Fortunately, services like Dropbox provide access to every version of a file
ever saved as a contingency against overwriting, accidental deleting, etc.

Tracking Changes and Adding Comments

One of the features that is particularly useful for keeping track of the changes made to a document by several users is
called Track Changes. If a team member wishes to explain a change, it is very important that they do not insert their
explanation as text into the document. Such explanations might not be deleted and would end up in the final version of

                                                                                       148
the document with potentially damaging results. Instead, team members can use a form of electronic sticky note to
make comments. This feature is found in MS Word 2007 on the Review tab, in the Comments group. A change and a
comment are shown in Figure 6.4. The document owner must go through the document and accept or reject each
change and delete all the comments before the document is released as a finished product.
Figure 6.4
Tracking Changes and Adding Comments

Diagramming Software

The processes and relationships in medium- and high-complexity projects usually require more sophisticated software
tools for creating reporting diagrams and workflow charts. The market for diagramming software is more diverse than
for word processing and spreadsheets, and it is not as likely that most team members will have the same programs that
save files in the same formats. Microsoft Visio 2007 is available as a stand-alone program that sells for several hundred
dollars. For medium-complexity projects, a free alternative to Visio is Open Office Draw. Open Office is a free software
alternative that includes a word processing, spreadsheet, presentation, and drawing programs. The Open Office Draw
program, and others like it, can create diagrams such as the one shown in Figure 6.5.
Figure 6.5
Diagram Created Using Open Office Draw

                                                                                       149
The files created by the various drawing programs might not be compatible with each other, but all the programs can
create static image files that can be pasted into word processing documents.

Project Management Software

The relationships between project activities can become complicated in medium- and high-complexity projects.
Dedicated project management software can compute the sum of activity durations along several different paths
through complex relationships and recalculate them immediately if any of the durations or starting times are changed.
Similarly, charts and reports are updated automatically based on the new data. The most popular software for medium-
complexity projects is Microsoft Project. If a project manager begins work on the project in the belief that it can be
managed using a list of activities in a word processing program or in a spreadsheet, the list of activities and their
durations can be copied and pasted, or imported, into the project management software's table of activities, if the
original document or spreadsheet was designed with that possibility in mind, as shown in Figure 6.6.
Figure 6.6
List of Activities Transferred to a Project Management Program

                                                                                       150
Once the data are placed in the project management software, the relationships can be defined and reports created.
Organizations on a tight budget might consider using an open source program named OpenProject. Open source
software is usually available at no cost for individual users and with fewer restrictions than proprietary software like
Microsoft Project. OpenProject is similar to Microsoft Project, as shown in Figure 6.7, and could be used on low- and
medium-complexity projects that do not need the more advanced features available in Microsoft Project.
Figure 6.7
Open Source Project Management Software

Software for Complex Projects

Complex projects can involve thousands of individual activities and a company might have several projects going at the
same time. Large, complex projects are common in the construction industry. A software that is commonly used for
complex projects in construction is P6 from Primavera. It has the ability to produce sophisticated reports that help
project managers to anticipate problems and make projections.
Word processing documents often contain data that could be aggregated and analyzed. Beginning with Microsoft Word
2007 and the .docx file format, it is possible to insert characters called tags on either side of a particular section of a

                                                                                       151
form or document and assign a data label. For example, the name of the supplier on an invoice could be enclosed
between two tags: Thompson Hardware. These tags resemble those used in the hypertext markup language (HTML) to
identify how to display text on a Web page, but instead of telling a Web browser how to display the name of the supplier,
it identifies Thompson Hardware as the supplier. These tags are can be created by following a set of rules called the
extensible markup language (XML). Forms created using XML can be scanned for the content that is marked by tags.
The data can be imported into a spreadsheet or database for analysis. Creating documents that use XML to identify
data in the forms can be done using Microsoft InfoPath. An example that identifies key facts in a document that was
prepared using InfoPath is shown in Figure 6.8. Because it takes extra effort to learn to use InfoPath, or a similar XML
authoring program, and to create the forms, this approach is normally limited to complex and sophisticated
organizations that have the need to manage large amounts of data.
Figure 6.8
InfoPath Form with XML Tags

                                                                                       152
Key Takeaways

      Low-complexity projects might be managed using general purpose word processing and spreadsheet
      software by using the special features for outlining, managing data, and inserting graphic objects
      Medium-complexity projects need special purpose software for managing project activities, such as
      Microsoft Project, and graphic software such as Visio. Open source software such as OpenProject and
      Open Office Draw may suffice.
      High-complexity projects need more sophisticated project management software like P6 from Primavera.
      Forms can be created using XML tags that allow data to be extracted from the documents.
      Files can be stored at a location that is accessible by all the team members. They can be granted different
      levels of access, including view only, edit only, and ownership. Features like track changes and compare
      documents can help manage edits.

                      This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                      Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/6-2-selecting-software.

                                                                                 153
154
  7

Starting a Project

Overview

This chapter aligns with Chapters 3-5 of the PMBOK and 33% of the CAPM questions come from these chapters. The
content connects to the Initiating, Planning and Monitoring & Controlling category of the PMP questions.
This chapter provides an overview of the selection and initiation of a project. Prior to the initiation of a project, the
chartering organization--the organization that determines the need for the project--develops a justification for the
project. Often, several initiatives compete for the resources of the organization, and potential projects are evaluated to
see which ones are best aligned with the mission and goals of the organization. This evaluation process can be very
simple where the benefits to the organization are obvious and the economics of the project are very favorable. On larger,
more complex initiatives, the process of gathering and evaluating the data to justify the project can take a year or more.
The information gathered during this evaluation process provides the basis for the project charter, the initial scope of
work, and other information required to initiate the project.

                                                                                       155
Designers Share Their Experiences

   Dr. Andy Gibbons - Instructional Psychology and Technology - BYU

                                                                   Watch on YouTube
     The starting of a project is always an exciting time. There is so much happening and it has to happen so fast,
     you almost can't catch your breath. This project was on a technical subject matter, how to fly helicopters. I've
     never flown in a helicopter before, much less piloted one. Sensor operators operating sensitive electronic
     equipment. So one of the big challenges was getting up to speed on the technology. One of the things that they
     hadn't taught me in school that I wished they had taught me was about different types of content and how to do
     an analysis of the subject matter. Because there were different kinds of subject matter in this training. And we
     were getting up to speed as quickly as we could, but we were treating the subject matter as if it was procedures
     and rules and facts that had to be memorized. When in fact it was a very complex skill that had to be learned.
     And we didn't analyze it appropriately. So one of the challenges was how to learn the content fast. And how to
     see in the content structures that even the subject matter experts didn't see. There were other projects that I
     worked on where after I had learned to see into content the people had, it's a skill that you learn as a designer by
     the way, how to see the constructs that exist in their subject matter. There were times when I could actually
     anticipate and ask questions where the subject matter expert would say "Oh yeah that is a part of our, that is
     something that you have to learn in order to do this." As designers, one of a designer's biggest challenges at the
     beginning of a project is getting their minds around the subject matter and seeing invisible structures inside.
     When training is bad, and as a designer, you get called in to replace somebody else's bad job, or inadequate job.
     When training is bad very often it is because the subject matter was misconceived. So that was one big
     challenge. The other was just a matter of getting budgets completed, and getting staff organized, and getting
     them assigned to tasks, figuring out who is going to do what. Making sure that-one interesting process that
     we-that I had to undertake was a challenge. And that was, we created probably four or five hundred different
     pieces, instructional pieces, actually elements, media elements from videotapes down to individual handout
     lessons that had to be managed and configure managed-configuration managed. And we had to have a way as
     they were going through the development process. Each piece that was created had to go through seven or
     eight stages including, the reviews and the paste-up artists, and the Navy reviews, and the subject matter,

                                                                                       156
excuse me the designer reviews. Artwork had to be created, text had to be written. And so each piece had to go
through a chain of events. Managing one piece of instruction through that chain of events, and because there
were things that were this kind of event, there were this kind of workbook, or maybe there was this kind of a
slide sound presentation, or a videotape, or there were all kinds of different events going through this process.
We found that managing that was going to be a nightmare, and so one of things that really saved us on this
particular project was we devised a little system of, you normally had some kind of a check off that would go
around with each package of material at each stage of development. Well, we devised a little system where
each person, as it would get sent to the artist, and it says create the art for this segment. When they had
finished it they would check it off and they would put the date and the time and then they would clip that and put
it into a box. Each day at the end of work we were able to tell where every segment was because it was going to
be on somebody's desk. We were able to tell how much time they had worked on it and how fast things were
moving through this pipeline. And which artists had free time, which artists had surplus-who didn't have
surplus but were being overworked and were falling behind. It was a stroke of luck actually that we discovered
early on that we had to have this kind of a tracking system for all these little tiny pieces and parts that had to go
through this system. That was a really a stroke.

                                                                                 157
Heather Bryce - Independent Studies - BYU

                                                              Watch on YouTube
With Art 45, I think our greatest challenge was at the beginning there were so many ideas. Because we had so
many artists working on the project, people with art backgrounds. So I think that the challenge was trying to
figure out how do we best present this in a long distance atmosphere. Traditionally, with an art class, you're in
the classroom, the teacher is looking at what you're doing, you're seeing examples. And so as much as possible
we wanted to see how we could give that experience. So it was a combination of having everyone at the table
talking about, well this would be a good example of when video would be appropriate for the actual instructor to
draw or, you know, show what she is doing. We showed technology, you know, have them show the program and
a little video snippet and then some Flash activities where the student can have some kind of virtual experience.
So I think that was probably the beginning, the start-up. All these amazing ideas, how to bring them in together
and be concrete in deciding okay what is the best way to proceed?

                                                                                 158
Dr. Larry Seawright - Center for Teaching and Learning - BYU

                                                               Watch on YouTube
 Well, the project start-up for the BYU Learning Suite was a little bit kind of an interesting start-up. The way
 evolved is out of an existing product. We built something called the Syllabus Builder, which was an attempt to
 offer a systematic way for departments and faculty to build a uniform syllabus. We did a database at the
 backend of it at the request of a college who needed to output all of their syllabi for creditors. The University as
 they were going through and looking at the learning management system with the University currently
 purchases and renews on an annual basis. As they were looking at alternatives to that, one of the
 administrators took a look at the Syllabus Builder and said "Hey we could extend that and make it into a learning
 management system." And so the start-up of the project really came from the University down to us. And they
 gave us a huge list of requirements. So the start-up was really difficult because we had to pair through all of
 those requirements and match those against our limited capabilities and see, you know, what could we do in
 the, with the resources that we had. The people, the money, which is essentially how much can we pay for
 students. And the time that we have to make all of this stuff. And so, you know, start-up was interesting. And
 then of course, because of who we are, we have lots of instructional designers, we have consultants who have
 Ph.D.'s in Instructional Design. So they went out and started talking to faculty and students, so our list of
 requirements, it got to be really big. And we had, you know, our biggest challenge at start-up was to figure out
 what we could do in the time frame that the University was going to give us.

Project Selection
Project Scope
Project Start-Up

                                                                                  159
Alignment Process
Communications Planning

                       This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                       Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/7-starting-a-project.

                                                                                  160
  7.1

Project Selection

Learning   Project Selection  Missions  BYU IPT             Organization  Goals  Objectives  Cash Flow
Interest  Simple Payback
                              IRR  Internal Rate of Return

   LEARNING OBJECTIVES

        1. Describe the difference between an organization's mission, goals, and objectives.
        2. Describe how the missions are different depending on the type of organization.
        3. Define economic terms used for choosing projects.
        4. Describe the influences of funding, timing, and unofficial considerations on project selection.
        5. Define a project champion and his or her role.

Projects are chosen for a variety of reasons and not all of them are apparent. The project manager must understand
why a project was selected over other choices so that he or she can align the team toward justifying the choice that has
been made by senior management.

          Image by UK Department for Business, Innovation and Skills

                                                               161
Mission of the Organization

The mission of an organization is a statement of why it exists. For example, a police department might have its mission
stated on the door of each patrol car--to protect and serve. A well-written mission statement is short and has the
following sections:

      Purpose of the organization
      Primary stakeholders
      Responsibility of the organization toward the stakeholders
      Products or services offered

BYU IP&T Department Mission Statement

The objective of the Department of Instructional Psychology and Technology is to enhance learning by improving
instruction and teaching. In partnership with others, the department will (1) search for knowledge that improves
instruction, (2) apply knowledge and technology to solve instructional problems, and (3) empower students with
knowledge and skills in instructional development, research, evaluation, and measurement.1

Organizations can be categorized as profit, not for profit, and government. A business that is created to make a profit
for its owners and stock holders must consider the cost of each project and how much profit it is likely to generate. The
mission statement of a not-for-profit organization, like a charity, would emphasize the service it provides. A not-for-profit
organization must control its costs so that it does not exceed its funding, and it is always seeking funding and is in
competition with other not-for-profit organizations for funding from the same sources. A government agency, like a
police department, is similar to a not-for-profit organization but its sources of funding are usually taxes and fees. Its
mission would include its responsibilities to the citizens it represents. Government organizations compete for funding
from higher levels of government. Projects are more likely to be funded if the proposal for the project is closely aligned
with the mission of the organization. The project manager must be aware of that mission while building a team and
aligning it behind the purpose of the project.

Goals and Objectives

Senior administrators of the organization decide on how to achieve the mission of the organization by choosing goals.
For example, the director of a not-for-profit preschool that provides low-cost education for children of poor, single
parents might set a goal of improving its reputation for quality. A goal is an end toward which effort is directed. The
director meets with her staff and they consider several ways of achieving that goal. They decide to seek certification by
a nationally known group that evaluates the quality of preschool programs. Obtaining this certification is an objective.

In this text, we distinguish between the terms goals and objectives. An objective must have a measurable outcome. In
this example, it is easy to measure whether or not the organization receives the certification, which is the distinguishing
characteristic of an objective. The use of these terms is not standardized across the industry or in business, but we will
be consistent within this text. To determine whether a statement is a goal or an objective, simply ask if there is a
measurable outcome. Seeking the certification is an objective that can be met by treating it as a project that has a
measurable outcome and a limited time frame.

                                                                                       162
Figure 7.1 Relationships between Mission, Goals, and Objectives

Economic Selection Criteria

If an organization's mission is to make money, it will try to maximize the profits of the company by increasing the money
coming in or decreasing the money going out. The movement of the project's money is called cash flow. Money coming
in is positive cash flow, and money going out is negative. The company can maximize profits by improving its
operational efficiency or by executing projects. The company must raise money to fund projects. Companies can raise
money in three ways:

  1. Borrow it (government organizations, such as cities and schools, can sell bonds, which is a form of borrowing).
  2. Fund the project from existing earnings.
  3. Sell additional stock or ownership shares in the company.
If a company borrows money, it must pay back the amount it borrowed plus additional interest. The interest is a
percentage of the amount of the loan that has not been repaid. The repayment of the loan and interest is usually paid
quarterly or annually. To qualify for selection, a project that is intended to make or save money must be able to do the
following:

      Repay loans if money must be borrowed to fund the project
      Increase future earnings for shareholders
      Make the company stock more valuable
When senior managers at a for-profit company decide which projects to fund, they must consider these economic
issues.

                                                                                       163
Simple Payback

To help managers choose between projects, they can use an unsophisticated measurement called simple payback. If
the purpose of the project is to improve cash flow--make it more positive or less negative--the improved positive cash
flow each year is applied to the original cost (negative cash flow) of the project to determine how many years it would
take to pay back the original cost. It is assumed that after that date, the improved cash flow could be used for other
purposes or paid out to owners. For example, if the company borrows $100,000 to fund the project and the project
increases cash flow by $20,000 a year, the simple payback would be five years, as shown in Figure 7.2.

Figure 7.2 Simple Payback

The cash flow from each year is summed up in the cumulative cash flow row. When the
cumulative cash flow becomes zero or positive, it means that the original cost has been paid
back by the increased income or savings created by the investment.

Companies can use simple payback to establish a cutoff for project consideration. For example, management could
declare that no projects will be considered that have a payback of more than three years. For projects that meet this
criterion, projects with shorter simple payback periods would have an advantage in the selection process. Not-for-profit
or government organizations are likely to approve projects with longer simple payback periods because they are not
compared to other not-for-profit or government agencies based on their profitability.

Internal Rate of Return

Companies whose mission is to make a profit are usually trying to make more profit than their competitors. Simply
paying back the loan is not sufficient. If the project involves buying and installing equipment to make a profit, executives
can use another method called internal rate of return (IRR). The IRR is like an internal interest rate that can be used to
compare the profitability of competing projects. To calculate an IRR, the company considers the cash flow each year for
the expected life of the product of the project. It assumes that some of the annual cash flows will be negative and that
they can vary from year to year due to other factors, such as lost production during changeover, periodic maintenance,
and sale of used equipment. For example, a company decides to upgrade a manufacturing line with new equipment
based on new technology. They know that the initial cash flow--shown in year zero--will be negative due to the expense
of the conversion. They know that the new equipment has an expected life of six years before newer technologies make
it out of date, at which time they can sell it for a certain salvage value. The inputs to the IRR calculation are the net cash
flow for each year where at least one of them is negative and at least one of them is positive. The result is a percentage
that indicates how well this project performs as an investment. (See Figure 7.3.)

                                                                                       164
Figure 7.3 The internal rate of return measures the profitability of an investment.

The life of the equipment is part of the IRR calculation. If a project manager knows that senior management intends to
sell the equipment in six years, team members can be made aware of that decision if it affects their choices.

Other Selection Criteria

Besides making money, there are many other reasons for a project to be selected, including the following:
      Keeping up with competitors
      Meeting legal requirements, such as safety or environmental protection
      Improving the organization's public image

The timing of the project can be very important. A project might be selected at a particular time of year for some of the
following reasons:

      Accumulating a year-end budget surplus
      Increasing executive bonus for the year or quarter
      Funding or certification review deadline
If the project manager must make changes to the schedule at some point in the project that could affect its completion
date, it is valuable to know if the project was selected because of timing.

Project Champions and Opponents

In addition to knowing why a project was selected, it is valuable to know which senior executives supported or opposed
the selection of the project and if the project manager's supervisor was in favor of it or not. Because most project
teams consist of people who do not report to the project manager but who report to other unit managers, they might
not be available when you need them if their boss thinks other projects are more important. If a particular executive
proposed the project and actively advocated for its approval, that person could be a source of support if the project runs
into trouble and needs additional resources. A project champion, sometimes called an executive sponsor, is an
influential person who is willing to use his or her influence to help the project succeed.
To identify the advocates and opponents of the project, you can read public documents (if available), such as the
minutes of the meeting at which the project was approved. Next, the project manager can use his or her unofficial
network of trusted colleagues to get their opinions. Those discussions should be informal and off the record. Those
opinions might be inaccurate, but it is valuable to know what misunderstandings exist about a project. If executives in
an organization are assigned as project sponsors, the project champion might be a different person.

Project Champions Support Employee Performance Training

A large organization hired an instructional design team to improve employee performance. The project took over a year
to complete and faced some setbacks due to resistance from middle management. During the course of the project,
some department managers were frustrated with the time needed for the project team's assessments, interviews, and

                                                                                       165
test implementations, which interrupted the normal course of business. Some of the project team's findings also
indicated a need for specialized training, which put a greater burden on individual departments and the department
managers balked at taking on this additional workload.
However, due to the organization director's priority of performance improvement, the project team had the support and
authority to continue. If upper management did not reinforce the efforts of the project team, the department managers
would have greatly inhibited the progress of the project. Ultimately, the project was a success and the department
managers realized that the temporary upset to the status quo yielded exponential benefits to the organization as a
whole.

   KEY TAKEAWAYS

           A mission statement declares the purpose of the organization and identifies the primary stakeholders, the
           products or services offered, and the responsibility toward the stakeholders. Goals are statements of
           direction for the organization, and objectives are activities that achieve those goals with measurable
           outcomes.
           Profit-making organizations exist to make profits for their owners while in competition with other
           companies. Not-for-profit organizations are directed at providing a service to a particular group. A
           government agency is similar to a not-for-profit organization, but its sources of funding are usually taxes,
           fees, and funding from a higher level of government, and it has a responsibility to the citizens it represents.
           Two economic tools for evaluating and comparing projects are simple payback and internal rate of return.
           Simple payback is a calculation of the year when the cumulative income or savings due to spending money
           on a project will meet or exceed the original cost of the project. Internal rate of return is a calculation of the
           average percentage of increased cash flow over the life of the project's product.
           Project selection depends on the availability of funds, which depends on the way each type of organization
           receives money for projects. Funds might be available at certain times and projects are selected that can
           take advantage of that opportunity. Projects might be initiated for reasons that are not stated, and
           investigating the source of funding and likely motivation of project champions can provide better
           understanding of the project's chances for success.
           A project champion is an influential person who is willing to use his or her influence to help the project
           succeed. It is useful to know why the project champion wants the project to succeed and to be sure to
           accomplish that goal even if it is not stated.

[1] https://edtechbooks.org/-VEhH

                                                                                       166
This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/7-1-project-selection.

                                                        167
168
  7.2

Project Scope

Objectives  Project Scope  Project Complexity

   LEARNING OBJECTIVES

        1. Describe how the project scope is affected by project complexity.
        2. Identify the uses of a scope document.
        3. Describe how a scope document is developed and changed.

Definition of Scope and the Effects of Complexity

Recall from Chapter 1 that the scope document (also called the scope of work document) defines the project scope--
what tasks the project team is expected to accomplish and, just as importantly, what is not part of the project.
Depending on the complexity level of the project, the scope document can be as short as one page or as long as several
hundred pages. On more technical projects (like the submarine project described in Dr. Gibbons' video), the scope
would include a significant amount of technical specifications (such as focusing on the equipment used to find the
submarines). The size and character of the project scope document is related to the project complexity. Higher scores
on the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index indicate the need for more detailed scope documents.

                                               169
                                    Image by World Economic Forum

Uses of a Scope Document

A well-developed project scope statement provides the project team with information the team needs to design and
implement the project execution plan. The well-developed project scope also provides the team with an understanding
of the purpose of the project and the basis for defining project success.

Scope Document for Training Auto Workers

An automotive company is building a new plant to produce electric passenger cars in the southeast United States. As
the plant nears completion, the plant's manager issues a contract to an instructional design firm to train the new plant
workers. The training of workers who will be maintaining the production equipment will be done by the equipment
suppliers and will not be in the scope of the training contract.

The scope of work for the training project will include the identification of the knowledge, skills, and abilities needed by
each classification of worker and the development of the delivery methods (online, classroom, hands-on) that will
effectively and efficiently teach the identified knowledge, skills, and abilities. The scope will also include delivery of the
training, evaluation of the workers after training, and the development of training records. Items not included in the
project scope are items that will be the responsibility of the automotive company, such as the selection and hiring of the
workers and the provision of the automotive tools and equipment needed for training. These exclusions are specifically
stated in the scope document.

During the design of the plant, the Human Resources Division of the company explored different workforce models.
Experience in other plants indicated that a team-based approach combined with a lean manufacturing philosophy
produced the highest productivity. This information was included in the documents provided to the team developing the
training project's scope. The plant manager, the human resources manager, and the plant engineer reviewed and
occasionally made changes to the draft training scope.

The scope of work for the training project was developed from a combination of information from experts with previous
experience, documents that reflected the plant operation philosophy, and selected managers from operations and
human resources. All the knowledge needed to develop the scope was within the automotive project team. Sometimes
outside consultants are needed to develop a complete project scope. For example, if the team in our automotive
training example did not have experience in the start-up of another automotive plant, then the hiring of a consultant with

                                                                                       170
that experience might have been required to understand the entire scope of activities needed for training the automotive
workforce.
The automotive project described above is a typical example of the types of information and the people involved in
developing a project scope. From the information in the project description, the project team could develop a project
scope document.

Development and Management of a Scope Document

The project manager will often develop the first draft of the project scope and then solicit feedback and suggestions
from the project team, client, and sometimes key vendors. The project manager will attempt to develop consensus
around the project scope, but the final approval belongs to the project client or sponsor. Depending on the complexity
profile of the project, the development of the project scope document can be a short discussion between the project
manager and the client, or on a large, complex project, the process can take weeks.
The project scope is not a stagnant document, and changes are to be expected. Changes to the project scope are
necessary to reflect new information. Changes to the project scope also create the opportunity for new purposes to
emerge that will change the end results of the project. In some cases, these new results represent a positive outcome
for the chartering organization.

Deviation versus Change

If a minor change is made to the schedule that does not affect the completion date of the project, it is a deviation from
the schedule. As long as the end date of the project or major objectives are not delayed, a formal change request to the
client is not needed. Recording and communicating these schedule deviations is still important for coordinating
resources and maintaining the client's awareness of the project's progress.

Deviation of Educational Materials Cost

In our example above, the cost of educational materials for employee training was estimated at fifteen dollars per
training packet. The winning bid for the printing contract actually quoted a cost of sixteen dollars per packet. The cost
deviated from the estimate and a change was made to the budget. This was a cost deviation, not a change in scope.
The additional cost for the materials was covered from the project contingency reserves, and the budget was revised to
reflect the changes.

New Boss Causes a Change to the Schedule

The client hired a new boss who wants something completely different from what was decided upon under the old
management. This is an actual change of scope that requires a change request because it changes the budget, the
timeline, and the materials needed.

Documenting Changes

It is important to have a written record of changes to the scope of a project. On the least complex projects, an e-mail
message can be sufficient, but on larger projects a standard form is normally used. The following steps are
paraphrased from Tom Mochal,1 and they have the necessary components of a change documentation process:

                                                                                       171
      Inform project stakeholders of the change request process.
      Require that the change request is made in writing, including the business value of the change to the project.
     Enter the request into a scope change log, a record that should be kept to track changes (remember - "Document,
      document, document!").
      Estimate the time needed to evaluate the change. If the evaluation process is time consuming and would affect
      activity completion dates by diverting management resources, get approval from the project sponsor to evaluate
      the change request. If the evaluation is not approved, record the decision in the scope change log.
      Evaluate the change and its impact on the schedule and budget if the evaluation is approved.
      Present the change request to the project sponsor for approval. Record the decision in the scope change log with
      the recommended course of action.
      Distribute the scope change log periodically to team members so they know what changes are being considered
      and what happened to those that were not approved or evaluated.
      If the change is approved, update the project charter or other initiation documents.
      Update the work plan.
      Distribute the revised work plan to stakeholders and team members.

   KEY TAKEAWAYS

           Scope is a description of the major tasks that are included in the project and some of the tasks that are
           specifically not included. More complex projects require more detailed and specific scope documents.
           A scope document is used to provide the project team with the information it needs to design and
           implement the project plan. It provides understanding of the purpose of the project and what project
           success would be.
           The scope document begins as a draft that is circulated for comments by the team, client, and in some
           cases, key vendors. The final draft is approved by the client or sponsor. Changes to the scope must be
           approved by the project sponsor or client and are documented carefully using standard forms and
           processes.

[1] Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal, Lessons in Project Management (Berkeley, CA: Apress, 2003).

                           This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                           Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/7-2-project-scope.

                                                                                       172
  7.3

Project Start-Up

Project  Project Manager  Project Infrastructure

   LEARNING OBJECTIVES

        1. Identify the major activities included in project start-up.
        2. Explain how the project start-up activities may differ on a highly complex project.

The parent organization's decision-making process influences when start-up activities of the project will take place. The
transition from planning to project initiation is typically marked by the decision to fund the project and the selection of
the project manager. However, be aware that the selection of the project manager is not always the defining event.
Some organizations will have the project manager involved in project evaluation activities, and some select the project
manager after the decision to fund the project has been made. Including the project manager in the evaluation process
enables the project manager to have an understanding of the selection criteria that he or she can use when making
decisions about the project during later phases. Selecting the project manager prior to a complete evaluation also
includes some risks. The evaluation of the project may indicate a need for project manager skills and experiences that
are different from the project manager who is involved in the evaluation.

Selecting the best project manager depends on how that person's abilities match those needed on the project. Those
skills can be determined using the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index (DPCI). If the project profile indicates a high
complexity for external factors and a medium complexity for the project's technology, the profile would indicate the
preference for a project manager with good negotiation skills and an understanding of external factors that affect the
project. Because of the technological rating, the project manager should also be comfortable in working with the
technical people assigned to the project. The project manager involved in the project selection process may not be the
best match for the project execution.

During the start-up of a project, the project manager focuses on developing the project infrastructure needed to execute
the project and developing clarity around the project charter and scope. Developing the project infrastructure can be a
simple task on a project with a low complexity level. For example, the project manager of a worker training project in
South Carolina who works for a training college has existing accounting, procurement, and information technology (IT)
systems in the college that he or she can use. On large complex projects, a dedicated project office, IT system, and
support staff might be needed that would be more challenging to set up. For example, on a large project in South
America, the design and operations offices were set up in Canada, Chile, and Argentina. Developing compatible IT,
accounting, and procurement systems involved a high degree of coordination. Acquiring office space, hiring

                                                                                       173
administrative support, and even acquiring telephone service for the offices in Argentina required project management
attention in the early phases of the project.

                                                Image by Novartis AG
The project manager will conduct one or more kickoff meetings to develop plans for the following activities:

      Establish the project office
      Develop project policies and procedures
      Begin refining the scope of work, the schedule, the budget, and the project execution plan
Depending on the complexity level of the project, these meetings can be lengthy and intense. Tools such as work flow
diagrams and responsibility matrices, as defined in Chapter 8, can be helpful in defining the activities and adding clarity
to project infrastructure during the project start-up.
Typically, the project start-up involves working lots of hours developing the initial plan, staffing the project, and building
both internal and external relationships. The project start-up is the first opportunity for the project manager to set the
tone of the project and set expectations for each of the project team members. The project start-up phase on complex
projects can be chaotic, and the project manager must be both comfortable in this environment and able to create
comfort with the client and team members. To achieve this level of personal comfort, the project manager needs
appropriate tools, one of which is an effective alignment process. This is one of the reasons there are a large number of
meetings during the start-up of projects with a high-complexity profile.

                                                                                       174
KEY TAKEAWAYS

      The major activities included in project start-up are selecting the project manager; establishing funding;
      developing project infrastructure such as accounting, procurement, and IT; holding a kickoff meeting,
      determining staffing; and building relationships.
      The start-up activities for small projects can utilize existing infrastructure for support functions and can
      have a single start-up meeting, while larger projects require more dedicated infrastructure and full-time
      staff, and the start-up meetings can take longer and involve more people.

                      This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                      Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/7-3-project-start-up.

                                                                                 175
176
  7.4

Alignment Process

Goals  Trust  Alignment  Purpose

   LEARNING OBJECTIVES

        1. Identify the purpose of the alignment process.
        2. Identify the components of the alignment process.
        3. Identify the effects of a lack of trust on a project.

Developing a common understanding among the key stakeholders of the purpose and goals of the project and the
means and methods of accomplishing those goals is called the alignment process. It is important to accomplish this
alignment during the initiation phase. Project managers usually conduct a start-up meeting that is sometimes called a
kickoff meeting. The agenda and duration of the start-up meeting depends on the complexity level of the project.
Projects with a limited scope and short duration may engage in a session start-up meeting over lunch. A medium-
complexity project will require a four-hour meeting or more while a high-complexity project cannot achieve alignment in
a single meeting. Alignment can require several days of activities.

Enhance Alignment Meetings

On one large, complex project, the project alignment required a five-day process. Over twenty members of the project
team and client participated in this alignment. To create a relaxed atmosphere and facilitate an open discussion, the
alignment meetings and activities were held on a horse ranch in Montana.
A number of companies specialize in designing and facilitating alignment sessions for large, complex projects.
Although designed to meet the needs of each project, alignment sessions have some common agenda items:

      Developing a common understanding of the project purpose
      Agreeing on the means and methods for accomplishing the purpose
      Establishing trust among team members

Common Understanding

A common understanding does not mean building a consensus. People may disagree with the direction being
developed, but they have the same basic understanding as to the purpose of the project. For a project plan to be
effective, there must be a critical mass or sufficient commitment among the critical stakeholders. Therefore,
disagreement is not fatal to the project execution, but a unified team with a common understanding is much more

                                                                                       177
powerful and increases the likelihood of success. If disagreement does exist, an open and forthright discussion will
enable the project leadership to address the disagreement in developing the project plan. If the disagreement stays
hidden and is not openly discussed, problems will emerge later in the project.
Developing a common understanding can be as easy as an informal discussion that lasts a few hours, or it can be a
lengthy, complex process. The methods and processes employed to develop a common understanding are directly
related to the complexity of the project. The more complex projects will require more intense discussions around those
issues that score high on the complexity profile.
Developing a common understanding among the key project stakeholders requires the following:

      Defining project success
      Determining potential barriers to success
      Establishing key milestones
      Identifying decision makers and the decision-making process
It is difficult to execute a successful project without first defining what makes a successful project. The first part of this
discussion is easy: the project must be completed on time, within budget, and to all specifications. The next level of the
discussion requires more reflection. During this discussion, reflection on the organization's mission, goals, and related
issues such as safety and public perception of the project emerge.
After the team develops a common understanding of project success, a discussion of barriers to achieving that
success enables team members to express skepticism. On more complex projects, the goals of a project often seem
difficult to achieve. A discussion by the team of the potential barriers to project success places these concerns out in
the open where team members can discuss and develop plans to address the barriers. Without this discussion, the
perception of these barriers becomes powerful and can have an effect on project performance.

Project Purpose

The project purpose is sometimes reflected in a written charter, vision, or mission statement. These statements are
developed as part of the team development process that occurs during the project initiation phase and results in a
common understanding of the purpose of the project. A purpose statement derived from a common understanding
among key stakeholders can be highly motivating and connects people's personal investment to a project purpose that
has value.
A purpose statement--also called a charter, vision, or mission--provides a project with an anchor or organizational
focus. Sometimes called an anchoring statement, these statements can become a basis for testing key decisions. A
purpose statement can be a powerful tool for focusing the project on actions and decisions that can have a positive
impact on project success. For example, a purpose statement that says that the project will design and build a free
educational website for high-school students will influence meeting educational goals, designs appropriate for cognitive
development levels, the cost, etc. When designers are deciding between different types of materials or instructional
methods, the purpose statement provides the criteria for making these decisions.

                                                                                       178
                          Image by thekenyeung

Developing a common understanding of the project's purpose involves engaging stakeholders in dialogue that can be
complex and in-depth. Mission and vision statements reflect some core values of people and their organization. These
types of conversations can be very difficult and will need an environment where people feel safe to express their views
without fear of recrimination.

Goals

Goals add clarity to the anchor statement. Goals break down the emotional concepts needed in the development of a
purpose statement and translate them into actions or behaviors, something we can measure. Where purpose
statements reflect who we are, goals focus on what we can do. Goals bring focus to conversations and begin
prioritizing resources. Goals are developed to achieve the project purpose.

Developing goals means making choices. Project goals established during the alignment process are broad in nature
and cross the entire project. Ideally, everyone on the project should be able to contribute to the achievement of each
goal.

Goals can have significantly different characteristics. The types of goals and the processes used to develop the project
goals will vary depending on the complexity level of the project, the knowledge and skills of the project leadership team,
and the boldness of the project plan. Boldness is the degree of stretch for the team. The greater the degree of challenge
and the greater the distance from where you are to where you want to be, the bolder the plan and the higher the internal
complexity score.

Clarity of Objectives Saves Money

A critical online instructional resource was being developed for a project in Michigan. Designers determined that a
software upgrade would enable the resource to be developed one month earlier, but at a cost higher than was allocated
in the budget. Earlier in the project it was determined that any delays would cost the project over $100,000 per month.

                                                                                       179
Because the objectives of the project were well understood, the decision to obtain the more expensive software was
made quickly and easily.

Roles

Role clarity is critical to the planning and execution of the project. Because projects by definition are unique, the roles of
each of the key stakeholders and project leaders are defined at the beginning of the project. Sometimes the roles are
delineated in contracts or other documents. Yet even with written explanations of the roles defined in documents, how
these translate into the decision-making processes of the project is often open to interpretation.

A discussion of the roles of each entity and each project leader can be as simple as each person describing their role
and others on the project team asking questions for clarification and resolving differences in understanding. On less
complex projects, this is typically a short process with very little conflict in understanding and easy resolution. On more
complex projects, this process is more difficult with more opportunities for conflict in understanding.

One process for developing role clarification on projects with a more complex profile requires project team members,
client representatives, and the project's leadership to use a flip chart to record the project roles. Each team divides the
flip chart in two parts and writes the major roles of the client on one half and the roles of the leadership team on the
other half. Each team also prioritizes each role and the two flips charts are compared.

This and similar role clarification processes help each project team member develop a more complete understanding of
how the project will function, how each team member understands their role, and what aspects of the role are most
important. This understanding aids in the development or refinement of work processes and approval processes. The
role clarification process also enables the team to develop role boundary spanning processes. This is where two or
more members share similar roles or responsibilities. Role clarification facilitates the development of the following:

      Communication planning
      Work flow organization
      Approval processes
      Role boundary spanning processes

Means and Methods

Defining how the work of the project will be accomplished is another area of common understanding that is developed
during the alignment session. An understanding of the project management methods that will be used on the project
and the output that stakeholders can expect is developed. On smaller and less complex projects, the understanding is
developed through a review of the tools and work processes associated with the following:

      Tracking progress
      Tracking costs
      Managing change

On more complex projects, the team may discuss the use of project management software tools, such as Microsoft
Project, to develop a common understanding of how these tools will be used. The team discusses key work processes,
often using flowcharts, to diagram the work process as a team. Another topic of discussion is the determination of
what policies are needed for smooth execution of the project. Often one of the companies associated with the project
will have policies that can be used on the project. Travel policies, human resources policies, and authorization
procedures for spending money are examples of policies that provide continuity for the project.

Trust

Trust on a project has a very specific meaning. Trust is the filter that project team members use for evaluating
information. The trust level determines the amount of information that is shared and the quality of that information.
When a person's trust in another person on the project is low, he or she will doubt information received from that person

                                                                                       180
and might not act on it without checking it with another source, thereby delaying the action. Similarly, a team member
might not share information that is necessary to the other person's function if they do not trust the person to use it
appropriately and respect the sensitivity of that information. The level of communication on a project is directly related
to the level of trust.
Trust is also an important ingredient of commitment. Team member's trust in the project leadership and the creation of
a positive project environment fosters commitment to the goals of the project and increases team performance. When
trust is not present, time and energy is invested in checking information or finding information. This energy could be
better focused on goals with a higher level of trust.1
Establishing trust starts during the initiation phase of the project. The kickoff meeting is one opportunity to begin
establishing trust among the project team members. Many projects have team-building exercises during the kickoff
meeting. The project team on some complex projects will go on a team-building outing. One project that built a new
pharmaceutical plant in Puerto Rico invited team members to spend the weekend spelunking in the lime caves of
Puerto Rico. Another project chartered a boat for an evening cruise off the coast of Charleston, South Carolina. These
informal social events allow team members to build a relationship that will carry over to the project work.

   KEY TAKEAWAYS

           The purpose of the alignment process is to develop a common understanding of the purpose, agree on the
           means and methods, and establish trust.
           The components of the alignment process are discussions of the purpose, goals, participant roles,
           methods of tracking progress and costs, methods of managing change, and building trust.
           The effects of a lack of trust are delays caused by fact checking or missing information that was not
           shared because the person's discretion was not trusted to handle sensitive information.

[1] Marsha Willard, "Building Trust: The Relationship Between Trust and High Performance," Axis Advisory 1999, http://www.paclink.com/~axis/M7trust.html.

                           This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                           Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/7-4-alignment-process.

                                                                                       181
182
  7.5

Communications Planning

Communication  Organization  Information Flow  Communication Matrix

   LEARNING OBJECTIVES

        1. Describe the differences between communications in an existing organization compared with a new
           project.

        2. Describe how the detail of the communications plan is related to the complexity of the project.
        3. Describe a communication matrix and its function.
        4. Describe conventions for naming files to indicate their content and the version.

When a person joins an existing organization, one of the early tasks is to learn the work processes of the organization,
including where to find information, the meeting schedule, and what reports are required. In existing organizations, new
members discover the gatekeepers of information: those persons in the organization who know how to generate or find
information. Typically, the generation, flow, and storage of information reflects the organizational culture, and to
effectively communicate in an organization, a person must be able to develop communication styles and processes
consistent with that organization.

                                               183
                                             Image by Anthony Albright

Projects do not have the advantage--or sometimes the disadvantage--of an existing organizational culture or
communication structure. The project leadership team develops an understanding of the information needs of the
various members and stakeholders of the projects and develops a communications plan that provides the right
information, at the right time, to the right people.

The detail of the communications plan is related to the complexity level of the project. Highly complex projects require a
detailed communications plan to assure that the information needed by the project team and stakeholders is both
generated and distributed to support the project schedule and project decisions. Crucial information can be lost or
delayed in a complex project if the communications plan is not functioning properly.

Communicating Priorities

During a project in Tennessee, the project management team was exploring ways to complete the project earlier to
meet the changing requirements of the client. The team identified a number of actions that could create an earlier
completion date. The plan required an early delivery of testing materials by, and the team visited the supplier's senior
management and agreed to pay a bonus for early delivery of the equipment.

Two weeks later, during a review of the project procurement team progress, the project manager discovered that the
organization's procurement department had delayed approvals needed by the supplier because the engineering design
was not submitted in the required format. This action effectively delayed the project two weeks and reduced the
possibility of the project team meeting milestone requirements for earning a bonus.

The organization's procurement team did not understand the critical nature of this supplier's contribution to an early
completion of the project. All the information needed by the organization's procurement team was in the meeting
minutes distributed to the entire team. The procurement team did not understand the implications of their work
processes, and the result was a delay to the project schedule and a reduction in client satisfaction and project
profitability.

Effective communication on a project is critical to project success. The Tennessee project is a typical example of errors
that can be created by the breakdown in communication flow. Highly complex projects require the communication of
large amounts of data and technical information that often changes on a frequent basis. Even when the information is

                                                                                       184
at the right place and at the right time, the project procurement leader must assist the procurement team in
understanding the priorities of the project. On large, complex projects, that procurement lead would not be in the daily
communication to subcontractors or vendors. In the Tennessee project example, the procurement leader's unique
understanding that came from participation in the project leadership meeting required a more direct involvement with
those subcontractors and vendors that impacted the project goals.
An effective project communications plan also does not overload team members and project systems with information
that is not useful. Some project managers will attempt to communicate everything to the entire project team. Although
this assures that each team member will receive critical information, the large influx of information can make the
distillation of the information to the critical and relevant people more difficult for each team member.

Communication Matrix

A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK) describes tools and techniques for identifying project
stakeholders, defining their information requirements, and determining the appropriate communication technology. The
project includes developing a list of all the people impacted by the outcome of the project and people who can influence
the execution of the project, including project team members. The project leadership then generates a list of
information needed or requested by each stakeholder.
The project leadership team develops a list of communication methods for gathering and communicating project
information. These include a list of reports, meetings, and document flowcharts. The leadership team then typically
develops a communication matrix that details who is included in each project meeting and the distribution of major
documents in a table format.

Figure 7.4 Simple Communication Matrix

Document Control

On large, complex projects, organizing the creation, distribution, and storage of documents is a major and important
activity. Organizations that execute a large number of complex projects will often have project document control
systems that the project leadership team will adapt for their project. Document control systems distribute, store, and
retrieve information that is needed by the project team. Documents originate from the various team members during the
planning and execution of the work and then are transmitted to the document team for cataloging, distributing, and
storing.

                                                                                       185
Document control systems have a systematic numbering system that allows a team member to derive information
about the document through the document number.

Document Naming Provides Information about the Content

It is useful to have a unified system for naming documents which immediately provides content identification. For
example, document names might indicate the category, purpose, author, and date via standardized codes that the
project team adheres to. For example, a file named RFQ3.Monitors-Darnall-10.08.2012,rev3 lets team members instantly
know this is a procurement document, which item was procured, who it was prepared by, when it was prepared, and
what revision number it is.
When a document is expected to be revised over the course of the project, version control becomes important. Version
control means labeling each revision which enables the team to understand the latest activity and status of the
document (or the activity behind the document). For example, each drawing might be given a unique identification that
reflects the type of drawing, the artist, and the version number. Because the design process includes several iterations
of the drawings as more information is developed, document control uses an identification that indicates the version of
the document. One procedure might be to use letters to indicate the version of the document until the document is
approved and then use a number after approval. Therefore, a document with revision D will be the fourth version of the
document. The same document with revision 3 means that this is third revision after the project was approved for
construction.
To assure that everyone who should either review or approve the document received a copy, document control develops
a distribution list for each type of document. Each person reviews and signs the distribution list and then sends the
document to the next person on the list. The design documents, distribution lists, and other project documents are
archived by document control for future reference. In the example above, the document was the third revision after the
design was approved.
Naming conventions for files and the versions of files should be consistent with the practices of the parent organization
or with the client organization so that the files may be archived with files from other projects.

   KEY TAKEAWAYS

           In an existing organization, there are gatekeepers who know how to find information, when it is needed, and
           what reports are required. In a new project, the project manager can create a new flow of information and
           reporting requirements.
           More complex projects require more sophisticated communications plans.
           A communication matrix is a table that shows the names of people as column or row headings and the
           types of documents as row or column headings. In the cells where the name and document type intersect,
           a symbol indicates the person's responsibility or access with regard to that type of document.
           File names can be used as codes to describe the contents of the file. Parts of the name can be used to
           identify the category, location, subject, author, and date. File name conventions should be used that match
           those used by the parent organization or by the client.

                                                                                       186
This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/7-5-communications-planning.

                                                        187
188
  8

Project Time Management

Overview

This chapter aligns with Chapter 6 of the PMBOK and 11% of the CAPM questions come from this knowledge area. Th
content connects to the Planning and Monitoring & Controlling category of the PMP questions.

        "In preparing for battle, I have always found that plans are useless, but planning is indispensable." -Dwight
        D. Eisenhower
Although stated for a context quite distinct from instructional design, the above quote encapsulates several key truths
about planning when it comes to project management: A well-structured plan and schedule fulfills an essential role in
the completion of successful projects, although it may often be the case that events unfold quite differently from wha
was originally projected.
The nature of the planning process varies by project. For larger and more complex projects, there may be an extensive
planning process with multiple layers of complexity, documentation, and specialized staff; while for smaller projects, t
planning process may consist of little more than a regularly updated Excel spreadsheet by a single project manager.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide you with a framework by which to approach planning as a project manager.
Project planning and scheduling is both an art and a science. No two project managers or planning professionals
develop identical plans or project schedules. The planning process is creative and reflects each planner's approach an
style. Even though the project plan is unique to the approach and style of the planner, methods for developing the
schedule and documenting the resulting plan typically follow certain patterns. These include:
      Identification of project resources and scope
      Development of a project timeline
      Deciding on project milestones
      Determining the schedule of activities
By following these steps the project manager is in better position to successfully guide the project to completion.

                                                                                       189
Designers Share Their Experiences

   Dr. Andy Gibbons - Instructional Psychology and Technology - BYU

                                                                   Watch on YouTube
     On this particular project, we were training two different positions: A helicopter pilot and a sensor operator who
     operated sensitive electronic equipment. We had about 500 different pieces that were being created of media,
     different kinds of media. Each one had to go through its own little development process. So managing the
     schedule was figuring out how many of each piece we had to create, how many steps it had to go through, how
     long each step would take on average, and then doing the multiplication deal. This was, by the way, before the
     day of spreadsheets, and so we didn't have, this is all done by hand on big sheets of graph paper. But we would
     build a schedule-actually there are two ways to do a schedule. On this project we were able to manage the
     schedule that way. We could do a very systematic approach, number of people, amount of time for each step,
     that kind of thing, and it worked out very well. On another project that I worked on, I did the same thing on a big
     piece of graph paper that was, here is this many things that need to be created, and here is this many steps, and
     I actually plotted each piece of thing that had to be created on a certain number of squares on this graph paper.
     And as the list grew, I still have this chart at home as a reminder that the systems approach doesn't always
     work. Because I got about half way down the list of things to be produced and I was already at the end of the
     project and there were still the rest of the things on this plan, the rest of the things had to be produced and it
     was going to double the time of the project. And so we finally just said, throw it away. We're just going to get it
     done. We don't know how we're going to get it done, but we're going to get it done. And we just started putting it
     through, and it worked, we were done on time, satisfied customer.

                                                                                       190
Heather Bryce - Independent Studies - BYU

                                                              Watch on YouTube
At the very beginning, I think the key to Art 45 or any project that you work in is to do as much planning work up
front, in making predictions on how long you think something will take a team. A lot of a project is one part of
the team will work on their portion of it, and then they'll pass it off to another team. So they're kind of
dependent. And so we really try to get together and figure out. Okay, this project started last year in January, so
you know, editing would take from January to March, from March to June we would be working on the Flash or
the video. I think that's really key, is to plan ahead of time. To make sure that you kind of have a basis schedule
and then what I do is, we actually have a program here that is a task management program. So, one person
checks off their task. The next person who is supposed to receive the task will have it show up in their
dashboard. And then that kind of helps control the flow of processes. And then I check in and remind people,
because we have several people on several different teams. So you could be working on several different
projects at the same time. So, one of my functions is to check in on people. Have regular meetings and see that
we're staying on schedule. Our general guideline for a course is about a year. From beginning, when we're
planning the idea to when we finish and it is actually available to students. We try to get it finished within a year,
and this course finished within a year.

                                                                                 191
Dr. Larry Seawright - Center for Teaching and Learning - BYU

                                                              Watch on YouTube
You know, the BYU Learning Suite because it's such a large project, very complex, lots of different components,
scheduling is our biggest difficulty. So, you know, we've got resources we have to schedule, the developers,
instructional designers, graphic designers. So the complexity of that was my biggest challenge as a project
manager. We always kept running into bottlenecks, the critical path, you know, seemed like one person, you
know, they'd bounce around. Okay, as soon as we get this problem resolved and this person off the critical path,
now we've got another one. So initially it was the instructional designers, they've got to get the initial look and
feel, and their working that out with the consultants, we're gathering all the requirements, we're building the
initial design. Now we have to throw it over to our graphic designer, and he's got to develop the high fidelity look
and feel for the programmers to develop. And they take that look and feel, combine it with the requirements and
they know what to program. So, you know, you're going through all those different things and it's like, how hard
do you push this person, you know. And one of the constraints that we're working with is we're not a business. I
can't say we've got a deadline, I don't care if you have to work 60, 70 , 80 , 90 hours a week, you got to get it
done. This is a University where we kind of don't do that. It's not like we're working 40 hour weeks, but we're not
working 60 hour weeks, at least not all of us are. Some of us are. So that's the biggest issue is how do you get
the schedule in a constrained environment where your resources really are only working this many hours a
week, as many as we're paid to work. And so that's the biggest difficulty, but that's true with any project. You
have schedules and the resources that you have. And you have to know how hard you can push without pushing
so hard that they leave, try to find a better job, they become disgruntled, they become less effective, because
you can only work so many hours of peak efficiency work and then it starts dropping off. So you have to balance
all those issues whether you are in a University environment or not, but in any instructional project you have
almost always limited resources because folks who build instructional products are trainers, product
specialists, folks who generally don't have unlimited budgets. So you have a limited amount of budget, a limited
amount of time to get things done. So the schedule is often the thing that drives those other things. So you
know, we've only got this much money to spend, and we've got this much time, so we're going to get this much
done.

                                                                                 192
Types of Schedules
Elements of Time Management
Critical Path and Float
Managing the Schedule
Project Scheduling Software

                       This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                       Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/8-project-time-management.

                                                                                  193
194
  8.1

Types of Schedules

Master Schedule  Detail  Schedule  Project

   LEARNING OBJECTIVES

        1. Define the types of project schedules.
The schedule develops as the project moves from its early conceptual phase into the execution phase.

                 Image by Cairn

                                                                    195
SCHEDULES

When the scope of the project is being determined, a conceptual simple schedule that shows the major tasks and
approximate start and end dates is developed to allow senior management to make decisions about the scope of the
project. Detail is not required at this stage because entire tasks might be dropped from the scope, or the whole project
might not be approved.

Master

If the project is chosen, a master schedule is created. It has major events and dates such as the starting date and the
completion date. The master schedule is often part of a contract. Changes to the master schedule must be approved
using a documented change process with approval by the project sponsor and client.

Detail

To execute the master schedule, the major activities are broken down into smaller activities and resources are assigned
to those activities. The most detailed versions or portions of the schedule may be developed a few weeks prior to the
execution of those activities and are called two-week plans. Portions of the master schedule that affect particular
vendors might be sent to them so they can provide detailed activities that they would perform.

   KEY TAKEAWAYS

           Types of schedules vary in detail. A broad, general conceptual schedule is used in the earliest phases of the
           project design.
           A master schedule with start date, milestones, and completion date becomes part of the contract and is
           changed by mutual agreement using a formal change process.
           Details are added to the master schedule as needed to perform the work of the project activities.

                           This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                           Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/8-1-types-of-schedules.

                                                                                       196
  8.2

Elements of Time Management

Project Management  Time management  Graphic representations  Work breakdown

   Learning Objectives

        1. Describe a work breakdown structure and how it relates to activities.
        2. Describe the use of graphic representations for time management.

Project Time Management

According to the Project Management Institute (PMI), project time management includes the following elements:1

      Define activities
      Sequence activities
      Estimate activity resources
      Estimate activity durations
      Develop schedule
      Control schedule

The list of activities, their relationship to each other, and estimates of durations and required resources comprise the
work breakdown structure (WBS). The project WBS is a hierarchical--classified according to criteria into successive
levels--listing and grouping of the project activities required to produce the deliverables of the project. The WBS
represents a breakdown of the project into components that encompass the entire scope of the project. Each level of
the WBS hierarchy represents a more detailed description of the project work so that the highest level represents broad
categories, and the lower levels represent increasing amounts of detail.

                                     197
                 Image by Klaus Schoenwandt

Larger and more complex projects often require a larger WBS. The size of the WBS is directly related to the amount of
work on the project and how that work is divided into work packages. The WBS can be developed around the project
phases or the project units or functions that will be performing the work. A WBS organized around the project phases
facilitates the understanding of the amount of work required for each phase of the project. A WBS developed around the
project units or functions of the project facilitates the understanding of the amount of work required for each function.

The following example, "John's move", will often be used throughout the rest of the book. It has a low level of
complexity compared to a larger project and would probably not receive the amount of detailed planning described in
the following examples; however, we felt this basic scenario, which is familiar to most people, will demonstrate the
concepts that can be applied to any project.

John's Move

John has a small but important project. He has accepted an instructional design position in Atlanta and now has to
move from Chicago to Atlanta and be there, ready to work, right after the Christmas holidays. If the furniture arrives in
good condition at least two days before John starts work, and for less than five thousand dollars, the project will be a
success. The move to Chicago five years ago cost five thousand dollars, but John is smarter now and will use his
friends to help, so he is confident he can stay within budget.

Developing a WBS begins by defining and developing lists of all activities--work performed on the project that
consumes project resources, including cost and time--needed to accomplish the work of the project. The first draft of
the WBS includes activities at the highest level of the hierarchy or the management level and typically includes the
major activities or summary activities required to accomplish the deliverables identified in the project scope of work. On
John's move project, these top-level activities are numbered 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, and so on, as shown in figure 8.1.

Figure 8.1

Summary Level Activities

                                                                                       198
One of John's Summary Level Activities is Packing (3.0). The activity is then decomposed--broken down into smaller
units--to the next level by listing the tasks needed to accomplish that step, as shown in figure 8.2. The first subdivision
of activities is listed as 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3. The WBS shows a greater level of detail by listing the tasks needed for each
subdivision activity, such as 3.3.3 Pack bedroom (which could be decomposed further, such as 3.3.3.1 Pack closet,
3.3.3.2 Pack drawers, etc.). This type of numbering of the activities is called intelligent numbering. In intelligent
numbering, the numbering system has meaning so that a member of the project team knows something about the
activity by the number of the activity. For example, any activity associated with packing begins with a 3; even picking up
donuts is an activity under packing because the donuts are a form of payment for the packing labor of Dion and Carlita.
Figure 8.2
Major Activity Decomposed into Smaller Activities

The WBS is developed or decomposed to the level that the manager needs to control or manage the project. On our
John's move example, the project schedule may have been just as effective without detailing the packing of the
individual rooms in the old apartment. If we deleted these items, would John know when he needed to pack each one of
these rooms? If the answer is yes, then we may not need that level of detail.

Estimation of Duration

After the project team has created the WBS, each activity is reviewed and evaluated to determine the duration (how
long it will take to accomplish from beginning to end) and what resources (time, materials, facilities, and equipment)
are needed. An estimate is an educated guess based on knowledge, experience, and inference--the process of deriving

                                                                                       199
conclusions based on assumptions. The accuracy of the estimate is related to the quality of the knowledge and how
that knowledge is applied. The person with the most knowledge may not be the most objective person to provide
duration estimates. The person responsible for the work may also want to build in extra time. Multiple inputs into the
duration estimate and a more detailed WBS help reduce bias--the making of decisions based on a prejudged
perspective.

Duration Estimate for Training

A language training facility recently decided to start teaching Arabic. The language training manager will need to know
when the new language materials can be acquired, when the new instructors will start their training on the curriculum
and when they can start teaching. The facility's human resources manager will need to know what skills the workers
need to teach Arabic and how much time each training class will take. In addition, the HR manager will need to include
activities to locate facilities, schedule training, write contracts for trainers, and manage the initiation of training classes.
As can be seen, a duration estimate can become very complicated and require an even greater level of detail, which
could be measured in days, hours or even minutes.

The unit of time used to develop the activity duration is a function of the level of detail needed by the user of the
schedule. Typically, larger and more complex projects require a more detailed WBS--which usually translates into
shorter time for the actual activities. The unit of duration is typically working days but could include other units of time
such as hours, weeks, or months. The unit chosen should be used consistently throughout the schedule.

Resource Allocation and Calendars

A common resource constraint is availability. To consider the availability of team members, consultants, and vendors,
you can create a resource calendar that indicates which days they are available and which are days off. A calendar for
team members from the same company could be the company calendar that shows working days, weekends, and
holidays. Individual team members can have individual calendars that show their vacation days or other days off, such
as parental leave days. If major pieces of equipment are only available for certain periods of time, they can be given a
resource calendar.

Resource calendars become important tools when changes must be made to the schedule. When a resource calendar
is applied to a duration estimate, the duration in days is distributed across the available calendar days. For example, if
the duration is three days and the start date of the activity is Thursday, the activity would begin on Thursday and end on
Monday of the following week, assuming the resource calendar shows that the person has the weekend off. If the
weekend included an extra day off for a holiday like Labor Day, the completion day of the same three-day activity would
be pushed to Tuesday.

Activity Sequencing

Determining the schedule of a project begins by examining each activity in the WBS to determine its relationship to the
other activities. The project logic is the development of the activity sequence or determining the order in which the
activities will be completed. The process for developing the project logic involves identifying the predecessors--
activities that come before--and successors--the activities that come after.

Project Logic for John's Move

In our example of John's move, contacting Dion and Carlita--activity 1.1--comes before the lunch meeting is scheduled.
You must logically contact Dion and Carlita before you schedule your Host Planning Lunch--activity 1.2. Your
conversation with Dion and Carlita will provide you with dates they are available and establish their commitment to help
you move. Therefore, the conversation with Dion and Carlita is a predecessor to the Host Planning Lunch Activity. This
relationship is diagramed below.
Figure 8.3

Relationship between Two Activities

                                                                                       200
These terms define a relationship that is similar to a family relationship like father and son. The father exists in time
before the son. Similarly, each element of the diagram can have predecessor-successor relationships with other
elements, just like a father can be the son of someone else. Additionally, just as the son has a mother as well as a
father, activities can have more than one predecessor.
The relationship between a predecessor activity and a successor activity is called a dependency. The successor activity
starts after and is dependent on the predecessor activity. Because the conversation with Dion and Carlita must take
place before a planning meeting can be scheduled, this is called a natural dependency because the relationship can be
inferred logically. Activities that have predecessor-successor relationships occur sequentially--one after the other.
Another term for this type of relationship is finish-start, which means the first activity must finish before the next one
can start. (Refer to the figure 8.3.) Because the finish-start relationship is by far the most common, the type of
relationship is assumed to be finish-start unless otherwise mentioned.
Some activities take place concurrently--at the same time. If they must begin at the same time, they have a start-start
relationship. If the activities can start at different times but they must finish at the same time, they have a finish-finish
relationship. (Refer to Figure 8.4.)
Figure 8.4
Start and Finish Relationships

                                                                                       201
Concurrent activities can be constrained to finish at the same time or start at the same time. Figure 8.5 shows the
activities in John's move with the predecessors identified for the Plan Move and Prepacking groups of activities.
Figure 8.5
Outline of Activities with Predecessors Identified

                                                                                       202
Lag and Lead Times

As stated before, most activities in a network diagram have a finish-start relationship. If a certain amount of time must
go by before a successor activity can begin, the required delay is called lag time. In some cases, the successor activity
can overlap the end of its predecessor activity and begin before the predecessor is finished. This is called lead time.

Lead Time in John's Move

In John's move, you might begin separating the small and delicate items that will be packed in step 2.3 before you get
the packing materials in step 2.1 so that when the materials are available, step 2.3 is already partially completed. If
preparing the small items for packing can overlap its predecessor and shortens the time it takes to accomplish both
tasks by a day, it has a lead time of one day.
Figure 8.6
Lead Time

The characteristics and identifiers of an activity are its attributes. At this point in the process of analyzing John's move,
each activity has an identifying code, a short description, predecessors, and lead or lag times, as shown in a partial
table of activities in Figure 8.7.
Figure 8.7
Table of Attributes

                                                                                       203
Milestones

Milestones are significant events in your project which consume no resources and have no duration. Milestones are
usually indicated on the project schedule with a diamond and often have a vertical line on a time-scaled graph to show
the relationship of various schedule paths to the milestone. An effective milestone schedule will capture the major
constraints to the project schedule and provide a summary level overview of the project.

In our John's move project, we might create a milestone called "all packing complete" to represent the date when
everything is packed and ready for the moving van. Any delay in this date will mean a delay in the arrival of the moving
van in Chicago, a delay in the arrival of the moving van in Atlanta, and a delay of all the unpacking and other
downstream activities (see Figure 8.8, "Gantt Chart").

Graphic Representations

Relationships between activities are easier to recognize if they are presented using graphics such as bar charts or a
network of connected boxes.

Gantt Chart

The type of bar chart used to illustrate activity relationships in a project is the Gantt chart. The Gantt chart was
developed by Henry Gantt and used on major projects, including building the Hoover Dam and the U.S. interstate
highway system.2 The Gantt chart is a time-scaled graphic that represents each activity with a bar that reflects the
duration, start, and finish time, as shown in Figure 8.8.

Figure 8.8

Gantt Chart

                                                                                       204
A Gantt chart is easy to read and provides sufficient information for project team members to plan activities within a
short time frame. For many larger projects, a two-week bar chart, extracted from the larger master schedule, provides
the information needed for team members and contractors to coordinate activity details. The Gantt chart provides
information for simple planning but is limited because a Gantt chart does not illustrate complex relationships well.

Network Diagrams

People recognize relationships and patterns more effectively when they look at diagrams like the one in Figure 8.9,
"Project Network Diagram". The precedence diagram method (PDM) is a technique for graphically displaying the logic
of the schedule by placing the activities in boxes with arrows between them to show the precedence-successor
relationships. The boxes in this type of diagram are called nodes and the arrows indicate finish-start relationships.
Compare the diagram in Figure 8.9 to the outline in Figure 8.5, "Outline of Activities with Predecessors Identified" to see
how much easier it is to trace a sequential path from one activity to the next in the precedence diagram. This type of
diagram is also called a project network diagram.
Figure 8.9
Project Network Diagram

                                                                                       205
   Key Takeaways

           The work breakdown structure is a list of activities, including estimates of their durations, their
           relationships with others, and the resources assigned to them.
           Bar charts are used to indicate durations and sequencing where the relationships are simple. Network
           diagrams are used to show complex relationships between activities.

References

Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK Guide), 4th ed.
         (Newtown Square, PA: Project Management Institute, Inc., 2008), 129.

Reference.com, "Henry Gantt," http://www.reference.com/browse/wiki/Henry_Gantt (accessed July 27, 2009).

                           This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                           Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/8-2-elements-of-time-
                           management.

                                                                                       206
  8.3

Critical Path and Float

Start Dates  Project Float  Critical Path

   Learning Objective

        1. Calculate critical path, project float, early start dates, and late start dates.

The critical path is the path through the network that results in the latest completion date of the project.

                                           207
                       Image by Be the Change, Inc.
If any activity on the critical path is delayed, the completion of the project will be delayed by an equal amount. To
determine the critical path, add the amount of time estimated for the duration of each activity to the previous activity, as
shown in Figure 8.10. Durations are indicated in days and activities on the critical path are shaded. The critical path
through these tasks takes at least eight days.
Figure 8.10
Critical Path

Early Start Dates

Starting dates can be assigned to each activity by doing a forward pass proceeding from left to right in the network
diagram beginning with the project start date. The dates derived by this method are the early start (ES) dates. The early
start date for an activity is the earliest date the activity can begin. The estimate considers durations and resource

                                                                                       208
availability calendars. To calculate early start dates, begin with the project start date and assign that date as the start
date of activities that have no predecessor activities. Follow these steps to calculate the early start dates of subsequent
activities, assuming finish-start relationships:

      Add the predecessor activity's duration to its start date.
      Add the lag time or subtract the lead time.
      Refer to the resource calendar(s) that applies to the people and equipment necessary for the activity, and add the
      number of off-days that the activity would span on those calendars.
      Assign the calculated date as the early start date of the successor activity.

Forward Pass for John's Move

John begins planning his move to Atlanta the same day he accepts the job. The start date in this example is Monday,
November 29, 2010. Tasks 1.1 and 2.1 can both start on that day, so the early start dates for tasks 1.1 and 2.1 are
November 29. John calculates the early start date for the activities. A partial list is provided below. Compare the figure
below and the figure in the next sidebar. Observe that John is willing to work on weekends, but activity 2.2.3 is delayed
by two days because one of the moving companies did not provide bids on the weekend. Observe that activity 2.3 has a
lead time of one day, but that relationship is between activity 2.1 and 2.3. The network path from activity 1.3 is longer,
so the lead time with activity 2.1 is not considered in calculating the early start date of 2.3.
Figure 8.11
Early Start Dates Determined by a Forward Pass

Doing this process manually is error prone and time consuming. Fortunately, there are computer programs to assist in
the process, but the project manager must understand the process well enough to recognize computer errors.
Computer software must be combined with common sense or good judgment.

Float

Float, sometimes called slack, is the amount of time an activity, network path, or project can be delayed from the early
start without changing the completion date of the project.
Total float is the difference between the finish date of the last activity on the critical path and the project completion
date. Any delay in an activity on the critical path would reduce the amount of total float available on the project. A

                                                                                       209
project can also have negative float, which means the calculated completion date of the last activity is later than the
targeted completion date established at the beginning of the project.
If activities that are not on the critical path have a difference between their early start date and their late start date,
those activities can be delayed without affecting the project completion date. The float on those activities is called free
float.

Float in John's Move

The last activity in John's move has an early start date of December 28 and a duration of one day. John could start work
on Wednesday, December 29. John's first day at work is Monday, January 3, so the project has a total float of five days.
Figure 8.12
Total Project Float

Late Start Dates

The next step is to work through the network diagram from right to left beginning with the mandated completion date,
which is a milestone that is set in the project plan. Subtract the duration of each activity in each path to determine the
latest date the activity could begin and still meet the project completion date. Resource calendars must be considered
in the backward pass as well as the forward pass.
To calculate late start dates, begin with the project completion milestone and assign that date as the finish date of its
predecessor activities. Follow these steps to calculate the late start dates of predecessor activities, assuming finish-
start relationships:

      Subtract the predecessor activity's duration from its late finish date.
      Subtract the lag time or add the lead time to the late finish date.
      Refer to the resource calendar(s) that applies to the people and equipment necessary for the activity, and subtract
      the number of off days that the activity would span on those calendars.
      Assign the calculated date as the late start date of the predecessor activity.
The difference between the early start date and the late start date for activities on the critical path is usually the same
as the total float, unless the activities are affected by the resource calendars differently in the forward and backward
pass. For example, if a piece of key equipment is only available for a few days, activities that depend on it have the
same start and finish dates in the forward and backward passes.

                                                                                       210
Key Takeaways

      To calculate total project float, begin at the start date and add the duration of each activity in each possible
      path through the network diagram, including nonworking days from the resource calendars, to determine
      the early project end date.
      The longest path through the network is the critical path.
      The difference between the early end date and the required completion date of the project is the total
      project float, and the start date of each activity is the early start date.
      To calculate the late start dates, begin with the required project completion date and work backward,
      subtracting the duration of each activity though each possible pathway.

                      This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                      Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/8-3-critical-path-and-float.

                                                                                 211
212
  8.4

Managing the Schedule

tracking  Progress  Reporting  Resource Leveling  Accelerating Schedule

   Learning Objectives

        1. Describe methods of tracking and reporting progress.
        2. Define resource leveling.
        3. Describe methods of accelerating the schedule.

To manage a schedule, the project manager must know how the work is progressing compared to the master schedule
and, if necessary, make changes to keep the project on time.

Tracking and Reporting Progress

Tracking the schedule performance involves measuring the work performed against the work expected to be performed
with a given expenditure of resources. Periodic reporting on the progress of the project provides the project
management team with information on how the project is performing against expectations and to make decisions and
corrections. Accurate measurement of schedule performance requires planning during the early stages of the project to
determine the unit of measure and process for tracking progress.

Reporting Percentage Completed

To determine the percentage of a project that has been completed, the project manager must determine what to
measure. Some percentages are misleading. For example, a project that has completed 25% of the scheduled activities
does not mean that the project is 25% complete. In our John's move example, four rooms were to be packed. After the
bedroom was packed, packing was not 25% complete. The kitchen contained five times as many items and required
more delicate, time-consuming packing. John estimated that 40% of the items to be packed were in the kitchen, 20% in
the living room, 20% in the bedroom, and the remaining 20% in miscellaneous locations. If the unit of measure for these
activities is items packed, the packing is only 20% complete instead of 25% if rooms are the unit of measure.

The unit of measure for tracking schedule progress is related to the estimate. If hours of labor are used as the unit of
measure, the percentage of packing is even less because more time is estimated to pack each item in the kitchen. As
the project management team estimates the duration for each activity, the amount of work to accomplish the tasks is
captured in both resources expended and a unit of measure for tracking progress. The unit of measure is related to the

                                                                                       213
type of project. On a software development project, the unit of measure may be lines of code written. The unit of
measure that is chosen can affect the quality of the work.

Units of Measure on a Programming Project

Steve Ballmer of Microsoft related early clashes with IBM over the unit of measure used to determine how much
Microsoft would get paid for its work for IBM. IBM's standard was to pay per K-LOC, which is a thousand lines of code;
Microsoft thought that they should not be paid less if they were able to produce good work in fewer lines of code.1

In this case, IBM's insistence on using thousands of lines of code as the unit of measure did not reward Microsoft for
writing smaller code that would run faster. Microsoft and IBM cancelled their joint project for writing an operating
system named OS/2. Microsoft wrote Windows, and IBM's OS/2 operating system was not able to compete with it
successfully.

On a construction project, a unit of measure may be yards of concrete poured, and on a training project, the unit of
measure may be the class curriculums developed or the number of students taught.

Managing Schedules Using Milestones

Milestones provide the opportunity for project management to focus on completing activities that will have the greatest
impact on the schedule. On complex projects, focusing on the milestones is useful for communicating important dates
to the entire project team. Project team members can then adjust their efforts to complete the activities connected to
the milestone events.

Many project leaders believe that time lost on early activities can be made up toward the end of the project. Hard
decisions about paying overtime and working weekends are often delayed until the end of the project when the pressure
to complete the project on time becomes much stronger. Project managers who focus on milestone events create a
sense of urgency to meet the milestone deadlines and spread the urgency to complete the project over the life of the
project. Projects that meet milestone dates are more likely to meet project completion dates.

Current Schedule

A schedule update is distributed regularly to provide project stakeholders with an assessment of the progress of the
project against the master schedule. This updated schedule is called the current schedule. The current schedule
provides new start and end dates for all activities and the project. Calculations based on the current schedule may
result in a new critical path and subsequent changes in the project execution plan.

The project team develops an understanding of the project productivity by comparing the current schedule to the
original schedule. If the schedule is behind original estimates, the project team conducts an assessment of the causes
of the schedule slippage and develops a plan to address the changes to the project. The project management team
typically has several alternatives for addressing changes to the project situation. Selecting the right alternative requires
good information.

Resource Leveling

The schedule of activities is constrained by the availability of resources. If you apply the resource calendar to each
activity to be sure the people and equipment are available on those dates, you can still miss an important constraint. If
there are several activities that use a particular person's time on the same days, that person could end up with too many
activities scheduled for the same days and very little on other days. If key people are overloaded, the activities to which
they are assigned might not be completed on time. Managing the schedule of activities to ensure that enough
resources are available to complete each task by distributing the work load is called resource leveling. Activities to
which that person is assigned and that have free float can be delayed to reduce work overload of key people.

                                                                                       214
                                    Image by Tulane Public Relations

Accelerating the Schedule

The project manager must know how to accelerate a schedule to compensate for unanticipated events that delay
critical activities or to accommodate changes in the project completion date. Compressing or crashing the schedule are
terms used to describe the various techniques used to shorten the project schedule. Project managers utilize several
techniques to keep projects on schedule.

One method of accelerating the schedule is to add activities to the critical path that are empty or that are optional. If the
project is behind schedule, the time can be made up by dropping these activities. This extra time that is built into the
schedule is called contingency time, buffer, or reserve time.

Activities that are not on the critical path that have free float can be delayed without delaying the end date of the project
if they start by the late start date. Project managers can divert some resources from activities with free float to
activities on the critical path without delaying the completion of the project.

Changing Scope

The unit cost of work to be performed on a project is calculated at the beginning of the project based on the execution
strategy of the project to meet the project completion date. If the project completion date is moved up, then the unit
cost of work will likely increase. Conversely, a project team may be able to save money by extending the project end
date. With more time, the project team may be able to schedule activities in such a way to reduce their costs. For
example, an activity requiring overtime to be paid can now pay the labor at normal rates, saving the overtime premium.
Changing elements of the master schedule means a change in scope. Scope changes often affect costs and require
agreement by the parties who signed the original scope documents.

Additional Resources

Another option is to allocate funds that can be used to add resources if necessary. Available resources can be
increased by adding overtime to existing resource calendars or by hiring additional contract workers or renting
additional equipment.

                                                                                       215
Adding Resources to the Dreamliner Project

When Boeing sales of the new 878 Dreamliner Airplane exceeded expectations, contractors who were building the plane
were asked to increase production while maintaining all quality and safety requirements. All contractors involved in the
plane production were affected by this change.

One project team was responsible for developing and delivering training to the new employees who would be building
the fuselage of the Dreamliner. Training for new employees had to be complete three months early and the project team
developed an execution strategy to meet the new deadlines. The project had a month of float, so the project accelerated
the schedule by two months. The team authorized overtime from forty to fifty hours a week for team members working
activities on the critical path. The project team leased additional space and hired contractors to perform selected work
packages on the critical path and delayed the production of library quality documents until after the critical dates on the
project. Authorizing overtime and hiring contractors added a 15% cost to the project. Overtime and the procurement of
additional contract help was authorized only for work packages on the critical path because work not on the critical
path would not accelerate the schedule.

Changing Quality

Another option for accelerating the schedule is the changing of the quality specifications of the product. This is usually
done as a scope change.

Making Up Time by Reducing Quality

A western university contracted an online learning company to make an online independent study course for their
Calculus 112 class. As the project went on it fell behind schedule. To speed up the project, it was decided to produce
fewer animated videos, which meant that some of the lessons would not have these learning aids. The contract did not
specify the amount or quality of these videos so this change did not require a change of scope. As a result, some of the
more difficult calculus principles had only text as instruction. The university did not realize this change had been made
until after the project was completed and being used by the students.

   Key Takeaways

           Progress can be measured by determining the percentage of resources expended, completion of activities
           by scheduled dates, milestones achieved, or fraction of activities accomplished. Standards used to
           measure progress, particularly when partial payment to contractors is concerned, should be specified in
           contract documents.
           Resource leveling is reallocating people and equipment to remove periods of overuse or underuse.
           Unplanned delays and costs can be anticipated by including contingency time and budget amounts where
           needed to keep the schedule on time. Resource allocation and resource calendars should be examined to
           determine if a resource is overcommitted. Free float can be used to delay noncritical activities that use the
           same resource to allocate its time more evenly. If it is necessary to accelerate the schedule, activities that
           are not on the critical path can be delayed using their free float and their resources can be moved to
           activities on the critical path to complete them sooner. Contingency resources can be committed to
           speeding up the activities. If necessary, the scope can be changed to bring in additional resources or lower
           the quality.

                                                                                       216
References

[1] Robert X. Cringely, Triumph of the Nerds, June 1996, http://www.pbs.org/nerds/part2.html (accessed July 27, 2009).
                           This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                           Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/8-4-managing-the-schedule.

                                                                                       217
218
  8.5

Project Scheduling Software

Collaboration  Complexity  Software  Project

   Learning Objectives

        1. Describe the relationship between the choice of software and project complexity.
        2. Identify the features that should be considered when selecting software for project management.

Low-complexity projects can be managed with lists of activities on paper or by using an outline in word processing or
spreadsheet software. This software is inadequate for tracking complex projects. Fortunately, there are several
dedicated software programs that keep track of the complex relationships between activities and resources.

Appropriate to Project Complexity

Simple projects can be tracked using general purpose word processing and spreadsheet software like those available in
Microsoft Office or OpenOffice. Medium-complexity projects benefit from dedicated project management software such
as Microsoft Project and OpenProject. Complex projects require software that can track the interactions of thousands
of tasks and produce sophisticated reports such as Oracle's P6.

                           Image by Tricia Wang 

                                                                 219
Features

There are many features to consider when selecting the appropriate software. One consideration is cost. There are
dozens of computer software programs available with a wide range of prices; some open source software programs are
free, but others cost up to a thousand dollars. However, cost is not the most important feature.
Another factor to consider is familiarity. Use software that is already in use and with which most team members are
already familiar. If software that is used by most team members is appropriate to the complexity of your project, it is the
default choice. It is also valuable to know what software is used by key vendors or project partners so files can be
exchanged electronically in the same format.
Team members should be able to view the project schedule. Some software products require the use of expensive
proprietary software that runs on the company's server and that will allow several different team members to use the
same schedule and restricts the use of the software to team members who have access to the company's computer
system. Other software products use a server on the Internet that is open to team members and vendors who have valid
passwords.
Any project management software that is selected must have the ability to track and display basic features such as the
following:

      Durations
      Relationships
      Milestones
      Start and end dates
      Resource calendars
      Graphic displays using Gantt and network charts
For more complex projects, look for advanced features, such as the following:
      Issue tracking that tracks problems, actions, and resolutions
      Project portfolio management that tracks and compares groups of related projects
      Automatic resource leveling and alerts when a resource is overscheduled
      Document management feature that tracks contracts, bids, scope changes, and incidents

   Key Takeaways

           Medium- to high-complexity projects usually require the use of software that is designed specifically for
           managing projects.
           Features to look for when choosing project management software include (1) compatibility with existing
           software at the company or its vendors, (2) basic features for managing medium-complexity projects, (3) a
           method for collaboration between team members, and (4) if needed, advanced features for managing
           multiple projects.

                                                                                       220
This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/8-5-project-scheduling-software.

                                                        221
222
  9

Costs and Procurement

Overview

The cost portion of the chapter aligns with chapter 7 of the PMBOK and 9% of the CAPM questions come from this
knowledge area. The content connects to the Planning and Monitoring & Controlling category of the PMP questions.
The procurement portion of the chapter deals with Chapter 12 of the PMBOK and 9% of the CAPM questions come from
this knowledge area. The content connects to the Planning, Executing, Monitoring & Controlling and closure category of
the PMP questions.

An important part of a project manager's job is managing money. All types of organizations must manage their money
well in order to fulfill their mission, including not-for-profit and government organizations. The tools and methods used
to manage money on a project vary depending on the phase and complexity of the project. This chapter first describes
the methods used to estimate the cost of a project, create a budget, and manage the cost of activities while the project
is being executed. It then covers a major component of cost management--the procurement process.

To achieve the objectives of the project, the management team often needs to look outside the internal organization for
additional help. The process of obtaining goods and services from providers who are outside of the organization is
called procurement. We will discuss ways of selecting the work that will be procured and the different methods and
processes for procuring the equipment, materials, and services for the project.

The procurement effort on projects varies widely and depends on the type of project. Often the client organization will
provide procurement services on less complex projects. In this case, the project team identifies the materials,
equipment, and supplies needed by the project and provides product specifications and a detailed delivery schedule.
When the procurement department of the parent organization provides procurement services, a liaison from the project
can help the procurement team better understand the unique requirements of the project and the time-sensitive or
critical items of the project schedule.

On larger, more complex projects, personnel are dedicated to procuring and managing the equipment, supplies, and
materials needed by the project. Because of the temporary nature of projects, equipment, supplies, and materials are
procured as part of the product of the project or for the execution of the project. For example, workbook materials might
be procured for the product of the project, and the computers and software might be equipment procured for the
execution of the project work. At the end of the project, equipment bought or rented for the execution of the work of the
project are sold, returned to rental organizations, or disposed of some other way.

More complex projects will typically procure through different procurement and management methods. Commodities
are common products that are purchased based on the lowest bid. Commodities include items like concrete for building
projects, office supplies, or even lab equipment for a research project. The second type of procurement includes
products that are specified for the project. Vendors who can produce these products bid for a contract. The awarding of
a contract can include price, ability to meet the project schedule, the fit for purpose of the product, and other
considerations important to the project. Equipment especially designed and built for a research project is an example of

                                                                                       223
what might be provided by a project vendor. These vendors' performances become important parts of the project, and
the project manager assigns resources to coordinate the work and schedule of the vendor.
The third procurement approach is the development of one or more partners. A public relations firm that is awarded the
advertising contract for a major project and a research firm that is conducting critical subparts of the research are
examples of potential project partners. A partner contributes to and is integrated into the execution plan. Partners
perform best when they share the project vision of success and are emotionally invested in the project. The project
management team builds and implements a project procurement plan that recognizes the most efficient and effective
procurement approach to support the project.

                                                                                       224
Designers Share Their Experiences

   Dr. Andy Gibbons - Instructional Psychology and Technology - BYU

                                                                   Watch on YouTube
     Well project budgets are scary. Because when you are out of money, you are out of money. Your goal is to come
     in under budget if you possibly can. You know it's funny, there is a concept, I was working on this project,
     training submarine finding helicopter pilots and sensor operators so we had two little mini-projects going on.
     Well they weren't mini-projects they were pretty good-sized projects. We had a staff of about 25 people. We had
     to pay them all. We had to bring them on at the right time, and we had to put them off of the project at the right
     time. Because if we didn't then, they would bill against the project and we would use up funds that we didn't
     have. So we had to know when a certain set of jobs was going to be done. One of our artists was a cartoonist.
     We had to know when he came on the project and when he left the project. We had to make sure he was busy
     the whole time. So sometimes that comes into conflict with the production schedule, and you end up having
     people being paid longer than you expected. Boy, budget. There is a concept called designed costs. I think it's an
     important concept for instructional designers to understand. It means you only have a certain amount of time,
     and a certain amount of money to pay people, and so you make your design to fit those resources. There is no
     project that you get on where you couldn't design something that is like the Taj Mahal, ornate and guilded and
     beautiful and pure marble and all that kind of stuff. But you know, every project can't be the Taj Mahal. You can't
     afford it, it takes too long, too many people. And so you have to make your design fit what you have. And people
     say that's giving up your principles, isn't there something wrong about that, isn't there something unethical
     about that. And the answer is no. When your client contracts with you for a certain amount of money, that's
     what they want to pay you. And you can go back to your client with a change order, and that's kind of an official
     thing, a change order, saying, now if you want this extra feature this is how much it's going to cost you. Because
     one of the things that happens as you design for a client, all of a sudden they start getting the picture, you
     create these wonderful clouds of vision in their mind and they say, "That's so cool! We could do this. And we
     could do this..." You excite them. And they start imagining, "Wow we could create this, such a cool thing". Well

                                                                                       225
your budget said Volkswagen, it didn't say Cadillac. It said Volkswagen. So if you want a Cadillac we're going to
have to re-write some of the contract to say Cadillac in it. So budgets are scary.

Heather Bryce - Independent Studies - BYU

                                                              Watch on YouTube
Well, we didn't manage our budget very well for this course. Because of the meetings, the excessive meetings, it,
the cost jumped up dramatically. And a lot of the things that we made decisions on, the instructional designer.
You know, Flash takes a long time, video takes a long time, the recording, the post process, the pre-process.
Those are costly things. So you have to kind of weigh those things out when you create a course. But, with an
art course it would not be a very good course, instructionally, if you didn't have any of those things in it, if it was
just straight reading. In the end, we spent a lot more money than we planned, but it made for such a rich course.
It's a fantastic drawing course. In the triangle of project management, when you manage your time and your
cost and your quality, the quality of this course is incredible. The time, we kept our time on time. What we gave
up was, we gave up cost for quality in this example. And the award that we received, we all feel like it was worth
it, but of course we wouldn't be in business if we did that with every course. So you have to weigh it out. What
we have to manage the course budget, is we do have a program. Our same program that we use to manage our
tasks, and everyone records their hours that they spend on each task. And so it tabulates how much money
we're spending on the budget so you can look at the course at any time. I just, what I do is, and the instructional
designers we check on that throughout. So each phase of the project it will tell you how much money. And so,
how it's supposed to work is when you see that you are close, it will kind of go red, and it will show you that
you're using up your budget money for that processor, so you better hurry it out. So, how ideally it works is you
cut things out if you have to stay within your budget, but like I said, that was probably a project failure as far as
budget went for this course.

                                                                                 226
Dr. Larry Seawright - Center for Teaching and Learning - BYU

                                                               Watch on YouTube
 So in building the BYU Learning Suite, we're at the Center for Teaching and Learning. So, our budget is pretty
 constrained. And we have lots of stuff that we're doing. So we were kind of given this much money to do things,
 and we said we can only do this much of the project and you want this much done. So they said okay, we'll give
 you this much. And we just had to keep going back, this much, this much, this much. So, you know, budget
 management is one of the critical things that any project manager has to do. Where you're a smaller entity
 within a larger organization, and the larger organization is the one asking you to do something at least you're in
 a good position. You can go back and ask for more money. Is this really important to you? Then give us some
 more money. Is this really important to you? Than give us some more money. And that's kind of how we've been
 having to do this. They shortened the time frame that we needed to do the project in by quite a bit. So that
 compressed the development cycle. The budget went from this to this. Simply because we had to hire a lot
 more people to get it done that fast. So you know, it's a difficult project management triangle. You know, it's
 time, scope and money. If they reduce the time, you've got to spend more money, or reduce the scope. And we
 actually had to do both. We couldn't get as much done in that amount of time. But we tried to get more done by
 hiring more people. So you know, it's the old trade off.

Estimating Costs
Managing the Budget
Identifying the Need for Procuring Services
Procurement of Goods

                                                                                  227
Selecting the Type of Contract
Procurement Process

                       This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                       Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/9-costs-and-procurement.

                                                                                  228
  9.1

Estimating Costs

Schedule  Project  Estimating  Budget  Cost

   Learning Objectives

        1. Describe methods of estimating costs.
        2. Identify the effects of project phase and complexity on the choice of estimating method.
        3. Describe the method of combining cost estimates with a schedule to create a budget.

ESTIMATING COSTS TO COMPARE AND SELECT PROJECTS

During the conceptual phase when project selection occurs, economic factors are an important consideration when
choosing between competing projects. To compare the simple paybacks or internal rates of return between projects, an
estimate of the cost of each project is made. The estimates must be accurate enough so that the comparisons are
meaningful, but the amount of time and resources used to make the estimates should be appropriate to the size and
complexity of the project. The methods used to estimate the cost of the project during the selection phase are generally
faster and consume fewer resources than those used to create detailed estimates in later phases. They rely more on the
expert judgment of experienced managers who can make accurate estimates with less detailed information. Estimates
in the earliest stages of project selection are usually based from previous projects that can be adjusted--scaled--to
match the size and complexity of the current project or by applying standardized formulas.

                                       229
                                             Image by Andrew Magill

Analogous Estimate

An estimate that is based on other project estimates is an analogous estimate. If a similar project cost a certain
amount, then it is reasonable to assume that the current project will cost about the same. Few projects are exactly the
same size and complexity, so the estimate must be adjusted upward or downward to account for the difference. The
selection of projects that are similar and the amount of adjustment needed is up to the judgment of the person who
makes the estimate. Normally, this judgment is based on many years of experience estimating projects, including
incorrect estimates that were learning experiences for the expert.

Analogous Estimate for John's Move

In the John's move example, John asked a friend for advice about the cost of his move. His friend replied, "I moved from
an apartment a little smaller than yours last year and the distance was about the same. I did it with a fourteen-foot
truck. It cost about $575 for the truck rental, pads, hand truck, rope, boxes, and gas." Because of the similarity of the
projects, John's initial estimate of the cost of the move was less than $700 and he decided that the cost would be
affordable and the project could go forward.

Less experienced managers who are required to make analogous estimates can look through the documentation that is
available from previous projects. As explained in Chapter 2, if those projects were evaluated using the Darnall-Preston
Complexity Index (DPCI), the manager can quickly identify projects that have similar profiles to the project under
consideration even if those projects were managed by other people. Comparing the original estimates with the final
project costs on several previous projects with the same DPCI ratings gives a less-experienced manager the perspective
that it would take many years to acquire by trial and error. It also provides references which the manager can use to
justify the estimate.

Parametric Estimate

If the project consists of activities that are common to many other projects, average costs are available per unit. For
example, if you ask a construction company how much it would cost to build a standard office building, they will ask for
the size of the building in square feet and the city in which the building will be built. From these two factors--size and
location--the company's estimator can predict the cost of the building. Factors like size and location are parameters--
measurable factors that can be used in an equation to calculate a result. The estimator knows the average cost per
square foot of a typical office building and adjustments for local labor costs. Other parameters such as quality of

                                                                                       230
finishes are used to further refine the estimate. Estimates that are calculated by multiplying measured parameters by
cost-per-unit values are parametric estimates.

Parametric Estimate for John's Move

To estimate the size of the truck needed for John's move, the parameter used by a truck rental company is the number
of bedrooms, as shown in Figure 9.1.
Figure 9.1
Number of Bedrooms Used for Parametric Cost Estimate

The moving company assumes that the number of bedrooms is the important parameter in determining how big a truck
is needed for a move. For John's move, he has a one-bedroom apartment, so he chooses the fourteen-foot truck. Once
the size is determined, other parameters, such as distance and days, are used to estimate the cost of the truck rental.

ESTIMATING COSTS TO INITIATE PROJECTS

Once the project is selected, more accurate estimates are often needed to raise funds and agree on contracts with
vendors in the initiation phase.

Estimate During the Initiation Phase of John's Move

John recalled that his friend also told him how tiring it was to do all the packing, loading, and driving himself, and some
items were damaged when the load shifted inside the truck during the trip. John decides to call in favors from two
friends, Dion and Carlita, to help him pack in Chicago and to hire some of the skilled labor like that needed to load the
truck properly.

Vendor Bid Analysis

If services or products will be provided by vendors, the cost of those services can be determined by issuing a request
for proposal (RFP). The RFP describes the work, service, or product to be provided by the vendor and the quality level
required. The RFP is sent to a list of vendors who are qualified--meet standards of reliability and capability--to perform
this type of work. They respond with a proposal for completing the work described in the RFP, including an estimate of
the cost. Some government organizations are required to use the qualified vendor with the lowest bid. Other
organizations are not bound to take the lowest bid but are usually required to justify their reasons for not doing so.

Using RFPs to Make Estimates on John's Move

John wants to find out how much it would cost to hire a skilled crew to load and secure the furniture in the truck and
then have another crew from the same company meet him in Atlanta to unload the truck and help him unpack. He is not
sure if any companies offer this option, so he decides to ask three moving companies for bids. He also decides to ask
for bids on a standard move that includes all phases of packing, loading, transportation, and unloading as a comparison
to see if his cost-saving plan is worth the extra effort.

                                                                                       231
The project management team can review the responses by several vendors to the RFP to determine if their estimate of
the cost of that aspect of the project is close to the estimate made during the project selection stage. If the estimates
by the vendors are much higher than expected, and if the project cannot be completed for the cost that was used to
select the project, the selection decision might have to be reconsidered. Reconsidering the selection of the project
should take into consideration the economic ratings of the competing projects that were not chosen and who the
project champions are for the projects that would be affected.
Some vendors may suggest an alternative way to meet the objective of the RFP in a more cost-effective manner that
does not match the specifics of the RFP. Such alternatives can reduce costs if they are acceptable.

Bottom-Up Estimating

The most accurate and time-consuming estimating method is to identify the cost of each item in each activity of the
schedule, including labor and materials. If you view the project schedule as a hierarchy where the general descriptions
of tasks are at the top and the lower levels become more detailed, finding the price of each item at the lowest level and
then summing them to determine the cost of higher levels is called bottom-up estimating.

Bottom-Up Estimate for John's Move

After evaluating the bids by the moving companies, John decides the savings are worth his time if he can get the
packing done with the help of his friends. He decides to prepare a detailed estimate of costs for packing materials and
use of a rental truck. He looks up the prices for packing materials and truck rental costs on company Web sites and
prepares a detailed list of items, quantities, and costs, as shown in Figure 9.2.
Figure 9.2
Detailed Cost Estimate

                                                                                       232
This type of estimate is typically more accurate than an analogous or parametric estimate. In this example, the sum of
packing materials and truck expenses is estimated to be $661.25.
The detail can be rolled up--subtotaled--to display less detail. This process is made easier using computer software.
On projects with low complexity, the cost estimates can be done on spreadsheet software. On larger projects, software
that manages schedules can also manage costs and display costs by activity and by category. For example, the
subtotal feature could be used in Excel and collapsed to show the subtotals for the two categories of costs, as shown in
Figure 9.3.
Figure 9.3
Sum of Detailed Costs by Type

Activity-Based Estimates

An activity can have costs from multiple vendors in addition to internal costs for labor and materials. Detailed estimates
from all sources can be reorganized so those costs that are associated with a particular activity can be grouped by
adding the activity code to the detailed estimate, as shown in Figure 9.4.
Figure 9.4
Detailed Costs Associated with Activities

                                                                                       233
                                                                                                                         Cost estimate table

The detailed cost estimates can be sorted by activity and then subtotaled by activity to determine the cost for each
activity.

Establishing a Budget

Once you have broken your project down into activities, you will be able to calculate your overall project costs by
estimating and totaling the individual activity costs.
This process of subtotaling costs by category or activity is called cost aggregation.

Budget Timeline

Costs are associated with activities and since each activity has a start date and a duration period, it is possible to
calculate how much money will be spent by any particular date during the project. The money needed to pay for a
project is usually transferred to the project account shortly before it is needed. These transfers must be timed so that
the money is there to pay for each activity without causing a delay in the start of the activity. If the money is transferred
too far in advance, the organization will lose the opportunity to use the money somewhere else, or they will have to pay
unnecessary interest charges if the money is borrowed. A schedule of money transfers is created that should match the
need to pay for the activities. The process of matching the schedule of transfers with the schedule of activity payments
is called reconciliation. Refer to Figure 9.5 which shows the costs of ten major activities in a project. Funds are
transferred into the project account four times. Notice that during most of the project, there were more funds available
than were spent except at activity 6 when all the available funds were spent.
Figure 9.5
Fund Transfers and Expenditures

                                                                                       234
In the project budget profile shown in Figure 9.5 there is no margin for error if the total of the first six activities exceeds
the amount of funding at that point in the project.
Contractual agreements with vendors often require partial payment of their costs during the project. Those contracts
can be managed more conveniently if the unit of measure for partial completion is the same as that used for cost
budgeting. For example, if a graphic designer is putting together several pieces of artwork for a textbook, their contract
may call for partial payment after 25% of their total number of drawings is complete.

   Key Takeaways

           Analogous estimating scales an estimate from a similar project to match the current project. Parametric
           estimating multiplies a standard cost-per-unit value by the number of units in the project. Bids from
           contractors can be compared to estimate costs. Bottom-up estimating determines the cost of each detail
           and aggregates them to determine activity cost estimates.
           During the project selection and approval stage, rough estimates are used that are usually obtained using
           analogous and parametric methods. Vendor bid analysis and detailed bottom-up estimates are used in the
           initiation phase to estimate project costs.
           Detailed estimates are associated with activities and aggregated during the planning phase to create an
           activity-based budget. Funding transfers are arranged to reconcile money spent to money from funding
           sources in a timely manner.

                                                                                       235
This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/9-1-estimating-costs.

                                                        236
  9.2

Managing the Budget

Cash Flow  Budget  Earned Value Analysis  Schedule Performance Index  Cost Performance Index

   Learning Objectives

        1. Describe methods to manage cash flow.
        2. Describe the terms and relationships of budget factors used in earned value analysis.
        3. Calculate and interpret budget and schedule variances.
        4. Calculate and interpret the schedule performance index and the cost performance index.
        5. Calculate and interpret estimates to complete the project.
        6. Calculate the revised final budget.

Projects seldom go according to plan in every detail. It is necessary for the project manager to be able to identify when
costs are varying from the budget and to manage those variations.

Managing Cash Flow

If the total amount spent on a project is equal to or less than the amount budgeted, the project can still be in trouble if
the funding for the project is not available when it is needed. There is a natural tension between the financial people in
an organization, who do not want to pay for the use of money that is just sitting in a checking account, and the project
manager, who wants to be sure that there is enough money available to pay for project expenses. The financial people
prefer to keep the company's money working in other investments until the last moment before transferring it to the
project account. The contractors and vendors have similar concerns, and they want to get paid as soon as possible so
they can put the money to work in their own organizations. The project manager would like to have as much cash
available as possible to use if activities exceed budget expectations.

                                          237
                                               Image by kenteegardin

Contingency Reserves

Most projects have something unexpected occur that increases costs above the original estimates. If estimates are
rarely exceeded, the estimating method should be reviewed because the estimates are too high. It is impossible to
predict which activities will cost more than expected, but it is reasonable to assume that some of them will. Estimating
the likelihood of such events is part of risk analysis, which is discussed in more detail in a later chapter.

Instead of overestimating each cost, money is budgeted for dealing with unplanned but statistically predictable cost
increases. Funds allocated for this purpose are called contingency reserves.1 Because it is likely that this money will be
spent, it is part of the total budget for the project. If this fund is adequate to meet the unplanned expenses, then the
project will complete within the budget.

Management Reserves

If something occurs during the project that requires a change in the project scope, money may be needed to deal with
the situation before a change in scope can be negotiated with the project sponsor or client. It could be an opportunity
as well as a challenge. For example, if a new technology were invented that would greatly enhance your completed
project, there would be additional cost and a change to the scope, but it would be worth it. Money can be made
available at the manager's discretion to meet needs that would change the scope of the project. These funds are called
management reserves. Unlike contingency reserves, they are not likely to be spent and are not part of the project's
budget baseline, but they can be included in the total project budget.2

Evaluating the Budget During the Project

A project manager must regularly compare the amount of money spent with the budgeted amount and report this
information to managers and stakeholders. It is necessary to establish an understanding of how this progress will be
measured and reported.

Reporting Budget Progress on John's Move

In the John's move example, he estimated that the move would cost about $1,500 and take about sixteen days. Eight
days into the project, John has spent $300. John tells his friends that the project is going well because he is halfway
through the project but has only spent a fifth of his budget. John's friend Carlita points out that his report is not

                                                                                       238
sufficient because he did not compare the amount spent to the budgeted amount for the activities that should be done
by the eighth day.
As John's friend points out, a budget report must compare the amount spent with the amount that is expected to be
spent by that point in the project. Basic measures such as percentage of activities completed, percentage of
measurement units completed, and percentage of budget spent are adequate for less complex projects, but more
sophisticated techniques are used for projects with higher complexity.

Earned Value Analysis

A method that is widely used for medium- and high-complexity projects is the earned value management (EVM)
method. EVM is a method of periodically comparing the budgeted costs with the actual costs during the project. It
combines the scheduled activities with detailed cost estimates of each activity. It allows for partial completion of an
activity if some of the detailed costs associated with the activity have been paid but others have not.
The budgeted cost of work scheduled (BCWS) comprises the detailed cost estimates for each activity in the project.
The amount of work that should have been done by a particular date is the planned value (PV). These terms are used
interchangeably by some sources, but the planned value term is used in formulas to refer to the sum of the budgeted
cost of work up to a particular point in the project, so we will make that distinction in the definitions in this text for
clarity.

Planned Value on Day Six of John's Move

On day six of the project, John should have taken his friends to lunch and purchased the packing materials. The portion
of the BCWS that should have been done by that date (the planned value) is listed in Figure 9.6. This is the planned
value for day six of the project.
Figure 9.6
Planned Value for Lunch and Packing Materials

                                                                                       239
The budgeted cost of work performed (BCWP) is the budgeted cost of work scheduled that has been done. If you sum
the BCWP values up to that point in the project schedule, you have the earned value (EV). The amount spent on an item
is often more or less than the estimated amount that was budgeted for that item. The actual cost (AC) is the sum of the
amounts actually spent on the items.

Comparing PV, EV, and AC in John's Move on Day Six

Dion and Carlita were both trying to lose weight and just wanted a nice salad. Consequently, the lunch cost less than
expected. John makes a stop at a store that sells moving supplies at discount rates. They do not have all the items he
needs, but the prices are lower than those quoted by the moving company. They have a very good price on lifting straps
so he decides to buy an extra pair. He returns with some of the items on his list, but this phase of the job is not
complete by the end of day six. John bought half of the small boxes, all of five other items, twice as many lifting straps,
and none of four other items. John is only six days into his project, and his costs and performance are starting to vary
from the plan. Earned value analysis gives us a method for reporting that progress (refer to Figure 9.7).
Figure 9.7
Planned Value, Earned Value, and Actual Cost

                                                                                       240
The original schedule called for spending $261.65 (PV) by day six. The amount of work done was worth $162.10 (EV)
according to the estimates, but the actual cost was only $154.50 (AC).

Schedule Variance

The project manager must know if the project is on schedule and within the budget. The difference between planned
and actual progress is the variance. The schedule variance (SV) is the difference between the earned value (EV) and
the planned value (PV). Expressed as a formula, SV = EV - PV. If less value has been earned than was planned, the
schedule variance is negative, which means the project is behind schedule.

Schedule Variance on John's Move

Planning for John's move calls for spending $261.65 by day six, which is the planned value (PV). The difference
between the planned value and the earned value is the scheduled variance (SV). The formula is SV = EV - PV. In this
example, SV = $162.10 - $261.65 = $(99.55) A negative SV indicates the project is behind schedule.
The difference between the earned value (EV) and the actual cost (AC) is the cost variance (CV). Expressed as a
formula, CV = EV - AC. A positive CV indicates the project is under budget.

Cost Variance on John's Move

The difference between the earned value of $162.10 and the actual cost of $154.50 is the cost variance (CV). The
formula is CV = EV - AC. In this example, CV = $162.10 - $154.50 = $7.60.

Variance Indexes for Schedule and Cost

The schedule variance and the cost variance provide the amount by which the spending is behind (or ahead of)
schedule and the amount by which a project is exceeding (or less than) its budget. They do not give an idea of how
these amounts compare with the total budget.

                                                                                       241
The ratio of earned value to planned value gives an indication of how much of the project is completed. This ratio is the
schedule performance index (SPI). The formula is SPI = EV/PV. In the John's move example, the SPI equals 0.62 (SPI =
$162.10/$261.65 = 0.62) A SPI value less than one indicates the project is behind schedule.
The ratio of the earned value to the actual cost is the cost performance index (CPI). The formula is CPI = EV/AC.

Cost Performance Index of John's Move

In the John's move example, CPI = $162.10/$154.50 = 1.05 A value greater than 1 indicates the project is under budget.
Figure 9.8
Schedule Variance and Cost Variance on Day Six of the John's Move Project

The cost variance of positive $7.60 and the CPI value of 1.05 tell John that he is getting more value for his money than
planned for the tasks scheduled by day six. The schedule variance (SV) of negative $99.55 and the schedule
performance index (SPI) of 0.62 tell him that he is behind schedule in adding value to the project.
During the project, the manager can evaluate the schedule using the schedule variance (SV) and the schedule
performance index (SPI) and the budget using the cost variance (CV) and the cost performance index (CPI).

Estimated Cost To Complete the Project

Partway through the project, the manager evaluates the accuracy of the cost estimates for the activities that have taken
place and uses that experience to predict how much money it will take to complete the unfinished activities of the
project--the estimate to complete (ETC).
To calculate the ETC, the manager must decide if the cost variance observed in the estimates to that point are
representative of the future. For example, if unusually bad weather causes increased cost during the first part of the
project, it is not likely to have the same effect on the rest of the project. If the manager decides that the cost variance up
to this point in the project is atypical--not typical--then the estimate to complete is the difference between the original
budget for the entire project--the budget at completion (BAC)--and the earned value (EV) up to that point. Expressed as
a formula, ETC = BAC - EV

Estimate to Complete John's Move

In John's move, John was able to buy most of the items at a discount house that did not have a complete inventory and,
he chose to buy an extra pair of lift straps. He knows that the planned values for packing materials were obtained from
the price list at the moving company where he will have to buy the rest of the items, so those two factors are not likely

                                                                                       242
to be typical of the remaining purchases. The reduced cost of lunch is unrelated to the future costs of packing
materials, truck rentals, and hotel fees. John decides that the factors that caused the variances are atypical. He
calculates that the estimate to complete (ETC) is the budget at completion ($1,534) minus the earned value at that
point ($162.10), which equals $1,371.90. Expressed as a formula, ETC = $1,534 - $162.10 = $1,371.90.
If the manager decides that the cost variance is caused by factors that will affect the remaining activities, such as
higher labor and material costs, then the estimate to complete (ETC) needs to be adjusted by dividing it by the cost
performance index (CPI). For example, if labor costs on the first part of a project are estimated at $80,000 (EV) and they
actually cost $85,000 (AC), the cost variance will be 0.94. (Recall that the cost variance = EV/AC).
To calculate the estimate to complete (ETC) assuming the cost variance on known activities is typical of future cost, the
formula is ETC = (BAC - EV)/CPI. If the budget at completion (BAC) of the project is $800,000, the estimate to complete
is ($800,000 - $80,000)/0.94 = $766,000.

Estimate Final Project Cost

If the costs of the activities up to the present vary from the original estimates, it will affect the total estimate for the
project cost. The new estimate of the project cost is the estimate at completion (EAC). To calculate the EAC, the
estimate to complete (ETC) is added to the actual cost (AC) of the activities already performed. Expressed as a
formula, EAC = AC + ETC.

Estimate at Completion for John's Move

The revised estimate at completion (EAC) for John's move at this point in the process is EAC = $154.50 + $1,371.90 =
$1,526.40.
Refer to Figure 9.9 for a summary of terms and formulas.
Figure 9.9
Summary of Terms and Formulas for Earned Value Analysis

                                                                                       243
   KEY TAKEAWAYS

           Extra money is allocated in a contingency fund to deal with activities where costs exceed estimates. Funds
           are allocated in a management reserves in case a significant opportunity or challenge occurs that requires
           change of scope but funds are needed immediately before a scope change can typically be negotiated.
           Schedule variance is the difference between the part of the budget that has been done so far (EV) versus
           the part that was planned to be completed by now (PV). Similarly, the cost variance is the difference
           between the EV and the actual cost (AC).
           The schedule performance index (SPI) is the ratio of the earned value and the planned value. The cost
           performance index (CPI) is the ratio of the earned value (EV) to the actual cost (AC).
           The formula used to calculate the amount of money needed to complete the project (ETC) depends on
           whether or not the cost variance to this point is expected to continue (typical) or not (atypical). If the cost
           variance is atypical, the ETC is simply the original total budget (BAC) minus the earned value (EV). If they
           are typical of future cost variances, the ETC is adjusted by dividing the difference between BAC and EV by
           the CPI.
           The final budget is the actual cost (AC) to this point plus the estimate to complete (ETC).

[1] Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK Guide), 4th ed. (Newtown Square, PA: Project
Management Institute, Inc., 2008), 173.

                                                                                       244
[2] Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK Guide), 4th ed. (Newtown Square, PA: Project
Management Institute, Inc., 2008), 177.

                           This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                           Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/9-2-managing-the-budget.

                                                                                       245
246
9.3

Identifying the Need for Procuring Services

Procurement  Outsourcing Work  Self-performed Work

   LEARNING OBJECTIVES

        1. Identify what factors are considered when deciding to outsource or perform the work within the
           organization.

The decision to procure work from outside companies (outsourcing) or whether to have the project team members
perform the work (self-performed) is decided by the project team. Luu, Ng, and Chen1 studied project procurement
selection priorities and identified budget and schedule as the most important considerations in the decision to
outsource activities. Other factors that must be considered are risk, quality, and flexibility. Self-performing and
outsourcing the work have both benefits and risks. The project procurement strategy begins with these self-perform or
outsourcing evaluations.

Outsourcing Decision

A design company has a contract to build a large training curriculum for a company in downtown New York. Most, if not
all, of the editing and graphic-art work will be contracted with companies that specialize in these areas. Existing
companies that have expertise can provide these project needs faster and at a much lower cost than if the project
manager's organization attempted to build the capacity itself.Some outsourcing decisions--sometimes called make or
buy decisions--are difficult. In the same training project example above, new learning devices and methods are required
that will make the instruction more efficient. The project manager can decide to outsource this portion of the project to
companies that have technological expertise or develop this expertise on the project and self-perform the work. The
costs of developing this expertise within the project will be more expensive and may take more time than outsourcing
this work.

                                                    247
                                               Image by comedy_nose
Self-performing this work also has benefits. The project team would develop this expertise and the additional expertise
would add value to their parent company and save money on future projects. The project management team would have
greater control over the work because the work would be performed by members of the project team instead of
outsiders.

Outsourcing Versus Self-Performing

On the New York project, the project manager decided to outsource the portion of the work that required new methods
and materials. The project team designers evaluated the work during the project and assessed the appropriate methods
and costs for the parent company to develop this capacity within the company. The additional costs of developing the
capacity and the additional risks of implementing a new method with existing resources outweighed the benefits of
developing the capacity within the organization. The basic instructional design activities are the core expertise of the
parent company and the project team had access to the qualified resources to perform the work. The decision to self-
perform this portion of the work was easy because the company had a cost and schedule advantage by using the
existing resources.

   KEY TAKEAWAYS

           The factors that influence procurement are primarily cost and schedule but also include risk, quality, and
           flexibility.
           To determine whether to outsource or do the work within the organization, consider which option is less
           costly and which option can deliver the work on time.

[1] Duc Thanh Luu, S. Thomas Ng, and Swee Eng Chen, "Parameters Governing the Selection of Procurement System," Journal of Engineering, Construction, and
Architectural Management10, no. 3.

                                                                                       248
This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/9-3-identifying-the-need-for-
procuring-services.

                                                        249
250
  9.4

Procurement of Goods

Procurement  Suppliers  Vendors  Partners

   LEARNING OBJECTIVES

        1. Describe the role of suppliers.
        2. Describe the role of vendors.
        3. Describe the role of partners.

After the outsourcing versus self-performing decisions are made, the procurement team develops the purchasing plan.
The method of purchasing products or services depends on the uniqueness and importance of the product or service.
One way to organize the procurement plan is by the type of relationship with the providers of the outsourced goods or
services.

Suppliers

Some of the goods or services are commonly available with little variation in quality or availability. Such goods and
services are called commodities. The providers of commodities are suppliers and there are usually several from which
to choose. Purchasing commodities from suppliers focuses on achieving the lowest cost. Additional cost savings are
often available if large quantities of a commodity are purchased from the same supplier.
On larger, more complex projects, a list of materials and supplies is developed from the project cost estimate. This list
is provided to suppliers as a request for quote (RFQ), and the suppliers respond with their lowest price. To avoid
choosing a bid-- a quote that lists the specific materials to be provided, the price for each, and a schedule for delivery-
from a company that will make a promise it cannot keep, many organizations will maintain a list of suppliers that meet
the organization's requirements. These requirements usually include the proven ability to meet the quality and schedule
specifications.
The project management team develops a procedure for requesting a quote. On smaller projects, the parent purchasing
organization may process all RFQs. On larger projects, a procurement organization is established with expertise in
purchasing. The purchasing team will develop a list of all procurement requirements for the project and develop a
procurement schedule that assures the materials will be available to the project when needed.

                                                                                       251
The project team develops an RFQ based on the quantity and schedule needs of the project and sends the RFQ to the
identified qualified suppliers. The project team evaluates each quote from suppliers and determines that the supplier
bid meets all the requirements, and in most cases, the supplier with the lowest price will be awarded the bid.

RFQ for Publishing Contractor

A publishing contractor who is drafting a series of ten math textbooks develops a materials list that includes all the
supplies needed to publish all ten books. The contractor develops an RFQ for all these materials, including the writing
schedule, and submits the RFQ to the four largest writing guild companies in the region. Each of the guild companies
decides to bid on the project and provides a bid for the materials in the RFQ. One of the bidders has the lowest price but
is unable to deliver the materials to the client site. The project team calculates the cost of transporting the materials to
the client site. After the cost of transportation is added to the bid, it is no longer the lowest total cost. The bidder with
the total lowest total cost is awarded the contract.

Some organizations that do a large number of projects will develop a relationship with one or two suppliers based on
developing cost savings for both organizations. This relationship is commonly called a key supplier relationship.

Key Supplier for Publishing Supplies

The publishing contractor develops a key supplier relationship with one or two of the material supply companies. The
material supply company would guarantee a 10% discount on all materials and the contractor would promise to
purchase exclusively from the key supplier. Both organizations save the cost and time associated with preparing the
bid. The publishing supply company plans on a consistent volume of business from the contractor and the contractor
can expect priority treatment when supplies are scarce.

Vendors

Vendors often provide a unique product or service that cannot be readily purchased in the marketplace. The vendor
typically provides a product or service that is designed for the project. The following are examples of products or
services provided by vendors:

      Artwork
      Software developers and programs
      Publishers

Products and services from vendors need input and insight from the vendor. Instead of issuing a request for quote
(RFQ) for a list of commodities, the project team issues a request for proposal (RFP). Companies responding to an RFP
are invited to provide creative approaches to adding value to the project. Bidders are encouraged to offer design
alternatives, alternative uses of materials, and scheduling alternatives that meet all the project requirements and also
reduce the total project cost. The bids are evaluated on the total value to the project, including the contribution to the
project goals.

Because vendor performance is critical to the success of the project, the management of the vendor relationship is a
project management priority. Project management will often implement processes that encourage the vendors to
submit suggestions that will reduce total project cost, shorten the schedule, or improve the performance. The project
management team will often assign someone from the team to monitor the relationship and provide support from
project resources to help assure vendor success.

Partners

If the parent organization lacks key skills or relationships, it might work with other organizations as partners--especially
on international projects.

                                                                                       252
A partnership is a formal arrangement to execute the project with each party contributing resources. In most
partnerships, both parties benefit from the success of the project and share the costs associated with a less successful
project. Critical to the success of a partnership is the clear definition of roles and responsibilities on the project, a
common understanding of the project goals, and a scope of work for each partner.
Building the relationship between major partners on the project is similar to building relationships with clients. On a
large, complex project, a partnership alignment session is often required to build the trust required for open
communication channels. Maintaining the relationship permits more effective problem solving and coordinated action
on the project. A well-managed partnering relationship can contribute to the achievement of project goals, reduce
overall costs, and shorten the project schedule. In most cases, the parent organization is aware of weaknesses in the
project resources or skills and searches for a potential partner that has the needed resources or skills.

PR Partnership

On a project in Puerto Rico, an instructional design company wanted a Puerto Rican public relations firm to market their
product because of their expertise with the locale. Both companies researched the capability of the other company to
assure that the partnership was appropriate for each of them. This was a situation where a partnering relationship
would benefit the project--both companies would mutually support each other to achieve project goals and both would
benefit from project success.
In this situation, the project procurement plan specified the development of a subcontract for the PR services, and a
contract was developed with a clear scope of work and a cost based on completing the work in the contract on time
and according to specification. Because the project schedule required the PR firm to begin work before all the needed
information was available, change orders were required when new information became available. The contract allowed
several days to evaluate the impact of the change on cost and schedule, and the time evaluation process began to
cause delays in the project.
Eventually, a new contract was developed to make the Puerto Rican company a partner. These new partnering
arrangements allowed PR to get early information and contribute ideas that would shorten the schedule. This case is an
example of the need to evaluate the project goals and environment and develop a procurement strategy that matches
the conditions of the project.

   KEY TAKEAWAYS

           Commodities are purchased through suppliers using a request for quote (RFQ) and selected on the basis of
           price. An exception is the key supplier relationship where the supplier-organization relationship is long term
           and the supplier passes along some of the savings of avoiding the bidding process.
           Vendors provide products and services that are designed for the project based on a request for proposal
           (RFP) that invites the vendors to meet the goals of the request using their products and skills.
           If the organization lacks key skills or relationships, it might form a partnership arrangement with another
           company to share the benefits and risks of the project.

                                                                                       253
This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/9-4-procurement-of-goods.

                                                        254
  9.5

Selecting the Type of Contract

Cost  Fixed Cost Contracts  Cost Reimbursable Contracts  Scope of Work

   LEARNING OBJECTIVES

        1. Identify factors that determine which type of contract to select.
        2. Describe the types of fixed cost contracts.
        3. Describe the types of cost reimbursable contracts.
        4. Understand progress payments and how to reduce problems in changing the contractors' scope of work.

An agreement between the organization and an outside provider of a service or materials is a contract. To limit
misunderstandings and make them more legally binding, contracts are usually written documents that describe the
obligations of both parties and are signed by those with authority to represent the interests of the parties.

Because legal agreements often create risk for the parent organization, procurement activities are often guided by the
policies and procedures of the parent organization. After the project management team develops an understanding of
what portions of the project work will be outsourced and defines the type of relationships that are needed to support
the project execution plan, the procurement team begins to develop the contracting plan. On smaller, less complex
projects, the contract development and execution is typically managed through the parent company or by a part-time
person assigned to the project. On larger, more complex projects, the procurement team can consist of work teams
within the procurement function with special expertise in contracting. The contract plan defines the relationship
between the project and the subcontractors (supplier, vendor, or partner) and also defines a process for making
changes in the agreement to accommodate changes that will occur on the project. This change management process
is similar to the change management process used with the project agreement with the project client.

                            255
                                               Image by gibsonsgolfer

The contracting plan of the project supports the procurement approach of the project. The following are some factors
to consider when selecting the type of contract:

      The uncertainty of the scope of work needed
      The party assuming the risk of unexpected cost increases
      The importance of meeting the scheduled milestone dates
      The need for predictable project costs

There are several types of contracting approaches and each supports different project environments and project
approaches. The legal contracts that support the procurement plan consist of two general types of contract: the fixed-
price and the cost-reimbursable contracts, with variations on each main type.

Fixed-Price Contracts

The fixed-price contract is a legal agreement between the project organization and an entity (person or company) to
provide goods or services to the project at an agreed-on price. The contract usually details the quality of the goods or
services, the timing needed to support the project, and the price for delivering goods or services. There are several
variations of the fixed price contract. For commodities and goods and services where the scope of work is very clear
and not likely to change, the fixed price contract offers a predictable cost. The responsibility for managing the work to
meet the needs of the project is focused on the contractor. The project team tracks the quality and schedule progress to
assure the contractors will meet the project needs. The risks associated with fixed price contracts are the costs
associated with project change. If a change occurs on the project that requires a change order from the contractor, the
price of the change is typically very high. Even when the price for changes is included in the original contract, changes
on a fixed-price contract will create higher total project costs than other forms of contracts because the majority of the
cost risk is transferred to the contractor, and most contractors will add a contingency to the contract to cover their
additional risk.

Fixed-price contracts require the availability of at least two or more suppliers that have the qualifications and
performance histories that assure the needs of the project can be met. The other requirement is a scope of work that is
most likely not going to change. Developing a clear scope of work based on good information, creating a list of highly
qualified bidders, and developing a clear contract that reflects that scope of work are critical aspects of a good fixed-
priced contract.

                                                                                       256
If the service provider is responsible for incorporating all costs, including profit, into the agreed-on price, it is a fixed-
total-cost contract. The contractor assumes the risks for unexpected increases in labor and materials that are needed
to provide the service or materials and in the materials and timeliness needed.
The fixed-price contract with price adjustment is used for unusually long projects that span years. The most common
use of this type of contract is the inflation-adjusted price. In some countries, the value of its local currency can vary
greatly in a few months, which affects the cost of local materials and labor. In periods of high inflation, the client
assumes risk of higher costs due to inflation, and the contract price is adjusted based on an inflation index. The
volatility of certain commodities can also be accounted for in a price adjustment contract. For example, if the price of
oil significantly affects the costs of the project, the client can accept the oil price volatility risk and include a provision in
the contract that would allow the contract price adjustment based on a change in the price of oil.
The fixed-price with incentive fee is a contract type that provides an incentive for performing on the project above the
established baseline in the contract. The contract might include an incentive for completing the work on an important
milestone for the project. Often contracts have a penalty clause if the work is not performed according to the contract.
For example, if the new software is not completed in time to support the implementation of the training, the contract
might penalize the software company a daily amount of money for every day the software is late. This type of penalty is
often used when the software is critical to the project and the delay will cost the project significant money.
If the service or materials can be measured in standard units, but the amount needed is not known accurately, the price
per unit can be fixed--a fixed unit price contract. The project team assumes the responsibility of estimating the number
of units used. If the estimate is not accurate, the contract does not need to be changed, but the project will exceed the
budgeted cost.

Figure 9.10 Table of Fixed Price Contracts and Characteristics

Cost-Reimbursable Contracts

In a cost-reimbursable contract, the organization agrees to pay the contractor for the cost of performing the service or
providing the goods. Cost-reimbursable contracts are also known as cost-plus contracts. Cost-reimbursable contracts
are most often used when the scope of work or the costs for performing the work are not well known. The project uses
a -reimbursable contract to pay the contractor for allowable expenses related to performing the work. Since the cost of
the project is reimbursable, the contractor has much less risk associated with cost increases. When the costs of the
work are not well known, a cost-reimbursable contract reduces the amount of money the bidders place in the bid to
account for the risk associated with potential increases in costs. The contractor is also less motivated to find ways to
reduce the cost of the project unless there are incentives for supporting the accomplishment of project goals.

                                                                                       257
Cost-reimbursable contracts require good documentation of the costs that occurred on the project to assure that the
contractor gets paid for all the work performed and to assure that the organization is not paying for something that was
not completed. The contractor is also paid an additional amount above the costs. There are several ways to
compensate the contractor.

     A cost-reimbursable contract with a fixed fee provides the contractor with a fee, or profit amount, that is
      determined at the beginning of the contract and does not change.
     A cost-reimbursable contract with a percentage fee pays the contractor for costs plus a percentage of the costs,
      such as 5% of total allowable costs. The contractor is reimbursed for allowable costs and is paid a fee.
     A cost-reimbursable contract with an incentive fee is used to encourage performance in areas critical to the
      project. Often the contract attempts to motivate contractors to save or reduce project costs. The use of the cost
      reimbursable contract with an incentive fee is one way to motivate cost reduction behaviors.
     A cost-reimbursable contract with award fee reimburses the contractor for all allowable costs plus a fee that is
      based on performance criteria. The fee is typically based on goals or objectives that are more subjective. An
      amount of money is set aside for the contractor to earn through excellent performance, and the decision on how
      much to pay the contractor is left to the judgment of the project team. The amount is sufficient to motivate
      excellent performance.
On small activities that have a high uncertainty, the contractor might charge an hourly rate for labor, plus the cost of
materials, plus a percentage of the total costs. This type of contract is called time and materials (T&M). Time is usually
contracted on an hourly rate basis and the contractor usually submits time sheets and receipts for items purchased on
the project. The project reimburses the contractor for the time spent based on an agreed-on rate and the actual cost of
the materials. The fee is typically a percentage of the total cost.
Time and materials contracts are used on projects for work that is smaller in scope and has uncertainty or risk and the
project, rather than the contractor, assumes the risk. Since the contractor will most likely include contingency in the
price of other types of contracts to cover the high risk, T&M contracts provide lower total cost to the project.

Figure 9.11 Table of Contract Types and Characteristics

To minimize the risk to the project, the contract typically includes a not-to-exceed amount, which means the contract
can only charge up to the agreed amount. The T&M contract allows the project to make adjustments as more
information is available. The final cost of the work is not known until sufficient information is available to complete a
more accurate estimate.

                                                                                       258
PROGRESS PAYMENTS AND CHANGE MANAGEMENT

Vendors and suppliers usually require payments during the life of the contract. On contracts that last several months,
the contractor will incur significant cost and will want the project to pay for these costs as early as possible. Rather than
wait until the end of the contract, a schedule of payments is typically developed as part of the contract and is connected
to the completion of a defined amount of work or project milestones. These payments made before the end of the
project and based on the progress of the work are called progress payments. For example, the contract might develop a
payment schedule that pays for the development of the curriculum, and payment is made when the curriculum is
completed and accepted. There is a defined amount of work to be accomplished, a time frame for accomplishing that
work, and a quality standard the work must achieve before the contractor is paid for the work.
Just as the project has a scope of work that defines what is included in the project and what work is outside the project,
vendors and suppliers have a scope of work that defines what they will produce or supply to the company. (Partners
typically share the project scope of work and may not have a separate scope of work.) Often changes occur on the
project that require changes in the contractor's scope of work. How these changes will be managed during the life of
the project is typically documented in the contract. Capturing these changes early, documenting what changed and how
the change impacted the contract, and developing a change order (a change to the contract) are important to
maintaining the progress of the project. Conflict among team members will often arise when changes are not
documented or when the team cannot agree on the change. Developing and implementing an effective change
management process for contractors and key suppliers will minimize this conflict and the potential negative effect on
the project.

   KEY TAKEAWAYS

           Contract selection is based on uncertainty of scope, assignment of risk, need for predictable costs, and the
           importance of meeting milestone dates.
           Total fixed cost is a single price where the scope is well defined. A fixed price with incentive contract offers
           a reward for finishing early or under budget or a penalty for being late. A fixed price with adjustment allows
           for increases in cost of materials or changes in currency values. A fixed unit price contract sets a price per
           unit, but the exact number of units is not known.
           In a cost reimbursable contract, the project pays for costs. A cost plus fixed fee contract assures the
           contractor of a known fee. A cost plus percentage fee calculates the fee as a percentage of the costs. A
           cost plus incentive fee sets goals for the contractor to achieve that would result in a bonus. A cost plus
           award fee is similar, but the goals are more subjective. Time and materials contracts pay for costs plus an
           hourly rate for the contractor's time.
           Payments to vendors and suppliers are required during the course of the project. A change management
           system needs to be in place when dealing with vendors and suppliers.

                                                                                       259
This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/9-5-selecting-the-type-of-
contract.

                                                        260
9.6

Procurement Process

Procurement  Contracts  Bids

   LEARNING OBJECTIVES

        1. Describe the components of the procurement plan.
        2. Identify the decisions made when selecting the type of contract.
        3. Describe how bidders are qualified, solicited, and chosen.
        4. Identify the methods used to manage the contracts.

The project procurement cycle reflects the procurement activities from the decision to purchase the material or service
through to the payment of bills and closing of procurement contracts.

                        Image by Jeremy Lim

                                                        261
Procurement Plan

After the decision has been made to purchase goods or outsource services, the procurement team develops a plan that
includes the following:

      Selecting the appropriate relationships and contract approaches for each type of purchased goods or outsourced
      service
      Preparing RFQs and RFPs and evaluating partnership opportunities
      Evaluating RFQs, RFPs, and partnerships
      Awarding and signing contracts
      Managing quality, timely performance
      Managing contract changes
      Closing contracts

Depending on the complexity level of the project, each of these steps can take either hours or sometimes weeks of
work to complete. Each of these steps is also included in the project master schedule. The time involved in the
procurement cycle can influence the scheduling of critical activities, including the decision to self-perform the work or
contract the work to others. The equipment and materials delivery dates and completion of contracted work dates are
placed on the project schedule and any procurement activities that create a project delay or fall on the project critical
path may require special attention.

Selecting the Contract Approach

The technical teams typically develop a description of the work that will be outsourced. From this information, the
project management team answers the following questions:

      Is the required work or materials a commodity, customized product or service, or unique skill or relationship?
      What type of relationship is needed: supplier, vendor, or partnership?
      How should the supplier, vendor, or potential partner be approached: RFQ, RFP, or personal contact?
      How well known is the scope of work?
      What are the risks and which party should assume which types of risk?
      Does the procurement of the service or goods affect activities on the project schedule's critical path and how much
      float is there on those activities?
      How important is it to be sure of the cost in advance?

The procurement team uses the answers to the first three questions listed above to determine the approach to
obtaining the goods or services and the remaining questions to determine what type of contract is most appropriate.

A key factor in selecting the contract approach is determining which party will take the most risk. The team determines
the level of risk that will be managed by the project and what risks will be transferred to the contractor. Typically, the
project management team wants to manage the project risk, but in some cases, contractors have more expertise or
control that enable them to better manage the risk associated with the contracted work.

Soliciting Bids

A solicitation is the process of requesting a price and supporting information from bidders. The solicitation usually
takes the form of either an RFQ or an RFP. Partnerships are pursued and established on a case-by-case basis by senior
management.

Qualifying Bidders

Potential bidders are people or organizations capable of providing the materials or performing the work required for the
project. On smaller, less complex projects, the parent company typically has a list of suppliers and vendors that have
successfully provided goods and services in the past, and the project has access to the performance record of

                                                                                       262
companies on that list. On unique projects, where no supplier lists exist, the project team develops a list of potential
suppliers and then qualifies them to become eligible to bid on project work. Eligible bidders are placed on the bidders
list and provided with a schedule of when work on the project will be bid.

The eligibility of a supplier is determined by the ability to perform the work in a way that meets project requirements and
demonstrates financial stability. Ability to perform the work includes the ability to meet quality specifications and meet
the project schedule. During times when economic activity is high in a region, many suppliers become busy and stretch
their resources. The project team investigates the potential suppliers to assure they have the capacity and the track
record of meeting deadlines before they are included on the bidder's list.

The potential supplier must also be financially stable to be included on the bidders list. A credit check or a financial
report from Dun and Bradstreet (D&B)--a well-known provider of financial information about individual companies--will
provide the project with information about the potential bidder's financial status. D&B services include the following:

      D&B proprietary rankings and predictive creditworthiness scores
     Public filings, including suits, liens, judgments, and UCC filings--standardized financial disclosure documents that
      conform to the uniform commercial code
      Comprehensive payment history, including D&B's Paydex Scores
      Company financial statements and history

Request for Quote

An RFQ focuses on price. The type of materials or service is well defined and can be obtained from several sources. The
bidder that can meet the project quality and schedule requirements usually wins the contract by quoting the lowest
price.

Request for Proposal

An RFP accounts for price but focuses on meeting the project quality or schedule requirements. The process of
developing a proposal in response to an RFP can be very expensive for the bidder, and the project team should not issue
an RFP to a company that is not eligible to win the bid.

Evaluating Bids

Evaluation of bids in response to RFQs for commodity items and services is heavily graded for price. In most cases, the
lowest total price will win the contract. The total price will include the costs of the goods or services, any shipping or
delivery costs, the value of any warranties, and any additional service that adds value to the project.

The evaluation of bids based on RFPs is more complex. The evaluation of proposals includes the price and also an
evaluation of the technical approach chosen by the bidder. The project team evaluating the proposal must include
people with the expertise to understand the technical aspects of the various proposal options and the value of each
proposal to the project. On more complex projects, the administrative part of the proposal is evaluated and scored by
one team, and the technical aspect of the proposal is evaluated by another team. The project team combines the two
scores to determine the best proposal for the project.

Awarding the Contract

After the project team has selected the bidder that provides the best value to the project, a project representative
validates all conditions of the bid and the contract with the potential contractor. Less complex awards, like contracts for
printed materials, require a reading and signing of the contract to assure the printed materials supplier understands the
contract terms and requirements of the project schedule. More complex projects require a detailed discussion of the
goals, the potential barriers to accomplishing those goals, the project schedule and critical dates, and the processes for
resolving conflicts and improving work processes.

                                                                                       263
Planning Session Follows Contract Award

On a design project to create a major training for a world-wide company, the project manager invited two critical
partners to a three-day planning session after the project contracts were awarded.

The project manager began the session by stating that the project leadership intended to create an environment that
enabled each of the partners to exceed profit expectations on the project and that the only way to accomplish this goal
was through a mutually supportive team where everyone contributed to improve project performance and everyone
benefited from better performance. The session then focused on developing ways to resolve problems and increase
performance. Although this may appear to be a simple process of focusing contractors on project success, the process
took several days of lengthy discussion and conflict resolution. The effort invested in developing alignment between the
project team and contractors can significantly improve project performance.

Managing the Contracts

The contract type determines the level of effort and the skills needed to manage the contract. The manager of supplier
contracts develops detailed specifications and assures compliance to these specifications. The manager of vendor
contracts assures the contractors that bid the work have the skills and capacity to accomplish the work according to
the project schedule and tracks the vendor's performance against the project needs, supplying support and direction
when needed. The manager of partnering arrangements develops alignment around common goals and work
processes. Each of these approaches requires different skills and various degrees of effort.

Items that take a long time to acquire--long lead items--receive early attention by the project leadership. Examples of
long lead items are equipment that is designed and built specifically for the project, curriculum that is created for
training a new workforce, and a customized bioreactor for a biotech project. These items might require weeks, months,
and sometimes years to develop and complete. The project team identifies long lead items early to begin the
procurement activities as soon as possible because those procured through the normal procurement cycle may cause
delays in the project.

After the contract is awarded, the project team tracks the performance of the contractor against performance criteria in
the contract and his or her contribution to the performance of the project. Typically, the contractors deliver the product
or service that meets the quality expectations and supports the project schedule. Typically, there are also one or two
contractors that do not perform to project expectations. Some project managers will then pull out the contract and
attempt to persuade the contractor to improve performance or be penalized. Other project managers will explore with
the contractor creative ways to improve performance and meet project requirements. The contract management allows
for both approaches to deal with nonperforming contractors and the project team must assess what method is most
likely to work in each situation.

Managing contractor performance on a project is as important to the overall project outcomes as the work performed
by the project team.

Logistics and Expediting

Equipment and materials that are purchased for use on the project must be transported, inventoried, warehoused, and
often secured. This area of expertise is called logistics. The logistics for the project can be managed by the project
team or can be included in the RFP or RFQ. On international projects, materials may be imported, and the procurement
team manages the customs process. On smaller projects, the logistical function is often provided by the parent
company. On larger projects, these activities are typically contracted to companies that specialize in logistical services.
On larger, more complex projects, that procurement team will include logistical expertise.

The project work often depends on materials procured for the project. The delivery of these materials influences the
scheduling of the project, and often some materials are needed earlier than normal procurement practices would

                                                                                       264
deliver. On long lead items, the project schedule is included in the contracting plans and contractors must explain how
they will support the project schedule.
On large, complex projects, critical items might be scheduled for delivery after they are needed on the project. The
procurement team then explores ideas with the contractor to expedite the manufacturing or transportation of the
equipment or materials. The contract can often place a priority on the fabrication of the equipment and delivery of the
equipment to meet the project schedule. The project logistics team can also explore ways of shortening the
transportation time. For example, a project in Argentina flew some critical equipment from Sweden rather than
transport the equipment by ship to save several weeks in transit. The logistics costs were higher, but the overall value to
the project was greater.

   KEY TAKEAWAYS

           The procurement plan includes determining the category of materials or services, choosing the type of
           contractual relationship, soliciting bids, selecting bidders, managing the work, and closing the contracts.
           The decisions made when selecting the type of contract are based on whether the materials can be
           provided by suppliers, vendors, or partners; how well defined the work is; how the risk will be shared; the
           importance of the task to the schedule; and the need for certainty of the cost.
           Companies that bid on contracts are evaluated on past performance and current financial status. RFQs and
           RFPs are sent to those companies. RFQs are evaluated on price and RFPs are evaluated on price and
           method.
           Long lead time items are identified and monitored. Items that are critical to the schedule or delayed are
           assigned to an expediter. The logistics of handling delivery, storage, and transportation are determined.
           Work and materials are inspected for quality.

                           This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                           Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/9-6-procurement-process.

                                                                                       265
266
  10

Managing Project Quality

Overview

This chapter aligns with chapter 8 of the PMBOK and 7% of the CAPM questions come from this knowledge area. The
content connects to the Planning, Executing and Monitoring & Controlling categories of the PMP questions.
Project quality has a very different definition under instructional design than it has in a traditional manufacturing setting.
Nevertheless, no aspect of the final deliverable is more important than the actual quality and effectiveness of the
educational materials.
Managing project quality within instructional design takes some ingenuity, since any assessment of a project's "quality"
can differ depending on an individual's subjective criteria. The most important judges of the project's quality are your
client and the people who will be using your training.

                                                                                       267
Designers Share Their Experiences

   Dr. Andy Gibbons - Instructional Psychology and Technology - BYU

                                                                               Watch on YouTube

     Well the first thing that you do, is that you hire really capable people. You hire people who are really good at
     what they do. And you wait until you find the really good person that you want. We looked really hard for a
     cartoonist on this project. We were training submarine finding helicopter pilots, and sensor operators, military
     people, and we're going to have some cartooning in our art, we decided. We looked and we looked, and we
     waited and we waited until we found a really good cartoonist. Sometimes when you get the quality worker, you
     get all the quality workers quirks with him, and so, we had to manage this cartoonist. That was quite a revealing
     experience. So number one, you get the best people you can, people who are competent, people who are good
     because those people are also usually fast. The second thing you do is, you're innovative in your designs. You
     design your materials, how do you describe it? You design your materials so they can be created by, according
     to some kind of a pattern that people can get used to. You use those patterns as efficiency tools. You control
     costs by not having, in the early days of computer based instruction, people were so inventive, every piece of
     computer based instruction was different in some way. Uniquely, sometimes gothically so. Well, students had to
     learn a whole new system of navigating a lesson. Because in one lesson the controls would be up here, and in
     one lesson the controls would be down here. And so it became confusing. Designers eventually learned how to
     use screen designs that were consistent in the placement of controls. The worldwide web works that way today.
     The controls all work the same regardless of what web page you go to, more or less. One of the things you can
     do for designers is to find these patterns that designers use, I don't want to use the word templates, but
     templates is kind of what it is. Lesson patterns that they use, so that the lessons have the same internal

                                                                                       268
structure. And so you've got one class of lessons, maybe you've got fifteen lessons of this type, that have this
kind of a strategy that require this much writing, this much art. And so you know how much that packet costs.
And then there is this kind over here. It's going to require this kind of graphics, this kind of writing and this
amount. And so you use that as a projection tool. You have to know what the characteristics are of the thing
that you're creating. The advent types become very important to you.

Heather Bryce - Independent Studies - BYU

                                                                         Watch on YouTube

How I balance quality and time and cost is really a factor of my boss. They make the decision on whether to do
a course. Now if we know a course is going to be a high enroller, you have more money to play with on a course.
If a course is a low enroller there might be different reasons for doing that. We have to be stricter about our
budget. So when we meet at the very beginning with the designer, we talk about it and say, okay basically this is
the budget that you've been given. And we've gotten more strict with budget, so then you can fudge with time or
quality. Every project is different. Some projects, you have an absolute deadline that you have to have a course
available. So then, at that point you say, okay, then do we fudge on the quality, or do we fudge on the cost? So it
really depends on each project. For the project that I did, Art 45, we went with quality. That was the one that we
weren't going to sacrifice, and so we sacrificed cost on that one. But there have been other projects that we've
had, where time was a factor and we had to get it out. On those we said, okay, we'll have to not do those videos,
because that's a cost. So we cut our cost and maybe possibly the quality. Every project is different.

                                                                                 269
Dr. Larry Seawright - Center for Teaching and Learning - BYU

                                                                         Watch on YouTube

So that's always a project manager's trade-off. How do you balance quality with time and money? If you had as
much money, regardless of what the project is. Whether it's an instructional design project or building a bridge.
If you have a lot of money and a lot of time you could make a great bridge. If you don't have as much money and
you don't have as much time then your beautiful four lane bridge becomes a two lane bridge and hopefully it's
still earthquake proof and all those kinds of things. So you manage those quality things, but you have to shrink
things down. In our project, the BYU Learning Suite, we have a kind of, pretty fixed quality target, in that there is
an existing learning management system. And so let's say the satisfaction level is here with the existing
management system. So we have to at least hit that target. Now what we've had to do is define what that target
is. Basically that means no outages, we can't look at the history of that learning management system and say,
well when they first started there were lots of outages, and you know, things like that. We can't do that because
when it first started they had one hundred faculty on it. We have eighty percent of the faculty now using the
learning management system, and it affects virtually every student at Brigham Young University. We have to hit
that level of reliability. What we could do is kind of take a look at the quality of the offering in terms of the
number of features that are offered by the current learning management system and what we're going to initially
offer in our new BYU Learning Suite learning management system. And what we did is we took a look at what
are the features that are used by most of the faculty and students most of the time? And deliver those in a way
that's easier to use than the existing system, just as reliable as the existing system. So those are kind of two
quality elements that we looked at. It has to be just as reliable. And it has to be easier to use. And that's kind of
difficult because we think, in our design, we think it's easier to use, but it's different, and so the users may not
think it's easier to use initially. And so there's a training curve and a learning curve. After they use it a little bit
they say, "Oh this is easier to use." But it's like going from one kind of vehicle to another. They're both automatic

                                                                                 270
 transitions, but the shift mechanism is on the column in one and on the middle panel on the other one. And
 some people just never get used to that. Same thing with the learning management system. You click here in
 one, and you click here in another. And people, they'll just never get used to it and they'll think it's not as good.
 Quality is so subjective in applications like this. You just have to do what you can. And then you provide
 instructional help to help address some of those kinds of issues. And that's kind of one of the roles of the
 project manager is you go through and you start evaluating as it comes close to completion, and you start
 testing it within users. You find out what are the issues that they have? And you build just in time help so that
 they can click that little help icon or the help with this page and it brings up appropriate help that says, "Oh, this
 is what that is, now I know what to do." You can address some quality issues with help, but you don't want to
 rely on that. But the old saying of, "it should be so easy, no help is needed." You can almost never rely on that. As
 much as you'd like too.

Standards of Quality and Statistics
Development of Quality as a Competitive Advantage
Relevance of Quality Programs to Project Quality
Planning and Controlling Project Quality
Assuring Quality

                       This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                       Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/10-managing-project-quality.

                                                                                  271
272
10.1

Standards of Quality and Statistics

Statistics  Quality  Grade  Standard Deviation

   Learning Objectives

        1. Define quality and grade.
        2. Define and explain how statistics are used in quality control.
        3. Estimate the likelihood of samples falling within one, two, or three standard deviations of the mean given a

           normal distribution caused by random factors.

Quality and Grade

According to the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), quality is "the degree to which a set of inherent
characteristics fulfill requirements."1 The requirements of a product or process can be categorized or given a grade to
give a basis for comparison. The quality is determined by how well something meets the requirements of its grade.

Quality of Gasoline Grades

Petroleum refiners provide gasoline in several different grades based on the octane rating because higher octane
ratings are suitable for higher compression engines. Gasoline must not be contaminated with dirt or water, and the
actual performance of the fuel must be close to its octane rating. A shipment of low-grade gasoline graded as 87
octane that is free of water or other contaminants would be of high quality, while a shipment of high grade 93 octane
gas that is contaminated with dirt would be of low quality.
For most people, the term quality also implies good value--getting your money's worth. For example, even low-grade
products should still work as expected, be safe to use, and last a reasonable amount of time. Consider the following
examples.

Quality of Furniture Packing in John's Move

John has antique furniture that is in excellent condition that was left to him by his grandmother. The pieces are
important to John for sentimental reasons and they are also valuable. John decides to hire movers (high-grade
professionals) to load his furniture into the truck using appropriate padding and restraints to prevent dents and
scratches during the long trip to Atlanta and then to unload the truck in Atlanta. John's standard for high quality is that
no observable damage occurs to his large pieces of furniture, especially the antiques. If the furniture arrives in his new
apartment without a single dent, scratch, or other damage, the activity will be of high quality.John's standard for packing
his kitchen is lower. His dishes are old and cheap, so he decides to trust his inexperienced friends (low-grade amateurs)

                                                                                       273
to help him pack his kitchen. If a few of the dishes or glassware are chipped or broken in the process, the savings in
labor cost will more than make up for the loss and were still a good value.

Statistics

Determining how well products meet grade requirements is done by taking measurements and then interpreting those
measurements. Statistics--the mathematical interpretation of numerical data--is useful when interpreting large
numbers of measurements and is used to determine how well the product meets a specification when the same
product is made repeatedly. Measurements made on samples of the product must be between control limits--the upper
and lower extremes of allowable variation--and it is up to management to design a process that will consistently
produce products between those limits.

Instructional Designers often use statistics to determine the quality of their designs. Student assessments are one way
in which instructional designers are able to tell whether learning occurs within the control limits.

Setting Control Limits in Gasoline Production

A petroleum refinery produces large quantities of fuel in several grades. Samples of the fuels are extracted and
measured at regular intervals. If a fuel is supposed to have an 87 octane performance, samples of the fuel should
produce test results that are close to that value. Many of the samples will have scores that are different from 87. The
differences are due to random factors that are difficult or expensive to control. Most of the samples should be close to
the 87 rating and none of them should be too far off. The manufacturer has grades of 85 and 89, so they decide that
none of the samples of the 87 octane fuel should be less than 86 or higher than 88.
If a process is designed to produce a product of a certain size or other measured characteristic, it is impossible to
control all the small factors that can cause the product to differ slightly from the desired measurement. Some of these
factors will produce products that have measurements that are larger than desired and some will have the opposite
effect. If several random factors are affecting the process, they tend to offset each other, and the most common results
are near the middle of the range - this phenomenon is called the central limit theorem.

If the range of possible measurement values is divided equally into subdivisions called bins, the measurements can be
sorted, and the number of measurements that fall into each bin can be counted. The result is a frequency distribution
that shows how many measurements fall into each bin. If the effects that are causing the differences are random and
tend to offset each other, the frequency distribution is called a normal distribution, which resembles the shape of a bell
with edges that flare out. The edges of a theoretical normal distribution curve get very close to zero but do not reach
zero.

Normal Distribution of Gasoline Samples

A refinery's quality control manager measures many samples of 87 octane gasoline, sorts the measurements by their
octane rating into bins that are 0.1 octane wide, and then counts the number of measurements in each bin. Then she
creates a frequency distribution chart of the data, as shown in Figure 10.1, "Normal Distribution of Measurements of
Gasoline Samples".
It is common to take samples -- randomly selected subsets from the total population--and measure and compare their
qualities, since measuring the entire population would be cumbersome, if not impossible. If the sample measurements
are distributed equally above and below the center of the distribution as they are in Figure 10.1, the average of those
measurements is also the center value that is called the mean, and is represented in formulas by the lowercase Greek
letter  (pronounced mu). The amount of difference of the measurements from the central value is called the "sample
standard deviation" or just the "standard deviation".

The first step in calculating the standard deviation is subtracting each measurement from the central value (mean) and
then squaring that difference. (Recall from your mathematics courses that squaring a number is multiplying it by itself
and that the result is always positive.) The next step is to sum these squared values and divide by the number of values

                                                                                       274
minus one. The last step is to take the square root. The result can be thought of as an average difference. (If you had
used the usual method of taking an average, the positive and negative numbers would have summed to zero.)
Mathematicians represent the standard deviation with the lowercase Greek letter  (pronounced sigma). If all the
elements of a group are measured, instead of just a sample, it is called the standard deviation of the population and in
the second step, the sum of the squared values is divided by the total number of values.
Figure 10.1
Normal Distribution of Measurements of Gasoline Samples

The chart shows that the most common measurements of octane rating are close to 87 and that the other
measurements are distributed equally above and below 87. The shape of the distribution chart supports the central limit
theorem's assumption that the factors that are affecting the octane rating are random and tend to offset each other,
which is indicated by the symmetric shape. This distribution is a classic example of a normal distribution. The quality
control manager notices that none of the measurements are above 88 or below 86 so they are within control limits and
concludes that the process is working satisfactorily.

Standard Deviation of Gasoline Samples

The refinery's quality control manager uses the standard deviation function in her spreadsheet program to find the
standard deviation of the sample measurements and finds that for her data, the standard deviation is 0.3 octane. She
marks the range on the frequency distribution chart to show the values that fall within one sigma (standard deviation)
on either side of the mean (see figure 10.2).
Figure 10.2
One Sigma Range

                                                                                       275
Most of the measurements are within 0.3 octane of 87.
For normal distributions, about 68.3% of the measurements fall within one standard deviation on either side of the
mean. This is a useful rule of thumb for analyzing some types of data. If the variation between measurements is caused
by random factors that result in a normal distribution and someone tells you the mean and the standard deviation, you
know that a little over two-thirds of the measurements are within a standard deviation on either side of the mean.
Because of the shape of the curve, the number of measurements within two standard deviations is 95.4%, and the
number of measurements within three standard deviations is 99.7%. For example, if someone said the average (mean)
height for adult men in the United States is 5 feet 10 inches (70 inches) and the standard deviation is about 3 inches,
you would know that 68% of the men in the United States are between five feet seven inches (67 inches) and six feet
one inch (73 inches) in height. You would also know that about 95% of the adult men in the United States were between
five feet four inches and six feet four inches tall, and that almost all of them (99.7%) are between five feet one inches
and six feet seven inches tall. These figures are referred to as the 68-95-99.7 rule.
Almost All Samples of Gasoline are Within Three STD
The refinery's quality control manager marks the ranges included within two and three standard deviations, as shown
below.
Figure 10.3
The 68-95-99.7 Rule

                                                                                       276
Some products must have less variability than others to meet their purpose. For example, if training designed to operate
highly specialized and potentially dangerous machinery was assessed for quality, most participants would be expected
to exceed the acceptable pass rate. Three standard deviations from the control limits might be fine for some products
but not for others. In general, if the mean is six standard deviations from both control limits, the likelihood of a part
exceeding the control limits from random variation is practically zero (2 in 1,000,000,000). (Refer to Figure 10.4)
Figure 10.4
Meaning of Sigma Levels

A Step Project Improves Quality of Gasoline
A new refinery process is installed that produces fuels with less variability. The refinery's quality control manager takes
a new set of samples and charts a new frequency distribution diagram, as shown below.
Figure 10.5
Smaller Standard Deviation

                                                                                       277
The refinery's quality control manager calculates that the new standard deviation is 0.2 octane. From this, he can use
the 68-95-99.7 rule to estimate that 68.3% of the fuel produced will be between 86.8 and 87.2 and that 99.7% will be
between 86.4 and 87.6 octane. A shorthand way of describing this amount of control is to say that it is a five-sigma
production system, which refers to the five standard deviations between the mean and the control limit on each side.

   Key Takeaways

           Quality is the degree to which a product or service fulfills requirements and provides value for its price.
           Statistics is the mathematical interpretation of numerical data, and several statistical terms are used in
           quality control. Control limits are the boundaries of acceptable variation.
           If random factors cause variation, they will tend to cancel each other out--the central limit theorem. The
           central point in the distribution is the mean, which is represented by the Greek letter mu, . If you choose
           intervals called bins and count the number of samples that fall into each interval, the result is a frequency
           distribution. If you chart the distribution and the factors that cause variation are random, the frequency
           distribution is a normal distribution, which looks bell shaped.
           The center of the normal distribution is called the mean, and the average variation is calculated in a special
           way that finds the average of the squares of the differences between samples and the mean and then takes
           the square root. This average difference is called the standard deviation, which is represented by the Greek
           letter sigma, .
           About 68% of the samples are within one standard deviation, 95.4% are within two, and 99.7% are within
           three.

References

International Organization for Standardization, Quality Management Systems--Fundamentals and Vocabulary (Geneva:
         ISO Press, 2005), in Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge
         (PMBOK Guide), 4th ed. (Newtown Square, PA: Project Management Institute, Inc., 2008), 190.

                                                                                       278
This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/10-1-standards-of-quality-and-
statistics.

                                                        279
280
10.2

Development of Quality as a Competitive Advantage

Quality  Competitive Advantage  History

   Learning Objectives

        1. Describe the historical events and forces that led up to today's emphasis on quality as a competitive
           requirement.

        2. Describe quality awards in Japan and the United States.
        3. Describe quality programs and standards such as TQM, Six Sigma, and ISO 9000.
        4. Describe and calculate the cost of quality.

Quality management is an approach to work that has become increasingly important in every field, including
instructional design, as global cooperation and competition have increased. A review of the history of quality
management explains why it is so important for you to understand and why clients often require documentation to
show that your processes satisfy their quality standards.

History

Prior to the late 1700s, products such as firearms and clocks were made as unique, individual works. If a part broke, a
new one had to be made by hand to fit. In 1790 in France, Honor Blanc demonstrated that he could make musket parts
so nearly identical that a musket could be assembled from bins of parts chosen at random.1 The practice of making
parts to a high level of accuracy in their dimensions and finishes made the parts interchangeable. The use of
interchangeable parts became the founding principle of assembly-line manufacturing to produce all manner of goods
from sewing machines to automobiles to computer chips. The manufacturers of firearms and weapons were often the
leaders in improving quality because reliable and safe operation of weapons and their rapid repair is a matter of life and
death.

Statistical Control in the United States During World War II

During World War II, factories were converted from manufacturing consumer goods to weapons. War plants had to
make large numbers of parts as fast as possible while doing it safely for the workers and for the service members who
used them. Important improvements in quality control (QC)--the management of production standards through
statistical interpretation of random product measurements, which emphasizes consistency and accuracy--were made
during this period.

                                                                                       281
A key figure in the history of quality management who was an important person in the war effort was Walter Shewhart
at Bell Telephone Laboratories. Shewhart recognized that real processes seldom behaved like theoretical random
distributions and tended to change with time. He separated causes of variation into two categories: chance cause and
assignable cause. Chance causes could be ignored if they did not cause too much variation, and trying to eliminate
them often made the problem worse, but assignable causes could be fixed. To help distinguish between variations
caused by random events and trends that indicated assignable causes, Shewhart introduced the control chart, which is
also known as a type of run chart because data are collected while the process is running. A control chart has time on
the bottom axis and a plot of sample measurements. The mean, upper control limit, lower control limit, and warning
lines that are two sigma from the mean are indicated by horizontal lines.

Control Chart Shows Production Variation of Gasoline

The refinery quality control manager takes samples each day of the 87 octane gasoline for twenty days and charts the
data on a control chart, as shown below.
Figure 10.6
Control Chart Displaying Variations Due to Chance Causes

She recognizes that the highest and lowest measurements are not part of a trend and are probably due to chance
causes. However, the control chart from the next twenty days, as shown below, indicates an upward trend that might be
due to an assignable cause. She alerts the process manager to let him know that there is a problem that needs to be
fixed before the product exceeds the upper control limit. This might indicate the need to initiate a project to fix the
problem.
Figure 10.7
Control Chart Displaying Variations That Might Be Due to an Assignable Cause

                                                                                       282
Deming and Postwar Japan

The most influential person in modern quality control was an American who was a hero in Japan but virtually unknown
in the United States. W. Edwards Deming worked with Shewhart at Bell Labs and helped apply Shewhart's ideas to
American manufacturing processes during World War II. Following the war, American factories returned to the
production of consumer goods. Many of the other major manufacturing centers in the world had been damaged by
bombing during the war and took time to recover. Without the safety needs of wartime and with little competition,
quality control was not a high priority for American companies.2 Management in the United States focused on
increasing production to meet demand and lowering costs to increase profits.

After the war, while the United States occupied Japan, Deming was asked by the U.S. Department of the Army to assist
with the statistics of the 1950 census in Japan. Kenichi Koyanagi, the managing director of the Union of Japanese
Scientists and Engineers and a very influential industrialist, asked Deming to speak to twenty-one top industrial leaders
on the topic of global strategy for Japanese industry. Deming went beyond Shewhart's work and talked about his
philosophy of quality manufacturing and how the responsibility for quality begins with management. He explained that
a corporate culture devoted to producing high-quality products would result in less waste, lower costs, greater client
loyalty, and greater market share. With Koyanagi's support, Deming's ideas were widely adopted by these influential
leaders.

Deming described his philosophy as a system of profound knowledge, which has four parts:

  1. Appreciation of a system. Understanding how suppliers, producers, and clients interact.
  2. Knowledge of variation. Understanding statistical variation.
  3. Theory of knowledge. Understanding what can be known and what cannot.
  4. Knowledge of psychology. Understanding human nature.
In 1950, the Japanese created the Deming prize in Deming's honor, which is awarded to an individual and a company
for major advances in quality improvements. In 1960, Deming was awarded the Order of the Sacred Treasure, Second
Class by the Prime Minister on behalf of Emperor Hirohito.

                                                                                       283
                                   Image by Shane Global Language Centres

Quality Management in America

By the 1970s, Japanese companies had a reputation for high quality and were taking market share from American
companies, but Deming's teachings were virtually unknown in his own country. It was not until 1980 that America
became aware of Deming when his work was described in an NBC documentary titled If Japan Can, Why Can't We?3 By
then, Deming was eighty years old and the producer of the show originally assumed he was dead.4
In 1982, Deming's book was published and later retitled Out of Crisis, in 1986.5 It was aimed at explaining his system to
American manufacturers and the American public. In the book, Deming described fourteen principles of management to
guide the implementation of his philosophy. Some of them were challenges to Western managers and very different
from the thinking that was prevalent at the time. In brief, they are as follows:

                                                                                       284
  1. Create constancy of purpose toward improvement of product and service.
  2. Adopt a new philosophy. We are in a new economic age. Western management must awaken to the challenge,

      learn their responsibilities, and take on leadership for a change.
  3. Cease dependence on inspection to achieve quality. Eliminate the need for inspection on a mass basis by building

      quality into the product in the first place.
  4. End the practice of awarding business on the basis of price tag. Instead, minimize cost. Move toward a single

      supplier for any one item, on a long-term relationship of loyalty and trust.
  5. Improve constantly and forever the system of production and service to improve quality and productivity and thus

      constantly decrease costs.
  6. Institute training on the job.
  7. Institute leadership. The aim of supervision should be to help people and machines and gadgets to do a better job.

      Supervision of management is in need of overhaul, as well as supervision of production workers.
  8. Drive out fear, so that everyone may work effectively for the company.
  9. Break down barriers between departments.
 10. Eliminate slogans, exhortations, and targets for the workforce asking for zero defects and new levels of

      productivity.
 11. Eliminate work standards (quotas) on the factory floor. Substitute leadership.
 12. Remove barriers that rob the hourly worker of his right to pride of workmanship.
 13. Institute a vigorous program of education and self-improvement.
 14. Put everybody in the company to work to accomplish the transformation. The transformation is everybody's job.

Between 1979 and 1982, Ford Motor Company lost $3 billion, and they were looking for solutions to their problems.
They chose to apply Deming's approach to develop the new Taurus-Sable model and by 1986 had become the most
profitable American auto company.6

Ford adopted a Japanese approach to quality known in America as total quality management (TQM). TQM in Japan has
four major components:

  1. Kaizen. Improvement must involve all members of a company.7
  2. Atarimae hinshitsu. Make things work the way they are supposed to work.8
  3. Kansei. Learn from the way a user applies the product to make improvements.9
  4. Miryokuteki hinshitsu. Things should have an aesthetic quality and be pleasing to use.10

According to Peter B. Petersen,11 TQM differs from the Deming approach in four fundamental ways:

  1. The Deming approach represents one philosophy that is used in its entirety or not at all. In contrast, TQM can be
      tailored to a particular environment.

  2. Both agree that a long-term commitment is required by top management. However, Deming would drop clients if
      they started to wane, while TQM consultants were less demanding.

  3. Deming insists on constancy of purpose, while TQM adapts to the situation, which results in lack of constancy.
  4. Deming requires adoption of his principles of profound knowledge, while TQM lacks this unified philosophy.

Many poorly qualified consulting firms provided training in TQM to American companies. The approach worked in some
cases but not in others where it was applied superficially, and the movement's credibility was diminished.

Another approach to quality management in the United States was formulated at Motorola in 1986 and was named Six
Sigma (6). The Six Sigma practices were based on Deming's work, TQM, and others and had similarities regarding
continuous efforts at improvement involving everyone at the company. It emphasized a clear focus on achieving
quantifiable financial returns from any Six Sigma project. To determine the financial return on a quality initiative, the
cost of quality (COQ) must be determined. The cost of quality has two parts: the cost of prevention and the cost of
failure (or nonconformance). The cost of quality is the difference between the additional money spent on prevention
and the corresponding reduction in the cost of failure.

                                                                                       285
Cost of prevention

  1. Cost of conformance. Cost to improve quality
  2. Cost of appraisal. Cost to measure and evaluate quality

Cost of failure

  1. Internal costs. Repairing bad parts before shipment or retooling a manufacturing line to reduce failures
  2. External costs. Managing returns, lawsuits, product recalls

The name Six Sigma refers to a process that has six standard deviations from the mean to either control limit that
would ensure virtually zero defects. This approach was adopted by Jack Welch at General Electric with great success.
By the late 1990s, about two-thirds of the top five hundred companies in the United States had begun Six Sigma
projects, including Ford, which had allowed its quality programs to slip. To provide encouragement and a consistent
standard, the U.S. government created the Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award in 1987 to encourage companies
to improve quality; the award was named for Malcolm Baldrige who was the U.S. secretary of commerce from 1981 to
1987.12 The criteria used to determine award winners are as follows:

  1. Leadership of senior executives
  2. Strategic planning
  3. Customer and market focus
  4. Measurement, analysis, and knowledge management
  5. Workforce focus
  6. Process management
  7. Results

Often, instructional designers will be working with others who focus on quality within their organizations. Quality is
usually associated with the evaluation portion of instructional design. It is important to understand the current quality
management models that are employed so that evaluation of a design can be in line with organizational expectations.

Trade and International Standards

Trade between countries increased as countries recovered from WWII and began producing consumer goods. In 1948,
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) established the rules for international trade in the postwar world.
Through years of negotiations based on GATT, the World Trade Organization (WTO) was created in 1995. The WTO is a
negotiating forum where governments can discuss ways to help trade flow as freely as possible.13

Increases in trade forced companies to improve the quality of their products to compete for clients and to exchange
parts reliably between companies that used parts suppliers. To assist in developing standards for quality that would be
the same between countries, an organization of 158 national standards groups formed the International Organization
for Standardization (ISO), which is headquartered in Switzerland. There are thousands of ISO standards, and they are
grouped by their numbers. The ISO 9000 group of standards relate to quality.

Recommended steps for implementing a quality management system (QMS) are as follows:

  1. Fully engage top management.
  2. Identify key processes and the interactions needed to meet quality objectives.
  3. Implement and manage the QMS and its processes.
  4. Build your ISO 9001-based QMS.
  5. Implement the system, train company staff, and verify effective operation of your processes.
  6. Manage your QMS--focus on client satisfaction, strive for continual improvement.
  7. If necessary, seek third-party certification and registration of the QMS, or alternatively, issue a self-declaration of

      conformity.14

                                                                                       286
   Key Takeaways

           The need for production of safe, reliable weapons that could be mass produced led to use of methods to
           assure that parts were manufactured within controlled limits. An early example is the interchangeable
           musket parts produced in France in 1790 and, later, the quality control methods introduced by Shewhart in
           the United States during World War II.
           Following World War II, Japanese companies followed advice from Deming and others to make quality a
           top priority for management. Higher-quality products gave Japan a competitive advantage with U.S.
           consumers that forced U.S. firms to respond with similar quality programs.
           The Deming award is given by Japan to companies doing business in Japan for high-quality standards.
           Similarly, the Baldrige National Quality Award is given to U.S. companies and individuals for their
           contribution to quality.
           Total quality management is a flexible program that is adapted from Japanese practices that emphasize
           kaizen, participation by all; atarimaie hinshitsu, making things work the way they should; kansei, learning
           from the way the client uses the product to make improvements; and miryokuteki hinshitsu, giving products
           an aesthetic quality to make them pleasing to use. Six Sigma identifies specialists within the organization
           and assigns titles like Master Black Belt. Each quality project must evaluate the cost of quality to gain
           approval.
           The International Standards Institute devises guidelines for establishing practices. The ISO 9000 group are
           guidelines for establishing practices that are likely to create quality products.
           The cost of quality has two parts: the cost of prevention and the cost of failure. The cost of prevention
           includes costs to establish quality practices and the costs to verify them. The cost of failure includes
           internal costs before the product is sold, such as waste and fixing products, while external costs include
           those that occur after the product is sold, such as returns and lawsuits.

References

Ken Alder, "Innovation and Amnesia: Engineering Rationality and the Fate of Interchangeable Parts Manufacturing in
         France," Technology and Culture 38, no 2 (April 1997): 273-311.

John Dowd, "How the Japanese Learned to Compete," Asia Times, October 27, 2006,
         http://www.atimes.com/atimes/Japan/HJ27Dh01.html (accessed August 11, 2009).

John Dowd, "How the Japanese Learned to Compete," Asia Times, October 27, 2006,
         http://www.atimes.com/atimes/Japan/HJ27Dh01.html (accessed August 11, 2009).

Thomas J. Boardman, "The Statistician Who Changed the World: W. Edwards Deming, 1900-1993," The American
         Statistician 48 (August 1994): 179-87.

W. Edwards Deming, Out of the Crisis (Boston: MIT Press, 1982).

Andrea Gabor, "Ford Embraces Six-Sigma Quality Goals," June 13, 2001, http://andreagabor.com/selected-
         articles/management-quality-revival-part-2-ford-embraces-six-sigma/ (accessed December 4, 2012).

Encyclopedia Britannica, s.v. "Total Quality Control," http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/1387304/Total-
         Quality-Control (accessed August 13, 2009).

                                                                                       287
NationMaster.com, "Miryokuteki Hinshitsu," 2005, http://www.statemaster.com/encyclopedia/Miryokuteki-Hinshitsu
         (accessed August 14, 2009).

WASEDA University, "Kansei Quality," http://www.tqm.mgmt.waseda.ac.jp/study/kansei_e.html (accessed June 20,
         2010).

NationMaster.com, "Miryokuteki Hinshitsu," 2005, http://www.statemaster.com/encyclopedia/Miryokuteki-Hinshitsu
         (accessed August 14, 2009).

Peter B. Petersen, "Total Quality Management and the Deming Approach to Quality Management," Journal of
         Management History 5, no. 8 (1999): 468-88.

National Institute of Standards and Technology, "Frequently Asked Questions about the Malcolm Baldrige National
         Quality Award," November 25, 2008, http://www.nist.gov/public_affairs/factsheet/baldfaqs.cfm (accessed
         August 14, 2009).

World Trade Organization, "Understanding the WTO: Basics,"
         http://www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/whatis_e/tif_e/fact1_e.htm (accessed August 14, 2009).

International Organization for Standardization, Quality Management Systems--Fundamentals and Vocabulary (Geneva:
         ISO Press, 2005), in Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge
         (PMBOK Guide), 4th ed. (Newtown Square, PA: Project Management Institute, Inc., 2008).

                           This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                           Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/10-2-development-of-quality-as-
                           a-competitive-advantage.

                                                                                       288
10.3

Relevance of Quality Programs to Project Quality

Quality  Project  Process  Management

   Learning Objectives

        1. Identify the similarities between process quality management and project quality management.
        2. Identify the differences between process quality management and project quality management.

Process vs. Project Quality Management

Project quality refers to two distinct aspects of the project. The first aspect is the quality of the product or service
delivered by the project. Does the end product meet client specifications? For example, does a software development
project develop a program that performs to the client's requirements? A software program that performs the basic work
functions but does not integrate with existing software would not be considered a quality product, as long as the client
specified that the software must interface with existing software.

The second aspect of project quality is managing the project efficiently and effectively. Almost any client specification
can be met if the project manager has unlimited time and resources. Recall that high quality means meeting the
requirements for a particular grade while providing value. Meeting project deliverables within the time and resource
constraints is also a measure of project quality. Developing a project execution plan that matches the complexity level
of the project is the most critical aspect in developing a project plan that meets project specifications within the time
frame and at the lowest costs. These two aspects of project quality have similarities and differences to quality as
applied to parent organizations.

                                       289
                                                            License: CC BY-SA

Similarities

All successful quality programs have (1) a requirement for commitment to quality by all the employees and their
partners and (2) an emphasis on error prevention and client satisfaction. To comply with TQM, Six Sigma, ISO, or other
quality standards required by the client or by the project management firm, the project manager must engage in quality
programs and provide documents that specifically comply with the quality standards in use. For example, a project is
typically required to follow the parent organization's work processes related to procurement and document
management. Any project's processes that interface with the organization's quality processes will be required to meet
the quality standards of the organization.

If a large project involves repetitive processes such as repeated modules in an online training course, statistical
processes control methods can be used to maintain the quality of the product. These process control methods are
similar to those used by process managers in the manufacturing environment. The intent is for the work of the project
to meet design specifications. The modules, for example, if repeated could be assessed to determine whether they
consistently meet the quality standards of the project. The programmers design the modules to meet certain criteria
that will support a structure. The criteria, detailed in the design specifications, provide the parameters that the
instructional designers must meet when designing the course. On large projects the use of quality control tools and
methods are critical to meeting design specifications.

Differences

Because projects are temporary, spotting trends in samples produced by repetitive processes is not as important as
considering quality in the planning of the project. Instead, the project manager must be able to provide documentation
that demonstrates that the correct processes are in place to prevent quality failures.

The cost of quality (COQ) must be considered in the scope document and the project budget. If the group or company
that is providing the project management is separate from the client, the project budget will bear the cost of prevention
while the client will reap the rewards of avoiding the costs of failure. If senior management does not recognize the

                                                                                       290
benefit to the organization of reducing cost of failure by spending more on prevention during the project, the project
manager can be placed in the position of producing a product or service that he or she knows could be of higher quality.

If the cost of quality is not specifically considered and approved by senior management in the scope of the project,
quality might be sacrificed during the project to meet budget goals.

Cost of Quality in a Learning Management System

At a Midwestern university, a new learning management system was being implemented. To reduce the cost of the
system and avoid a late penalty, the project manager purchased and installed inferior server capacity. The less
expensive system could only handle the current size of the university's processing load. Five years after the learning
management system went online, the university had grown to far exceed the capabilities of their server architecture.
The university did not take the time to specify the quality of the learning management system in the scope statement
and was not aware of the implication of the inferior system at the time it was made. As a result, the cost of quality was
lower in the prevention category but much higher in the cost of failure category. Because each party acted in their own
interests instead of the interest of the university, and quality was not a priority, waste occurred and total cost increased.

Some separation of responsibility for quality is necessary. For example, if a project is undertaken to build a facility that
makes something, it is important to distinguish between the quality of the work done by the project team and the quality
of the items produced after the project is over. The client provides specifications for the facility that should result in
production of quality products. It is the client's responsibility to provide appropriate project requirements that will result
in a facility that can produce quality products. It is the project manager's responsibility to meet the project
requirements. The project manager must focus on meeting requirements for project activities, but as part of the quality
team, opportunities to improve the quality of the final product should be discussed with the client. If the final products
fail to meet quality standards, someone will be blamed for the failure. It could be the project manager, even if he or she
met all the requirements of the project specified by the client.

Cost of Prevention in Safety Training

An electronic parts manufacturer chooses to expand operations and needs to hire and train fifty employees. It uses its
own human resources department to handle the selection and hiring of the employees, but it contracts with a nearby
technical college to provide some of the training. The technical college is responsible for designing and delivering
training on the topic of plant safety practices. The objective of the training project is to reduce the number of workplace
accidents, but that is not the characteristic by which the quality of the training program is determined because the rate
of accidents for employees who go through the training will not be known until after they have been employed for
months or years. The criteria for determining the quality of the training must be something that can be controlled and
measured by the project manager during the project.

Because projects are time sensitive, meeting activity finish dates is a common characteristic of quality work on a
project that is not typical of a requirement of a process manager.

Timely Delivery Part of Quality

While developing training for a national event, certain deadlines were already set. If the event is scheduled for 6 months
out, then those volunteering will need appropriate training before the event. If the training is designed and developed to
specifications, but is delivered without enough time before the event, then the quality of the product is poor regardless
of the effectiveness of the training.

                                                                                       291
Key Takeaways

      Both project and process quality management require commitment from all employees, including top
      management. They are both client oriented and prevention oriented.
      Projects are temporary and allow fewer opportunities to improve repetitive processes. Cost of prevention is
      often part of the project budget, but the cost of failure usually happens after the project is completed. This
      separation of costs and benefits can lead to taking short-term savings on the project at the expense of
      higher cost of failure after the project is complete.

                      This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                      Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/10-3-relevance-of-quality-
                      programs-to-project-quality.

                                                                                 292
10.4

Planning and Controlling Project Quality

Measurement  Quality  Project  Planning

   Learning Objectives

        1. Define statistical measurement terminology.
        2. Identify sources of information for the planning process.
        3. Identify and describe the techniques for controlling project quality.
        4. Describe the results of planning and controlling quality.

High quality is achieved by planning for it rather than by reacting to problems after they are identified. Standards are
chosen and processes are put in place to achieve those standards.

Measurement Terminology

During the execution phase of the project, services and products are sampled and measured to determine if the quality
is within control limits for the requirements and to analyze causes for variations. This evaluation is often done by a
separate quality control group, and knowledge of a few process measurement terms is necessary to understand their
reports. Several of these terms are similar, and it is valuable to know the distinction between them.
The quality plan specifies the control limits of the product or process; the size of the range between those limits is the
tolerance. Tolerances are often written as the mean value, plus or minus the tolerance. The plus and minus signs are
written together, .

Tolerance in Gasoline Production

The petroleum refinery chose to set its control limits for 87 octane gasoline at 86 and 88 octane. The tolerance is 87 
1.
Tools are selected that can measure the samples closely enough to determine if the measurements are within control
limits and if they are showing a trend. Each measurement tool has its own tolerances.
The choice of tolerance directly affects the cost of quality (COQ). In general, it costs more to produce and measure
products that have small tolerances. The costs associated with making products with small tolerances for variation can
be very high and not proportional to the gains. For example, if the cost of evaluating each screen as it is created in an

                                                                                       293
online tutorial is greater than delivering the product and fixing any issues after the fact, then the COQ may be too high
and the instructional designer will tolerate more defects in the design.

Defining and Meeting Client Expectations

Clients provide specifications for the project that must be met for the project to be successful. Recall that meeting
project specifications is one definition of project success. Clients often have expectations that are more difficult to
capture in a written specification. For example, one client will want to be invited to every meeting of the project and will
then select the ones that seem most relevant. Another client will want to only be invited to project meetings that need
client input. Inviting this client to every meeting will cause unnecessary frustration. Listening to the client and
developing an understanding of the expectations that are not easily captured in specifications is important to meeting
the client's expectations.
Project surveys can capture how the client perceives the project performance and provide the project team with data
that is useful in meeting client expectations. If the results of the surveys indicate that the client is not pleased with
some aspect of the project, the project team has the opportunity to explore the reasons for this perception with the
client and develop recovery plans. The survey can also help define what is going well and what needs improved.

Sources of Planning Information

Planning for quality is part of the initial planning process. The early scope, budget, and schedule estimates are used to
identify processes, services, or products where the expected grade and quality should be specified. Risk analysis is
used to determine which of the risks the project faces could affect quality.

Techniques

Several different tools and techniques are available for planning and controlling the quality of a project. The extent to
which these tools are used is determined by the project complexity and the quality management program in use by the
client.

Quality Management Methodology

The quality management methodology required by the client is used. The project manager must provide the
documentation the client needs to prove compliance with their methodology. There are several different quality
management methodologies, but they usually have characteristics that are similar to the ones described previously in
the text.

Flowcharting

Many processes are more complicated than a simple sequence of related events that include several different paths. A
flowchart uses standard symbols to diagram a process that has branches or loops. Diamonds indicate decisions, and
arrows indicate the direction of the flow of the process, as shown in Figure 10.8.
Figure 10.8
Flowchart of a Quality Control Process

                                                                                       294
The process used to plan and assess quality can be described using flowcharts. They are useful for communicating
processes that have logical branches that can be determined by simple yes or no questions. Flowcharting is also useful
for discovering misunderstanding in project roles and responsibilities and communicating responsibility for work
processes.

Benchmarking

When products like shoes were made by hand, artisans would seek some degree of standardization by marking
standard lengths for different parts of the product on their workbench. In modern management practice, if a particular
method or product is a standard of quality, comparing your organization's quality plan to it is called benchmarking. If a
product or service is similar to something that is done in another industry or by a competitor, the project planners can
look at the best practices that are used by others and use them as a comparison.

Cost-to-Benefit Analysis

Because the cost of prevention is more often part of the project budget, the case must be made for increasing the
project budget to raise quality. Some quality management programs, like Six Sigma, require that expenditures for quality
are justified using a cost-to-benefit analysis that is similar to calculating the cost of quality, except that it is a ratio of
cost of increasing quality to the resulting benefit. A cost-benefit analysis in some quality programs can take into
account nonfinancial factors such as client loyalty and improvements to corporate image and the cost-to-benefit
analysis takes the form of a written analysis rather than a simple numeric ratio. It is similar to determining the cost of
quality (COQ).

Design of Experiments

Measuring for quality of manufactured products or use of repetitive processes requires taking samples. Specialists in
quality control design a test regimen that complies with statistical requirements to be sure that enough samples are
taken to be reasonably confident that the analysis is reliable. In project management, the testing experiments are
designed as part of the planning phase and then used to collect data during the execution phase.

                                                                                       295
Control Charts

If some of the functions of a project are repetitive, statistical process controls can be used to identify trends and keep
the processes within control limits. Part of the planning for controlling the quality of repetitive processes is to determine
what the control limits are and how the process will be sampled.

Cause and Effect Diagrams

When control charts indicate an assignable cause for a variation, it is not always easy to identify the cause of a
problem. Discussions that are intended to discover the cause can be facilitated using a cause-and-effect or fishbone
diagram where participants are encouraged to identify possible causes of a defect.

Diagramming Quality Problems

For example, a small manufacturing firm tries to identify the assignable causes to variations in its manufacturing line.
They assemble a team that identifies six possibilities, as shown in the fishbone diagram below.
Figure 10.9
Cause and Effect Diagram

Each branch of the diagram can be expanded to break down a category into more specific items.
An engineer and the electrician work on one of the branches to consider possible causes of power fluctuation and add
detail to their part of the fishbone diagram, as shown below.
Figure 10.10
Possible Causes of Power Fluctuation

                                                                                       296
Check Sheets, Histograms, and Pareto Charts

When several quality problems need to be solved, a project manager must choose which ones to address first. One way
to prioritize quality problems is to determine which ones occur most frequently. This data can be collected using a
check sheet, which is a basic form on which the user can make a check in the appropriate box each time a problem
occurs or by automating the data collection process using the appropriate technology. Once the data are collected, they
can be analyzed by creating a type of frequency distribution chart called a histogram. A true histogram is a column
chart where the width of the columns fill the available space on the horizontal axis and are proportional to the category
values displayed on the x axis, while the height of the columns is proportional to the frequency of occurrences. Most
histograms use one width of column to represent a category, while the vertical axis represents the frequency of
occurrence.

A variation on the histogram is a frequency distribution chart invented by economist Vilfredo Pareto known as a Pareto
chart, in which the columns are arranged in decreasing order with the most common on the left and a line added that
shows the cumulative total. The combination of columns and a line allows the user to tell at a glance which problems
are most frequent and what fraction of the total they represent.

Planning and Control Results

The quality plan is produced during the initiation phase. The methods, procedures, and logic are described to
demonstrate a commitment to a project of high quality. The plan identifies the products or services that will be
measured and how they will be measured and compared to benchmarks. A flowchart demonstrates the logic and
pathways to improve the plan.

During the execution phase, data are collected by measuring samples according to the design specified in the plan. The
data are charted and analyzed. If variations are due to assignable causes, change requests are created.

                                                                                       297
Key Takeaways

      Statistical control terms that are commonly used are tolerance (the range between control limits), flowchart
      (a diagram showing decision branches and loops), benchmarking (comparison to best practices), fishbone
      diagram (shows possible causes of quality problems), check sheet (form used to record frequency of
      problem occurrences), histogram (column chart that shows frequency of problems), and Pareto chart
      (histogram sorted by frequency from highest to smallest with a line that shows total cumulative problems).
      The quality planning process uses initial scope, budget, and schedule estimates to identify areas that need
      quality management.
      Control of quality in repetitive processes use statistical control methods that involve designing testing
      while considering the cost of quality, taking measurements, and then analyzing the data using run charts
      that show control limits and trends. Methodologies are compared to the best practices by competitors,
      which is called benchmarking. Errors are documented using check sheets and analyzed using fishbone
      diagrams, histograms, or Pareto charts.
      The products of planning and controlling quality are a quality management plan, data, analysis documents,
      and proposals for improvement.

                      This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                      Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/10-4-planning-and-controlling-
                      project-quality.

                                                                                 298
  10.5

Assuring Quality

     Quality Assurance

   Learning Objectives

        1. Describe the purpose and methods of quality assurance.

The purpose of quality assurance is to create confidence that the quality plan and controls are working properly. To
assure quality, time must be allocated to review the original quality plan and compare that plan to how quality is being
ensured during the execution of the project.

Process Analysis

The flowcharts of quality processes are compared to the processes followed during actual operations. If the plan was
not followed, the process is analyzed and corrective action taken. The corrective action could be to educate the people
involved on how to follow the quality plan or to revise the plan.
The experiments that sample products and processes and collect data are examined to see if they are following
statistically valid sampling techniques and that the measurement methods have small enough tolerances to detect
variation within control limits.
Because projects are temporary, there are fewer opportunities to learn and improve within one project if it has a short
duration, but even in short projects, the quality manager should have a way to learn from experience and change the
process for the next project of a similar complexity profile.

Analyzing Quality Processes in Safety Training

The technical college responsible for training employees in safe plant practices evaluates its instructor selection
process at the end of the training to see if it had the best criteria for selection. For example, it required the instructors to
have Masters degrees in manufacturing to qualify as college instructors. The college used an exit survey of the
students to ask what they thought would improve the instruction of future classes on this topic. Some students felt that
it would be more important to require that the instructors have more years of training experience, while others
recommended that the college seek certification as a training center by the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA).1 The college considered these suggestions and decided to retain its requirement of a Master's
degree but add a requirement that the instructor be certified by OSHA in plant safety.

                                                                                       299
   Key Takeaways

           The purpose of quality assurance is to build confidence in the client that quality standards and procedures
           are being followed. This is done by an internal review of the plan, testing, and revisions policies or by an
           audit of the same items performed by an external group or agency.

References

Occupational Safety and Health Administration, OSHA Training Institute Education Center Fact Sheet, July 3, 2007,
         http://www.osha.gov/fso/ote/training/edcenters/fact_sheet.html(accessed August 7, 2009).

                           This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                           Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/10-5-assuring-quality.

                                                                                       300
  11

Managing Project Risk

Overview

This chapter aligns with chapter 11 of the PMBOK and 11% of the CAPM questions come from this knowledge area. The
content connects to the Planning and Monitoring & Controlling category of the PMP questions.
All projects, including those within instructional design, rarely, if ever, go completely according to plan. Thus, competent
project managers are prepared to deal with unexpected adversity during the course of the project. In order to mitigate
the impact of disruptions, project managers must identify the potential risks and make appropriate plans. Failure to do
so can easily lead to a decrease in project quality or unnecessary increases in budget.

                                                                                       301
Designers Share Their Experiences

   Dr. Andy Gibbons - Instructional Psychology and Technology - BYU

                                                                               Watch on YouTube

     At the beginning of this project we were training helicopter pilots, we were training sensor operators who sit at
     the back and operate electronic equipment. What was the biggest threat? It was probably me and my naivety. I
     was the project director of a project that eventually accumulated twenty-five staff members, and we were
     working with Navy teams of subject matter experts. We probably had eight or nine subject matter experts
     assigned to our project. That was a rich, rich resource. And I had no idea, I'd not been trained how to manage a
     project that size. My previous project experience had been a staff of four people at most: a secretary, an artist
     and a writer, and myself. Well this project was a different kind of challenge. The biggest risk was me not
     understanding, and as a result, there were some big mistakes made. I would say that as far as designer's
     secrets, that I should have known that I didn't know, it would be how subject matter experts, excuse me, how
     bodies of subject matter are organized. And how, as a designer, you have to be able to get to the heart of the
     subject matter quickly and efficiently, sometimes even before the subject matter expert is there. I'll tell you
     about another project. I was working on a project with DC-10 pilots, for a major airline. And we were doing a
     task analysis. Tried to identify all the tasks that these pilots had to be able to perform. We got to the part where
     we were talking about emergencies that they had to be able to perform. And we were listing emergencies that
     happened in the pilot's handbook. And I was all the time going through trying to make sure, are we leaving
     anything out? Is there anything that could go wrong with this aircraft that a pilot would have to be able to
     respond to, that needs to go into this task analysis? And they said, well no. I said, well okay, hydraulic systems,
     your aircraft' s got two hydraulic systems. And they said, yeah. And I said, well what if both hydraulic systems,

                                                                                       302
we've got a single hydraulic system failure here, and you got a procedure that the pilot has to learn for that.
What about if you have a dual hydraulic system failure? What if both of them go out at the same time? Oh it
never happens. If one of them goes out, the second one kicks in, it automatically turns itself on, you don't have
to do anything. I said, hasn't there been any instance or isn't there some possibility of that happening. No, no,
no. So we left it out of the task analysis. Not nine months later there was a DC-10 flying over Saint Louis
somewhere in the region, mid U.S, and a private plane clipped off its tail. And both hydraulic systems failed. And
there were three hundred people on board. Now, a quick thinking pilot figured out a way, I mean what happens
when a hydraulic system fails on a major airliner, you can't control the aircraft, you can't turn it, you can't bank it
you can't do anything. So how did they land that aircraft, they finally did land the aircraft, it was a crash landing,
but it was a landing, and half of the people on board survived, so 150 people survived that crash landing in a
cornfield. How did the pilot figure out how to handle that emergency? Well, they used the jet throttles. They
would adjust it this way if they wanted to turn this way, they would adjust it this way if they wanted to turn this
way. And so they were able to land the aircraft where they wanted to. And of course, they did altitude control just
by denying gas to the engines. So they brought it down and a hundred and fifty people were saved, that
otherwise would have died. But I always remembered that one time when I had the instinct to say I think I know
your subject matter better than you do, and I think this is something that could happen. This is a task that you
ought to include in your training. I'll just bet you it's in the training now. And so, you have to, as an instructional
designer, you can't just be naive. You can't just accept what they tell you. You've got to question everything.
You've got to become a big critic.

                                                                                 303
Heather Bryce - Independent Studies - BYU

                                                                         Watch on YouTube

I didn't know how expensive Art 45 was going to be. And I hate bringing that up over and over again, because
honestly it was the only drawback of this project. Everything else went so well. That was probably a risk.
Fortunately, you know, we had the funds to be able to pay for that. But some places, you know, you don't have
the funds. If you run out of money, you are not able to finish your project. So that was probably a huge risk to
this project. But other than that, there weren't really any risks. I mean I suppose there could have been conflict
between the artist's opinions of what you should do when you have several artists working on different projects.
But we just really didn't have that.

                                                                                 304
Dr. Larry Seawright - Center for Teaching and Learning - BYU

                                                                          Watch on YouTube

 Probably in building the learning management system, that we call the BYU Learning Suite, the biggest risk that
 we had was the short beta test period that we're going to have. Had we known that up front I think we would
 have compressed some of our development cycle sooner so that we have a little bit more of a beta test period.
Defining Risk
Risk Management Process
Project Risk by Phases
Project Risk and the Project Complexity Profile

                                                                                  305
This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/11-managing-project-risk.

                                                        306
  11.1

Defining Risk

Project Risk  Risk Management

   Learning Objectives

        1. Define project risk.
        2. Define the difference between known and unknown risks.
        3. Describe the difference between the business risk of the organization and project risk.

Risk is the possibility of loss or injury.1 Project risk is an uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has an effect on
at least one project objective.2 Risk management focuses on identifying and assessing the risks to the project and
managing those risks to minimize the impact on the project. There are no risk-free projects because there are an infinite
number of events that can have a negative effect on the project. Risk management is not about eliminating risk but
about identifying, assessing, and managing risk.
Tzvi Raz, Aaron Shenhar, and Dov Dvir3 studied risk management practices on one hundred projects in a variety of
industries. The results of this study suggested the following about risk management practices:

      Risk management is not widely used.
      The projects that were most likely to have a risk management plan were those that were perceived to be high risk.
      When risk management practices were applied to projects, they appeared to be positively related to the success of
      the project.
      The risk management approach influenced project schedules and cost goals but exerted less influence on project
      product quality.
      Good risk management increases the likelihood of a successful project.

Risk deals with the uncertainty of events that could affect the project. Some potential negative project events have a
high likelihood of occurring on specific projects. Examples are as follows:

      Safety risks are common on construction projects.
      Changes in the value of local currency during a project affect purchasing power and budgets on projects with large
      international components.
      Projects that depend on good weather, such as road construction or coastal projects, face risk of delays due to
      exceptionally wet or windy weather.

                                                                                       307
These are examples of known risks. Known risks are events that have been identified and analyzed for which advanced
planning is possible. Other risks are unknown or unforeseen.

Weather

Project team members were flying to a project review meeting in South Carolina when a severe storm caused all flights
to be cancelled. Members of the leadership team could not make the meeting and weren't even able to return to their
home base for a couple of days.

Sudden Family Death

Just before a project meeting in Texas, the instructional design lead received word that his father had died in the middle
of the night. The team delayed making decisions on some critical events without the knowledge and judgment of the
instructional designer.
These events were unforeseen by the project team, and in both cases the projects experienced schedule delays and
additional costs.
Project risks are separate from the organizational risks that are associated with the business purpose of the project.
A project was chartered to design training for a new customer management system at a cost not to exceed $250,000. If
a project is completed on time, within budget, and meets all quality specifications, the project is successful. If the
customer management system does not meet the needs of the organization, the organizational goals of the project
may not be achieved. The customer management system is an organizational or business risk. The company
authorized the project based on assumptions about the system meeting their needs. The system's capability is not a
project risk on this project.

   Key Takeaways

           Project risk is the possibility that project events will not occur as planned or that unplanned events will
           occur that will have a negative impact on the project.
           Known risks can be identified before they occur, while unknown risks are unforeseen.
           Organizational risks are associated with the business purpose of the project and assumed by the client
           when deciding to do the project.

References

Merriam-Webster Online, s.v. "risk," http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/Risk(accessed August 21, 2009).
Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK Guide), 4th ed.

         (Newtown Square, PA: Project Management Institute, Inc., 2008), 273.
Tzvi Raz, Aaron J. Shenhar, and Dov Dvir, "Risk Management, Project Success, and Technological Uncertainty," R&D

         Management 32 (2002): 101-12.

                                                                                       308
This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/11-1-defining-risk.

                                                        309
310
  11.2

Risk Management Process

Project Risk  Risk  Risk Evaluation  Risk Mitigation

   Learning Objectives

        1. Identify the major elements in managing project risk.
        2. Describe the processes for identifying project risk.
        3. Describe the processes for evaluating risk.
        4. Describe the processes for mitigating risk.

Managing risks on projects is a process that includes risk assessment and a mitigation strategy for those risks. Risk
assessment includes both the identification of potential risk and the evaluation of the potential impact of the risk. A risk
mitigation plan is designed to eliminate or minimize the impact of the risk events--occurrences that have a negative
impact on the project. Identifying risk is both a creative and a disciplined process. The creative process includes
brainstorming sessions where the team is asked to create a list of everything that could go wrong. All ideas are
welcome at this stage with the evaluation of the ideas coming later.

Risk Identification

A more disciplined process involves using checklists of potential risks and evaluating the likelihood that those events
might happen on the project. Some companies and industries develop risk checklists based on experience from past
projects. These checklists can be helpful to the project manager and project team in identifying both specific risks on
the checklist and expanding the thinking of the team. The past experience of the project team, project experience within
the company, and experts in the industry can be valuable resources for identifying potential risk on a project.

Identifying the sources of risk by category is another method for exploring potential risk on a project. Some examples of
categories for potential risks include the following:

                                                      311
      Technical
      Cost
      Schedule
      Client
      Contractual
      Weather
      Financial
      Political
      Environmental
      People
The people category can be subdivided into risks associated with the people. Examples of people risks include the risk
of not finding the skills needed to execute the project or the sudden unavailability of key people on the project. David
Hillson1 uses the same framework as the work breakdown structure (WBS) for developing a risk breakdown structure
(RBS). A risk breakdown structure organizes the risks that have been identified into categories using a table with
increasing levels of detail to the right.

Risks in John's Move

In John's move, John makes a list of things that might go wrong with his project and uses his work breakdown structure
as a guide. A partial list for the planning portion of the RBS is shown in Figure 11.1.
Figure 11.1
Risk Breakdown Structure (RBS)

The result is a clearer understanding of where risks are most concentrated. Hillson's approach helps the project team
identify known risks, but can be restrictive and less creative in identifying unknown risks and risks not easily found
inside the work breakdown structure.

                                                                                       312
Risk Evaluation

After the potential risks have been identified, the project team then evaluates the risk based on the probability that the
risk event will occur and the potential loss associated with the event. Not all risks are equal. Some risk events are more
likely to happen than others, and the cost of a risk event can vary greatly. Evaluating the risk for probability of
occurrence and the severity or the potential loss to the project is the next step in the risk management process.
Having criteria to determine high impact risks can help narrow the focus on a few critical risks that require mitigation.
For example, suppose high-impact risks are those that could increase the project costs by 5% of the conceptual budget
or 2% of the detailed budget. Only a few potential risk events met these criteria. These are the critical few potential risk
events that the project management team should focus on when developing a project risk mitigation or management
plan. Risk evaluation is about developing an understanding of which potential risks have the greatest possibility of
occurring and can have the greatest negative impact on the project. These become the critical few.
Figure 11.2
Risk and Impact

There is a positive correlation--both increase or decrease together--between project risk and project complexity. A
project with new and emerging technology will have a high-complexity rating and a correspondingly high risk. The
project management team will assign the appropriate resources to the technology managers to assure the
accomplishment of project goals. The more complex the technology, the more resources the technology manager
typically needs to meet project goals, and each of those resources could face unexpected problems.
Risk evaluation often occurs in a workshop setting. Building on the identification of the risks, each risk event is analyzed
to determine the likelihood of occurring and the potential cost if it did occur. The likelihood and impact are both rated as
high, medium, or low. A risk mitigation plan addresses the items that have high ratings on both factors--likelihood and
impact.

                                                                                       313
Risk Analysis of Equipment Delivery

A project team analyzed the risk of some important equipment not arriving to the project on time. The team identified
three pieces of equipment that were critical to the project and would significantly increase the costs of the project if
they were late in arriving. One of the vendors, who was selected to deliver an important piece of equipment, had a
history of being late on other projects. The vendor was good and often took on more work than it could deliver on time.
This risk event (the identified equipment arriving late) was rated as high likelihood with a high impact. The other two
pieces of equipment were potentially a high impact on the project but with a low probability of occurring.
Not all project managers conduct a formal risk assessment on the project. One reason, as found by David Parker and
Alison Mobey2 in their phenomenological study of project managers, was a low understanding of the tools and benefits
of a structured analysis of project risks. The lack of formal risk management tools was also seen as a barrier to
implementing a risk management program. Additionally, the project manager's personality and management style play
into risk preparation levels. Some project managers are more proactive and will develop elaborate risk management
programs for their projects. Other managers are reactive and are more confident in their ability to handle unexpected
events when they occur. Yet others are risk averse, and prefer to be optimistic and not consider risks or avoid taking
risks whenever possible.

On projects with a low complexity profile, the project manager may informally track items that may be considered risk
items. On more complex projects, the project management team may develop a list of items perceived to be higher risk
and track them during project reviews. On projects with greater complexity, the process for evaluating risk is more
formal with a risk assessment meeting or series of meetings during the life of the project to assess risks at different
phases of the project. On highly complex projects, an outside expert may be included in the risk assessment process,
and the risk assessment plan may take a more prominent place in the project execution plan.

On complex projects, statistical models are sometimes used to evaluate risk because there are too many different
possible combinations of risks to calculate them one at a time. One example of the statistical model used on projects is
the Monte Carlo simulation, which simulates a possible range of outcomes by trying many different combinations of
risks based on their likelihood. The output from a Monte Carlo simulation provides the project team with the probability
of an event occurring within a range and for combinations of events. For example, the typical output from a Monte Carlo
simulation may reflect that there is a 10% chance that one of the three important pieces of equipment will be late and
that the weather will also be unusually bad after the equipment arrives.

Risk Mitigation

After the risk has been identified and evaluated, the project team develops a risk mitigation plan, which is a plan to
reduce the impact of an unexpected event. The project team mitigates risks in the following ways:

      Risk avoidance
      Risk sharing
      Risk reduction
      Risk transfer

Each of these mitigation techniques can be an effective tool in reducing individual risks and the risk profile of the
project. The risk mitigation plan captures the risk mitigation approach for each identified risk event and the actions the
project management team will take to reduce or eliminate the risk.

Risk avoidance usually involves developing an alternative strategy that has a higher probability of success but usually
at a higher cost associated with accomplishing a project task. A common risk avoidance technique is to use proven and
existing technologies rather than adopt new techniques, even though the new techniques may show promise of better
performance or lower costs. A project team may choose a vendor with a proven track record over a new vendor that is
providing significant price incentives to avoid the risk of working with a new vendor. The project team that requires drug

                                                                                       314
testing for team members is practicing risk avoidance by avoiding damage done by someone under the influence of
drugs.

Risk sharing involves partnering with others to share responsibility for the risk activities. Many organizations that work
on international projects will reduce political, legal, labor, and others risk types associated with international projects by
developing a joint venture with a company located in that country. Partnering with another company to share the risk
associated with a portion of the project is advantageous when the other company has expertise and experience the
project team does not have. If the risk event does occur, then the partnering company absorbs some or all of the
negative impact of the event. The company will also derive some of the profit or benefit gained by a successful project.

Risk reduction is an investment of funds to reduce the risk on a project. On international projects, companies will often
purchase the guarantee of a currency rate to reduce the risk associated with fluctuations in the currency exchange rate.
A project manager may hire an expert to review the technical plans or the cost estimate on a project to increase the
confidence in that plan and reduce the project risk. Assigning highly skilled project personnel to manage the high-risk
activities is another risk reduction method. Experts managing a high-risk activity can often predict problems and find
solutions that prevent the activities from having a negative impact on the project. Some companies reduce risk by
forbidding key executives or technology experts to ride on the same airplane.

Risk transfer is a risk reduction method that shifts the risk from the project to another party. The purchase of insurance
on certain items is a risk transfer method. The risk is transferred from the project to the insurance company. A
construction project in the Caribbean may purchase hurricane insurance that would cover the cost of a hurricane
damaging the construction site. The purchase of insurance is usually in areas outside the control of the project team.
Weather, political unrest, and labor strikes are examples of events that can significantly impact the project and that are
outside the control of the project team.

Contingency Plan

The project risk plan balances the investment of the mitigation against the benefit for the project. The project team
often develops an alternative method for accomplishing a project goal when a risk event has been identified that may
frustrate the accomplishment of that goal. These plans are called contingency plans. The risk of a truck drivers' strike
may be mitigated with a contingency plan that uses a train to transport the needed equipment for the project. If a
critical piece of equipment is late, the impact on the schedule can be mitigated by making changes to the schedule to
accommodate a late equipment delivery.

Contingency funds are funds set aside by the project team to address unforeseen events that cause the project costs to
increase. Projects with a high-risk profile will typically have a large contingency budget. Although the amount of
contingency allocated in the project budget is a function of the risks identified in the risk analysis process, contingency
is typically managed as one line item in the project budget.

Some project managers allocate the contingency budget to the items in the budget that have high risk rather than
developing one line item in the budget for contingencies. This approach allows the project team to track the use of
contingency against the risk plan. This approach also allocates the responsibility to manage the risk budget to the
managers responsible for those line items. The availability of contingency funds in the line item budget may also
increase the use of contingency funds to solve problems rather than finding alternative, less costly solutions. Most
project managers, especially on more complex projects, will manage contingency funds at the project level, with
approval of the project manager required before contingency funds can be used.

                                                                                       315
   Key Takeaways

           Risk management is a creative process that involves identifying, evaluating, and mitigating the impact of
           the risk event.
           Risk management can be very formal, with defined work processes, or informal, with no defined processes
           or methods. Formal risk evaluation includes the use of checklists, brainstorming, and expert input. A risk
           breakdown structure (RBS) can follow the work breakdown structure (WBS) to identify risk by activity.
           Risk evaluation prioritizes the identified risks by the likelihood and the potential impact if the event
           happens.
           Risk mitigation is the development and deployment of a plan to avoid, transfer, share, and reduce project
           risk. Contingency planning is the development of alternative plans to respond to the occurrence of a risk
           event.

References

David Hillson, "Using a Risk Breakdown Structure in Project Management," Journal of Facilities Management 2, no. 1
         (2003): 85-97.

David Parker and Alison Mobey, "Action Research to Explore Perceptions of Risk in Project Management," International
         Journal of Productivity and Performance Management 53, no. 1 (2004): 18-32.

                           This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                           Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/11-2-risk-management-process.

                                                                                       316
  11.3

Project Risk by Phases

Risk Management  Initiation  Planning  Execution  Closeout

Learning Objectives

  1. Describe the elements of risk management during the initiation phase.
  2. Describe the elements of risk management during the planning phase.
  3. Describe the elements of risk management during the execution phase.
  4. Describe the elements of risk management during the closeout phase.

                                              Image by shawncalhoun
Project risk is dealt with in different ways depending on the phase of the project.

                                                                                       317
Initiation Phase

Risk is associated with things that are unknown. More things are unknown at the beginning of a project, but risk must
be considered in the initiation phase and weighed against the potential benefit of the project's success in order to
decide if the project should be chosen.

Risks by Phase in John's Move

In the initiation phase of John's move, John considers the risk of events that could affect the whole project. He
identifies the following risks during the initiation phase that might have a high impact and rates the likelihood of their
happening from low to high.

  1. His new employer might change his mind and take back the job offer after he's given notice at his old job: Low.
  2. The current tenants of his apartment might not move out in time for him to move in by the first day of work at the

      new job: Medium.
  3. The movers might lose his furniture: Low.
  4. The movers might be more than a week late delivering his furniture: Medium.
  5. He might get in an accident driving from Chicago to Atlanta and miss starting his job: Low.

John considers how to mitigate each of the risks.

  1. During his job hunt, John had more than one offer, and he is confident that he could get another job, but he might
      lose deposit money on the apartment and the mover. He would also lose wages during the time it took to find the
      other job. To mitigate the risk of his new employer changing his mind, John makes sure that he keeps his
      relationships with his alternate employers cordial and writes to each of them thanking for their consideration in his
      recent interviews.

  2. John checks the market in Atlanta to determine the weekly cost and availability of extended-stay motels.
  3. John checks the mover's contract to confirm that they carry insurance against lost items, but they require the

      owner to provide a detailed list with value estimates and they limit the maximum total value. John decides to go
      through his apartment with his digital camera and take pictures of all of his possessions that will be shipped by
      truck and to keep the camera with him during the move so he has a visual record and won't have to rely on his
      memory to make a list. He seals and numbers the boxes so he can tell if a box is missing.
  4. If the movers are late, John can use his research on extended-stay motels to calculate how much it would cost. He
      checks the moving company's contract to see if they compensate the owner for late delivery, and he finds that they
      do not.
  5. John checks the estimated driving time from Chicago to Atlanta using an Internet mapping service and gets an
      estimate of eleven hours of driving time. He decides that it would be too risky to attempt to make the drive by
      himself in one day, especially if he didn't leave until after the truck was packed. John plans to spend one night on
      the road in a motel to reduce the risk of an accident caused by driving while too tired.

John concludes that the high-impact risks can be mitigated and the costs from the mitigation would be acceptable in
order to get a new job.

Planning Phase

Once the project is approved and it moves into the planning stage, risks are identified with each major group of
activities. A risk breakdown structure (RBS) can be used to identify increasing levels of detailed risk analysis.

Risk Breakdown Structure for John's Move

John decides to ask Dion and Carlita for their help during their first planning meeting to identify risks, rate their impact
and likelihood, and suggest mitigation plans. They concentrate on the packing phase of the move. They fill out a table of

                                                                                       318
risks, as shown in Figure 11.3.
Figure 11.3
Risk Breakdown Structure (RBS) for Packing John's Apartment

Execution Phase

As the project progresses and more information becomes available to the project team, the total risk on the project
typically reduces, as activities are performed without loss. The risk plan needs to be updated with new information and
risks checked off that are related to activities that have been performed.
Understanding where the risks occur on the project is important information for managing the contingency budget and
managing cash reserves. Most organizations develop a plan for financing the project from existing organizational
resources, including financing the project through a variety of financial instruments. In most cases, there is a cost to the
organization to keep these funds available to the project, including the contingency budget. As the risks decrease over
the length of the project, if the contingency is not used, then the funds set aside by the organization can be used for
other purposes.
To determine the amount of contingency that can be released, the project team will conduct another risk evaluation and
determine the amount of risk remaining on the project. If the risk profile is lower, the project team may release
contingency funds back to the parent organization. If additional risks are uncovered, a new mitigation plan is developed
including the possible addition of contingency funds.

                                                                                       319
Closeout Phase

During the closeout phase, agreements for risk sharing and risk transfer need to be concluded and the risk breakdown
structure examined to be sure all the risk events have been avoided or mitigated. The final estimate of loss due to risk
can be made and recorded as part of the project documentation. If a Monte Carlo simulation was done, the result can
be compared to the predicted result.

Risk Closeout on John's Move

To close out the risk mitigation plan for John's move, John examines the risk breakdown structure and risk mitigation
plan for items that need to be finalized. He makes a checklist to be sure all the risk mitigation plans are completed, as
shown in Figure 11.4.
Figure 11.4
Closeout of Risk Mitigation Plan for John's Move

Risk is not allocated evenly over the life of the project. On projects with a high degree of new technology, the majority of
the risks may be in the early phases of the project. On projects with a large equipment budget, the largest amount of
risk may be during the procurement of the equipment. On global projects with a large amount of political risk, the
highest portion of risk may be toward the end of the project.

                                                                                       320
Key Takeaways

      During the initiation phase, risks are identified that could threaten the viability of the project. Mitigation
      options are considered to see if they would be sufficient to protect the project.
      During the planning phase, risks are identified and analyzed for each activity group in a risk breakdown
      structure, and mitigation is planned for each risk
      During the execution phase, risks are checked off as activities are completed or mitigation is performed if
      loss does occur. New risks are identified and added to the plan.
      During the closeout phase, insurance contracts are cancelled and partnerships terminated. A summary of
      actual costs associated with risks are compared with initial estimates to refine estimating capabilities. The
      successes and failures of the risk management plan are summarized and saved with the project
      documentation to add to the company's corporate knowledge.

                      This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                      Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/11-3-project-risk-by-phases.

                                                                                 321
322
  11.4

Project Risk and the Project Complexity Profile

Complexity  Technical  Internal  External  Project Risk            Environmental

   Learning Objectives

        1. Identify the relationship between project risk and external, internal, technical, and environmental
           complexity.

Risk seems to have a positive correlation to complexity. High-risk projects are in most cases highly complex. The
process of conducting a risk analysis focuses on understanding what can go wrong and the likelihood that it will go
wrong. The project team then develops a project mitigation plan that addresses the items that were identified as high
risk. The complexity analysis explores the project from the perspective of what elements on the project add to project
complexity. The result of this analysis is the information needed by the project leadership to develop an appropriate
execution plan. This execution plan also contains the risk management plan.

            Image by Michigan Municipal League (MML)

                                                              323
Although increased complexity on a project increases the project risk profile, risk is only one component of the
complexity profile, and the manageability of the risk is also reflected in the complexity level of the project. For example,
the organizational component of the project may be extremely complex with decision making shared among several
independent clients. The project management team will develop an execution plan that includes developing and
maintaining alignment among the various clients. Although the organizational risk of the project decreases with the
development of the execution plan, the organizational approach of the client did not change the complexity level of the
project. If the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index (DPCI) is used to rate the project, high ratings in each category carry
their own types of increased risks.

External Complexity

Projects that have a high score in the external complexity category in the DPCI are larger and longer than usual for the
project management group and the project manager and the available resources are lacking. Due to lack of experience
on this size project, unknown risks are significant. The inadequacy of resources will cause risks that are more
predictable.

Internal Complexity

Projects with high scores for internal complexity have risks to the budget, schedule, and quality due to organizational
complexity and changes of scope due to lack of clarity in project and scope statements.

Technological Complexity

High scores in technological complexity are associated with high levels of risk due to unknown flaws in the technology
and lack of familiarity with it. These problems result in risks to the schedule, budget, and quality.

Environmental Complexity

Environmental complexity includes legal, cultural, political, and ecological factors. High scores for complexity in this
category imply high risks for delay and expensive resolution to lawsuits, public opposition, changes for political
considerations, and unforeseen ecological impacts.

                                                                                       324
Key Takeaways

      There is a positive correlation between the complexity of a project and the risk. Increased levels of
      complexity imply more people, newer technologies, and increased internal and external unknown factors.
      High scores for external complexity imply high risks to the schedule, budget, and quality due to unknown
      factors and limited resources.
      High scores for internal complexity imply high risks to the budget, schedule, and quality due to
      organizational complexity and changes of scope due to lack of clarity in project and scope statements.
      High scores for technological complexity imply high risks to the budget, schedule, and quality due to
      unknown flaws in the technology and lack of familiarity with it.
      Environmental complexity includes legal, cultural, political, and ecological issues. High scores for
      complexity in this category imply high risks for delay and expensive resolution to lawsuits, public
      opposition, changes for political considerations, and unforeseen ecological impacts.

                      This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                      Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/11-4-project-risk-and-the-project-
                      complexity-profile.

                                                                                 325
326
  12

Project Closure

Overview

This chapter aligns with chapter 3 of the PMBOK. 11% of the CAPM questions come from this knowledge area. The
content connects to the Closure category of the PMP questions.
This chapter describes several of the essential close-out activities to be performed at the end of a project.

                                                                                       327
Designers Share Their Experiences

   Dr. Andy Gibbons - Instructional Psychology and Technology - BYU

                                                                   Watch on YouTube
     The most interesting part of scaling back a project toward the end is, actually it's the funnest part of the project
     because there are a lot of celebrations as people are dropping off the payroll you have a party for them, and you
     have a close-out, and there are gifts that are given to each other, and it's fun. And people who are on your staff
     use their talents to celebrate each other. We had one, oh just this amazing artist on this one helicopter pilot
     project I did. And he drew a big caricature of the whole team. And gave out caricatures of the team members to
     each one of them. It was a wonderful thing, and I still have a poster that is about this big, in colorful color, the
     nicest artwork you want to see. The caricature of everybody that is on the team and they all signed it. It's just a
     warm memory. And one of the things that you want to do at the end of the project is make sure that you've given
     the people on your project the best possible experience. As a manager, you're not just a dollar and cents person,
     you're not just a timetable person. You're a leader and you need to be an inspiring leader. And you need to, by
     the time they finish the project, they need to have seen you as a leader, they need to have learned something, the
     project needs to have enriched their experience, they need to have gained friendships, they need to be working
     as a team. If you can't get there, then the project gets done, but as a designer you haven't done your job.

                                                                                       328
Heather Bryce - Independent Studies - BYU

                                                              Watch on YouTube
I think the biggest challenge in finishing a project is keeping people engaged. When you've worked on a project
for a long time, maybe at the beginning of a project you had a more important role than you might as your role
kind of becomes less in one project as you move onto another, I think it's hard to stay engaged in that former
project. As your roles, you might have to do a few edits, come back and fix a few things that you worked on, but
you might have moved on. So I think that's the biggest challenge is, people who have moved on to a more
important role in project B, it's harder to get them back to "Hey don't forget about the things you need to finish
up to get project A. So I think the most important process that we have is the course completion process. It
goes through a lot of different hands and it's those final touches that you have to put on to have a course go
live. And while the tasks themselves are kind of small, they add up. So a course could be delayed up to two
weeks, because people just sit on their tasks. You know, "oh it's just a five minute task". But if everybody sits on
a five minute task for a couple of days the time adds up quickly. So I think as the project manager you need to
make sure that people continue to be engaged even when their role lessens, and to make sure you finish up
strong.

                                                                                 329
Dr. Larry Seawright - Center for Teaching and Learning - BYU

                                                              Watch on YouTube
With the BYU Learning Suite, which is an ongoing project, there is never a close-out or something like that. Until
the University decides, okay we're going to shift from using our own internally developed learning management
system, and we'll go back out on the market and once more buy a more commercially available one. At that
point then we'll go through the close-out process, and take a look at things. But, that being said, you still have,
no matter how you officially close out a project, there is a delivery. We're going to start delivery on December 1st
this year. Faculty, it will be available to them to begin to build courses. So that's really the close out period at
that point were going to have post-mortem meetings. We'll take a look at what went well, what didn't go well?
What can we learn that we can apply to the ongoing enhancement process, because this is an ongoing project.
Things that we can do better, places that we can involve the faculty more, so that there's more faculty buy-in.
Places where we can involve students more, so students are more appreciative of it, and understand it better.
Quite frankly, become demanding of faculty, you know, you must use the Learning Suite because it makes our
lives so easy, kind of thing. That's how the Learning Suite will succeed. Ultimately, in any project, it's the end
users and whether or not they like it that will determine its success. They like it and start buying it or accessing
it or downloading it, you know, whatever the method of delivery is, or the method of purchase is, then it's a
success. And you know, you can take a look those things and say, you know, this was good, these things were
not quite so good, but there has to be some point where you just kind of stick a stake in the ground and say let's
take some time and look at what worked, what didn't work and what lessons can we learn from that. And that's
kind of difficult sometimes. It's actually the classic evaluation problem. A lot of evaluation never gets done
because it takes time, it takes money, and it's never used. You know, once the evaluation is done, people don't
make use of it, same with a project management post-mortem. If you don't take the time and the money to do it,
you won't get useful data that is usable and actionable for making changes. So you don't want to just go
through and have a post-mortem because it's part of the project management checklist. You want to do it if
people are going to use it. Otherwise just skip it and, you know, go on with the project.

                                                                                 330
Project Closure
                       This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                       Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/12-project-closure.

                                                                                  331
332
  12.1

Project Closure

contract  Post-Project Review

   Learning Objectives

        1. Describe the procedures for closing out contracts.
        2. Describe the elements and purpose of the post-project review process.
        3. Identify the types of documents that should be archived.
        4. Identify the objectives of the project closeout celebration.

Team members who were excited by the project in its early stages may find it difficult to maintain their focus to
complete the project. They might already be looking forward to the next project. Bringing a project to an end requires a
different management style that focuses on details as well as an analysis of the decisions that were made.

Closing out Contracts

The last stage of the project procurement cycle includes the payment of the bills and closing of procurement contracts.
Suppliers provide commodities that should meet standards of quality. The project team must check the records of
deliveries made and determine that they were acceptable quality. If any items were rejected for poor quality or not
delivered, the final payment is adjusted accordingly.

Punch Lists and Performance Tests

If a vendor is providing a service or building something for the project, there are usually items that must be fixed or
mistakes that must be corrected before the contract is complete. On a software project, performance tests are run on
the software, usually by the people who will be using the software, and any performance expectations not met are
noted. Sometimes the expectations were not captured in the project scope of work and sometimes the performance did
not meet the expectations established in the scope. If the items were not in the scope of work and the owner wants the
work done, then the owner typically issues a change order. If the expectations were in the scope of work, the contractor
is still responsible for completing the work.

Before the contract is closed, any minor items that need to be repaired or completed are placed on a punch list, which is
a list of all the items found by the client/or team/manager that still remain to be done. The project team will then work
on all of the items on the list, building a small schedule to complete the remaining work. If the number of items on the
punch list is too large or the amount of work is significant, the project team continues to work the project. Once the

                                                                                       333
punch list becomes smaller, the project manager begins closing down the project, maintaining only enough staff and
equipment to support the team that is working the punch list.

Transfer to Customer or Sponsor

If the product of the project is a software system, or something that must be operated and maintained by someone else,
it must be turned over to the people who will be responsible for it after the project is complete. They might perform their
own inspection to determine if the project team has met its goals for quality and that all elements of the project are
complete. These performance tests are typically identified in the original project contract.

Final Payments

The final payment is usually more than a simple percentage of the work that remains to be completed. Completing the
project might involve fixing the most difficult problems that are disproportionately expensive to solve, so the final
payment should be large enough to motivate the vendor to give the project a high priority so that the project can be
completed on time.

If the supplier has met all the contractual obligations, including fixing problems and making repairs as noted on a punch
list, the project team signs off on the contract and submits it to the accounting department for final payment. The
supplier is notified that the last payment is final and completes the contractual agreement between the supplier and the
project.

Post-project Evaluations

Before the team is dissolved and begins to focus on the next project, a review is conducted to capture the lessons that
can be learned from this project, often called a lessons learned meeting or document. The team explores what went
well and captures the processes to understand why they went well. The team asks if the process is transferable to other
projects. The team also explores what did not go well and what people learned from the experience. The process is not
to find blame, but to learn.

Quality management is a process of continual improvement that includes learning from past projects and making
changes to improve the next project. This process is documented as evidence that quality management practices are in
use. Some organizations have formal processes for changing work processes and integrating the lessons learned from
the project so other projects can benefit. Some organizations are less formal in the approach and expect individuals to
learn from the experience and take the experience to their next project and share what they learned with others in a very
informal way. Whatever type of approach is used, the following elements should be evaluated and the results of the
post-project evaluations are summarized in reports for external and internal use.

Project Profile

One of the first activities was to create a project profile to determine where the challenges were most likely to occur. If
the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index (DPCI) was used, each of the complexity evaluations is reviewed and compared to
actual events that occurred during the project. The team explores the changes in the complexity level during the life of
the project and how the team managed the complexity during the life of the project. Learning from this exercise
develops expertise that is useful in making the next project profile. The DPCI rating is adjusted, if necessary, for
reference purposes on future projects.

Trust and Alignment Effectiveness

The project leadership reviews the effect of trust--or lack of trust--on the project and the effectiveness of alignment
meetings at building trust. The team determines which problems might have been foreseen and mitigated and which
ones could not have been reasonably predicted. What were the cues that were missed by the team that indicated a
problem was emerging? What could the team have done to better predict and prevent trust issues?

                                                                                       334
Schedule and Budget Management

The original schedule of activities and the network diagram are compared to the actual schedule of events. Events that
caused changes to the schedule are reviewed to see how the use of contingency reserves and float mitigated the
disruption caused by those events. The original estimates of contingency time are reviewed to determine if they were
adequate and if the estimates of duration and float were accurate. These activities are necessary for the project team to
develop expertise in estimating schedule elements in future projects--they are not used to place blame.

A review of budget estimates for the cost of work scheduled is compared to the actual costs. If the estimates are
frequently different from the actual costs, the choice of estimating method is reviewed.

Risk Mitigation

After the project is finished, the estimates of risk can be reviewed and compared to the events that actually took place.
Did events occur that were unforeseen? What cues existed that may have allowed the team to predict these events?
Was the project contingency sufficient to cover unforeseen risks? Even if nothing went wrong on this project, it is not
proof that risk mitigation was a waste of money, but it is useful to compare the cost of avoiding risk versus the cost of
unexpected events to understand how much it cost to avoid risk.

Procurement Contracts

The performance of suppliers and vendors is reviewed to determine if they should still be included in the list of qualified
suppliers or vendors. The choice of contract for each is reviewed to determine if the decision to share risk was justified
and if the choice of incentives worked.

Customer Satisfaction

Relationships with the client are reviewed and decisions about including the client in project decisions and alignment
meetings are discussed. The client is given the opportunity to express satisfaction and identify areas in which to
improve. Often a senior manager from the organization interviews the client to develop feedback on the project team
performance.

A general report that provides an overview of the project is created to provide stakeholders with a summary of the
project. The report includes the original goals and objectives and statements that show how the project met those
goals and objectives. Performance on the schedule and budget are summarized and an assessment of client
satisfaction is provided. A version of this report can be provided to the client as a stakeholder and as another means for
deriving feedback.

Senior Management

The report to senior management contains all the information provided to the stakeholders in a short executive
summary. The report identifies practices and processes that could be improved or lessons that were learned that could
be useful on future projects.

Document Archival

The documents associated with the project must be stored in a safe location where they can be retrieved for future
reference. Signed contracts or other documents that might be used in tax reviews or lawsuits must be stored.
Organizations will have legal document storage and retrieval policies that apply to project documents and must be
followed. Some project documents can be stored electronically.

Care should be taken to store documents in a form that can be recovered easily. If the documents are stored
electronically, standard naming conventions should be used so documents can be sorted and grouped by name. If

                                                                                       335
documents are stored in paper form, the expiration date of the documents should be determined so they can be
destroyed at some point in the future. The following are documents that are typically archived:

      Charter documents
      Scope statement
      Original budget
      Change documents
      DPCI ratings
      Manager's summary--lessons learned
      Final DPCI rating

Project Celebration

A final celebration is a symbolic ending of a project and perhaps the dissolution of the team. The end of a major project
is often a time to reflect. Project team members and stakeholders have typically invested a great deal of time and
emotional energy into the success of the project. Because of this investment and because of the close relationships
that develop during a project, project closure is often sad. However, it is also an opportunity to improve client and team-
member satisfaction.

                                                Image by Jason Pratt
Reviewing the challenges and successes of the project creates a positive memory of the project and reinforces the
learning that can be transferred to future projects. Awards or recognition plaques might be given out to individuals who
made an outstanding contribution to the project. Groups or teams can be recognized for instances where trust between
team members made a positive difference can be rewarded. Celebrating the successes of the project provides a sense
of accomplishment and closure that brings satisfaction and pride in a job well done.

                                                                                       336
Key Takeaways

      To close contracts, systems are tested, materials are inspected, and punch lists of work to be completed
      are made.
      The purpose of the post-project review is to examine decisions that were made with partial knowledge with
      the way the project actually developed to learn from the experience and to improve future decisions. It is
      also used to identify processes that can be improved.
      Original project documents, such as the charter, scope statement, and budget, are stored. Documents
      developed during the project, such as change agreements, are stored. Post-project reviews, including a
      summary of lessons learned and a final project profile description--DPCI rating--are saved.
      At the project closeout celebration, positive behavior is awarded for individuals, and groups and the client
      or sponsor is invited to speak to enforce a sense of satisfaction.

                      This content is provided to you freely by EdTech Books.
                      Access it online or download it at https://edtechbooks.org/pm4id/12-1-project-closure.

                                                                                 337
338
