Educational Psychology
            Educational Psychology

         Nicole Arduini-Van Hoose, Ph.D.
        Hudson Valley Community College

Reviewers/Editors

Mele Nelson, MAED/TED-S, MED/Instructional Leadership
Adjunct Instructor, Humanities
Genesee Community College
Educational Psychology by Nicole Arduini-Van Hoose is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except
where otherwise noted.

Last Updated: June 2022

Universal Access to Education is Possible!

This book was produced with Pressbooks (https://pressbooks.com) and
rendered with Prince.

The Open Education program at Creative Commons works to minimize
barriers to effective education, supporting the CC mission through
education, training, advocacy and outreach on using open licenses and
open policies to maximize the benefits of open education (content,
practices and policy). Our work spans all levels of education (primary -
secondary - tertiary and vocational) and sectors of industry (non-profit -
corporate - government).

Open Educational Resources (OER) are teaching, learning, and research
materials that are either (a) in the public domain or (b) licensed in a manner
that provides everyone with free and perpetual permission to engage in
the 5R activities.

   Retain - make, own, and control a copy of the resource
   Reuse - use your original, revised, or remixed copy of the

      resource publicly
   Revise - edit, adapt, and modify your copy of the resource
   Remix - combine your original or revised copy of the resource

      with other existing material to create something new
   Redistribute - share copies of your original, revised, or

      remixed copy of the resource with others

[embed]https://player.vimeo.com/video/43401199[/embed]
Get Involved

We invite you to join us in our current efforts, or otherwise propose an idea
for collaboration:

   Join the CC Open Education Platform: Stay connected to
      global actions in open education resources, practice, and
      policy. Identify, plan and coordinate multi-national open
      education content, practices and policy projects to
      collaboratively solve education challenges with an amazing
      group of open education leaders from around the world.

   Take the Creative Commons Certificate: The Certificate is an
      in-depth course about CC licenses, open practices and the
      ethos of the Commons.

   License your work: Want to add a CC license to your project?
   Fund OER: Want to incorporate CC into your education

      funding policy? See Funder Policies for how to understand and
      implement CC licenses.
   Promote your project: Want to highlight your CC education
      project? Add it to our Case Studies wiki and tag it with `OER'.
      Then send a note to press@creativecommons.org.
   Share open policies: Know of an open education policy in your
      jurisdiction? Add it to the OER Policy Registry -- we need your
      help to make it a truly useful global resource.
   Stay up-to-date: Subscribe to the CC blog or simply follow
      the OER section of the blog.

This book was produced using Pressbooks.com.
Contents

Recommended Citation                                     xiii

How to Read this Textbook                                1

Other Books by Author                                    6

The Study of Educational Psychology

Educational Psychology                                   9

History of Educational Psychology                        11

Educational Psychology: Art or Science?                  23

The Nature of Teaching                                   25

Teacher Development                                      42

Teaching Philosophy                                      55

Chapter Summary: The Study of Educational Psychology     72

Glossary                                                 73

References                                               74

Using Science to Inform Educational Practices

The Science of Educational Psychology                    79

The Scientific Method                                    83

Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches to Research      87

Descriptive Research                                     93

Methods of Data Collection                               97

Analyzing Data: Correlational and Experimental Research  106

Correlational Research                                   124
Experimental Research                               131

Developmental Research Designs                      143

Teachers as Researchers                             153

Chapter Summary: Using Science to Inform Classroom  161

Practices

Glossary                                            162

References                                          165

The Developing Learner

Why Development Matters                             169

Fundamentals of Development                         173

Physical Development                                187

Brain Development                                   208

Cognitive Development                               230

Psychological Constructivism: Piaget's Theories     234

Social Constructivism: Vygotsky's Theory            270

Information Processing Theories                     275

Language Development                                302

Psychosocial Development                            332

Peer Relationships                                  352

Play                                                384

Moral Development                                   399

Chapter Summary: The Developing Learner             420

Glossary                                            422

References                                          433

The Learning Process

Teacher's Perspectives on Learning                  455

Major Theoretical Approaches of Learning            465
Behaviorism                                               467

Behaviorism in the Classroom                              493

Social Cognitive Learning Theory                          518

Constructivism in the Classroom                           542

Information Processing Approach in the Classroom          557

Chapter Summary: The Learning Process                     565

Glossary                                                  567

References                                                568

Facilitating Complex Thinking

Complex Thinking                                          573

Critical Thinking                                         574

Creative Thinking                                         579

Problem-Solving                                           582

Instructional Strategies that Stimulate Complex Thinking  594

Inquiry-Based Learning                                    613

Cooperative Learning                                      616

Chapter Summary: Facilitating Complex Thinking            623

Glossary                                                  625

References                                                626

Motivation

Theories of Motivation                                    631

Instinct, Drive, and Arousal Theories                     639

Behaviorism and Motivation                                645

Deficiency-Growth Theory: Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs     653

Interest as Motivation                                    657

Attribution Theory                                        662
Self-Efficacy Theory                                     667

Expectancy-Value Theory                                  679

Self-Determination Theory                                685

Goal Orientation Theory                                  696

Student Orientation Toward Achievement                   706

Keller's ARCS Model: Integrating Ideas About Motivation  710

Chapter Summary: Motivation                              716

Glossary                                                 718

References                                               719

Student Diversity

Student Differences                                      727

Intelligence                                             728

Learning Differences                                     753

Behavior Disorders                                       777

Physical Disabilities and Sensory Impairments            783

Teaching Students with Disabilities                      789

Gender Differences in the Classroom                      803

Cultural Differences in the Classroom                    810

Chapter Summary: Student Diversity                       825

Glossary                                                 828

References                                               829

Instruction

Instructional Management                                 843

Instructional Planning                                   845

Understanding by Design                                  860

Learning Objectives                                      870
Differentiated Instruction                       885
Students as a Resource for Instructional Goals   898
Delivering Instruction                           906
Direct Instruction: Lecture                      929
Active Learning                                  935
Flipped Classroom                                948
Just-In-Time Teaching (JiTT)                     957
Team-Based Learning (TBL)                        960
Experiential and Applied Learning                970
Blended and Online Learning                      982
Chapter Summary: Instruction                     993
Glossary                                         996
References                                       997

Classroom Management                             1011
                                                1019
Classroom Management and Why It Matters         1054
Systems of Classroom Management                 1080
Preventing Management Problems                  1093
Responding to Student Misbehavior               1095
Chapter Summary: Classroom Management           1096
Glossary
References                                       1101
                                                1109
Assessment and Evaluation                        1116
                                                1159
Assessment
Selecting High-Quality Assessments
Teacher-Made Assessments
Teacher's Purpose and Belief
Providing Feedback                          1162
Grading and Reporting                       1166
Communication with Parents                   1171
Standardized Tests                           1173
High-Stakes Testing                         1185
International Comparisons                   1200
Understanding Test Results                  1202
Issues with Standardized Tests              1213
Chapter Summary: Assessment and Evaluation  1219
Glossary                                     1221
References                                  1222

About the Author                            1229
OER Adoption Form--FACULTY ONLY              1231
Recommended Citation

Arduini-Van Hoose, N. (2020). Educational psychology. Retrieved
from https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud. CC BY-NC-SA
4.0 license.

                                                                 Recommended Citation | xiii
How to Read this Textbook

Organization

Chapters are organized predictably with figures, tables, and videos
that further organize and explain course concepts. The videos that
are directly embedded in the reading are mini-lectures on the
concept and are recommended to help you understand complex
ideas.

     Learning Objectives

        Before reading, review the learning objectives for the
     chapter. These objectives help guide your focus.

     Exercises

        Exercises provide you will an opportunity to practice and
     reflect on the concepts that you are learning.

                                                                How to Read this Textbook | 1
     Examples

        Case studies, interviews, examples, and current events
     highlight concepts in practice. This content is not a direct
     explanation of concepts but exemplifies how it applies in
     the real world.

Effective Reading

Reading a textbook is not like reading a novel. Opening a book and
reading from cover to cover does not typically result in an effective
reading of the content. One of the most recommended methods

for effective reading is the SQ4R method. SQ4R is an acronym
for: Survey, Question, Read, Respond, Record, and
Review. The SQ4R method may seem time-consuming at first, but

once you know the steps, it only takes a few minutes.

What are the benefits of using SQ4R?

   It's an active learning strategy that can be adapted to suit an
      individual's study preferences.

   It provides a strategy to retain a lot of factual detail, reducing
      the amount of information that has to be relearned for exams.

   It prompts the creation of study material to be used when
      preparing for exams.

   It helps to identify errors or areas of confusion.

2 | How to Read this Textbook
Step 1: Survey the Textbook and Chapters

   Read the preface and introduction to the text, and browse
      through the table of contents and the index. This section
      describes the main topics and the basic organizational
      structure of the book.

   Read the introduction and conclusion in each chapter and
      subsection.

   Scan the titles and subtitles. Study the pictures, charts, or
      graphs.

   Read the summary and any chapter questions.

Step 2: Start with a Question

   Take the section title, subtitle, or the first sentence of each
      paragraph and turn it into a question.

   For example: "Functions of the spinal cord" becomes "What are
      the functions of the spinal cord?"

Step 3: Read Actively

   Read carefully and actively by creating a "dialogue" with the
      text.

   Try to find the answer to the question you created, and ask
      questions as you read.

   Be careful not to skim the text looking for the answer, as you
      might miss other important information.

Step 4: Respond to Your Question

   Close the textbook and answer the question you created in
                                                               How to Read this Textbook | 3
      your own words.
   If you can't answer the question, reread the section until you

      can.
   If, after a few tries, you still can't answer the question, go on to

      the next few sections and see if things become clearer.
   If that doesn't help, you may need to change your question. Try

      making it broader or narrower.
   If changing your question doesn't help, get some assistance.

      Your instructor or TA are good places to start, or contact
      Learning Services.

Step 5: Record Your Notes

   Once you understand the material and can summarize it in
      your own words make a record of it.

   Common methods are highlighting and/or marking the text, or
      taking notes, or some combination of both.

   Whichever methods you choose, it's critical to read and
      understand the material first, and then go back and record.

   See below for the pros and cons of notetaking and highlighting.
   See our resources for help with note-taking.

Step 6: Review Your Notes

   Do a thorough review of lecture and text notes weekly, and
      briefly before each class.

   Make weekly review periods effective by starting from the
      beginning of the course in each review session. Though the
      volume of review material increases as the semester
      progresses, the amount of time needed to review older
      material decreases. After you've reviewed the first week's
      material a few times, it will take only minutes to skim over it

4 | How to Read this Textbook
      and recall the key points.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=23#oembed-1

CC licensed content, Original
   How to Read this Textbook. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/.
      License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously
   Study Effectively. Provided by: University of Guelph
      McLaughlin Library. Retrieved from:
      https://guides.lib.uoguelph.ca/c.php?g=697430&p=5011752.
      License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

                                                               How to Read this Textbook | 5
Other Books by Author

Adolescent Psychology
   Child Psychology
   Lifespan Development: A Topical Approach

6 | Other Books by Author
THE STUDY OF
EDUCATIONAL
PSYCHOLOGY

     Theme: Teaching as an Art

        Outline of Concepts:
          Educational Psychology: The art of classroom

             practice
          Teaching as decision making
        Learning Objectives:
          Understand educational psychology as a resource

             for educators
          Identify pioneers in educational psychology and

             their contributions to the field
          Differentiate the main psychological approaches

             applied to educational psychology
          Identify the three stages of teacher development

             and the role of Concern Theory
          Describe different ontologies and philosophies of

             education
          Define and create a philosophy of education

                                                                       The Study of Educational
                                                                                     Psychology | 7
Educational Psychology

Educational psychology is the branch of psychology concerned
with the scientific study of human learning. The study of learning
processes, from both cognitive and behavioral perspectives, allows
researchers to understand individual differences
in intelligence, cognitive development, affect, motivation, self-
regulation, and self-concept, as well as their role in learning. The
field of educational psychology relies heavily on quantitative
methods, including testing and measurement, to enhance
educational activities related to instructional design, classroom
management, and assessment, which serve to facilitate learning
processes in various educational settings across the lifespan
(Snowman, 1997).

   Educational psychology can in part be understood through its
relationship with other disciplines. It is informed primarily
by psychology, bearing a relationship to that discipline analogous to
the relationship between medicine and biology. It is also informed
by neuroscience. Educational psychology, in turn, informs a wide
range of specialties within educational studies,
including instructional design, educational technology, curriculum
development, organizational learning, special education, classroom
management, and student motivation. Educational psychology both
draws from and contributes to cognitive science and the learning
sciences.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=25#oembed-1

                                                                    Educational Psychology | 9
Video 1.1.1 What is Educational Psychology?
CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Educational Psychology. Provided by: Wikipedia. Retrieved
      from: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Educational_psychology.
      License: CC BY: Attribution

All rights reserved content
   Educational Psychology: Applying Psychology in the
      Classroom. Authored by: Wind Goodfriend. Provided by:
      Study.com. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/SAvrQAyCzkc.
      License: All Rights Reserved

10 | Educational Psychology
History of Educational
Psychology

Early Educational Psychologists

Educational psychology is a fairly new and growing field of study.

While philosophers  dating back  to  the  time

of Aristotle and Plato contemplated development, learning,

education, and the relationship between teacher and

learner educational psychology was not considered a specific

practice. It was unknown that everyday teaching and learning in

which individuals had to think about individual differences,

assessment, development, the nature of a subject being taught,

problem-solving, and transfer of learning was the beginning of the

field of educational psychology. These topics are important to

education and, as a result, they are important in understanding

human cognition, learning, and social perception (Berliner, 1993).

                                 Educational Psychology | 11
Johann Herbart

Johann Herbart (1776-1841) is

considered the father of

educational psychology. He believed

that learning was influenced by an

interest in the subject and the

teacher. He thought that teachers

should consider the students'

existing mental sets--what they

already know--when presenting

new  information             or

material. Herbart proposed what

are now known as the formal steps

(Hergenhahn, 2009):

1. Review material that has already been learned by the student
2. Prepare the student for new material by giving them an

     overview of what they are learning next
3. Present the new material
4. Relate the new material to the old material that has already

     been learned
5. Show how the student can apply the new material and show

     the material they will learn next

The period of 1890-1920 is considered the golden
era of educational psychology where aspirations
of the new discipline rested on the application of
the scientific methods of observation and
experimentation to educational problems. From
1840 to 1920, 37 million people immigrated to the
United States. This created an expansion of
elementary schools and secondary schools. The
increase in immigration also provided educational

12 | Educational Psychology
psychologists the opportunity to use intelligence
testing to screen immigrants at Ellis Island. At the

end of the 19th century, there were three major figures that
distinguished themselves in the emerging field of educational
psychology: William James, G. Stanley Hall, and John Dewey
(Berliner, 1993).

William James

                                   William James (1842-1910) is

                                             the father of psychology in
                                             America but he also made
                                             contributions to educational
                                             psychology. In his famous series of
                                             lectures Talks to Teachers on
                                             Psychology, published in 1899,
                                             James defines education as "the
                                             organization of acquired habits of
                                             conduct and tendencies to
                                             behavior". He states that teachers
                                             should "train the pupil to
                                             behavior" so that he fits into the
social and physical world. Teachers should also realize the
importance of habit and instinct. They should present information
that is clear and interesting and relate this new information and
material to things the student already knows about. He also
addresses important issues such as attention, memory, and
association of ideas (James, 1983).

 Alfred Binet

                                                                  Educational Psychology | 13
Alfred Binet (1857-1911) published Mental Fatigue in 1898, in which
he attempted to apply the experimental method to educational
psychology. In this experimental method, he advocated for two
types of experiments, experiments done in the lab, and experiments
done in the classroom. In 1904 he was appointed the Minister of
Public Education. This is when he began to look for a way to
distinguish children with developmental disabilities. Binet strongly
supported special education programs because he believed that
"abnormality" could be cured. The Binet-Simon test was the first
intelligence test and was the first to distinguish between "normal
children" and those with developmental disabilities. Binet believed
that it was important to study individual differences between age
groups and children of the same age. He also believed that it was
important for teachers to take into account individual students'
strengths and also the needs of the classroom as a whole when
teaching and creating a good learning environment. He also
believed that it was important to train teachers in observation so
that they would be able to see individual differences among children
and adjust the curriculum to the students. Binet also emphasized
that the practice of material was important. The test became known
as the Stanford-Binet and was one of the most widely used tests of
intelligence (Zimmerman & Schunk, 2003).

14 | Educational Psychology
Edward Thorndike

                  Edward Thorndike (1874-1949)

                  supported  the  scientific

                  movement in education. He based

                  teaching practices on empirical

                  evidence                and

                  measurement. Thorndike

                  developed  the          theory

                  of instrumental conditioning or

                  the law of effect. The law of effect

                  states that associations are

                  strengthened when it is followed

                  by something pleasing and

                  associations are weakened when

followed by something not pleasing. He also found that learning is

done a little at a time or in increments, learning is an automatic

process and all the principles of learning apply to all mammals.

Thorndike's research with Robert Woodworth on the theory of

transfer found that learning one subject will only influence your

ability to learn another subject if the subjects are similar. This

discovery led to less emphasis on learning the classics because they

found that studying the classics does not contribute to overall

general intelligence. Thorndike was one of the first to say that

individual differences in cognitive tasks were due to how many

stimulus-response patterns a person had rather than a general

intellectual ability. He contributed word dictionaries that

were scientifically based to determine the words and definitions

used. The dictionaries were the first to take into consideration the

user's maturity level. He also integrated pictures and an easier

pronunciation guide into each of the definitions. Thorndike

contributed arithmetic books based on learning theory. He made all

the problems more realistic and relevant to what was being studied,

not just to improve general intelligence. He developed tests that

                            Educational Psychology | 15
were standardized to measure performance in school-related
subjects. His biggest contribution to testing was the CAVD
intelligence test which used a multidimensional approach to
intelligence and was the first to use a ratio scale (Zimmerman &
Schunk, 2003). His later work was on programmed instruction,
mastery learning, and computer-based learning.

       "If, by a miracle of mechanical ingenuity, a book could be so
       arranged that only to him who had done what was directed
       on page one would page two become visible, and so on,
       much that now requires personal instruction could be
       managed by print" (Thorndike, 1912).

John Dewey

                                                John Dewey (1859-1952) had a
                                                major influence on the
                                                development of progressive
                                                education in the United States.
                                                He believed that the classroom
                                                should prepare children to be
                                                good citizens and facilitate
                                                creative intelligence. He pushed
                                                for the creation of practical
                                                classes that could be applied
                                                outside of a school setting
                                                (Zimmerman & Schunk, 2003).
                                                He also thought that education
                                                should be student-oriented, not
subject-oriented. For Dewey, education was a social experience
that helped bring together generations of people. He stated that
students learn by doing. He believed in an active mind that was able
to be educated through observation, problem-solving, and inquiry.

16 | Educational Psychology
In his 1910, book How We Think, he emphasizes that material should
be provided in a way that is stimulating and interesting to the
student since it encourages original thought and problem-
solving. He also stated that material should be relative to the
student's own experience (Dewey, 1910).

       "The material furnished by way of information should be
       relevant to a question that is vital in the student's own
       experience" (Dewey, 1910).

Jean Piaget

Jean Piaget (1896-1980) is considered one of the most influential
psychologists of the twentieth century, and his stage theory of
cognitive development revolutionized our view of children's
thinking and learning. His work inspired more research than any
other theorist, and many of his concepts are still foundational to

                                                                   Educational Psychology | 17
developmental psychology. His interest lay in children's knowledge,
their thinking, and the qualitative differences in their thinking as it
develops. Although he called his field "genetic epistemology,"
stressing the role of biological determinism, he also assigned great
importance to experience. In his view, children "construct" their
knowledge through processes of "assimilation," in which they
evaluate and try to understand new information, based on their
existing knowledge of the world, and "accommodation," in which
they expand and modify their cognitive structures based on new
experiences.

Contemporary Educational Psychologists

The number of people receiving a high school and college education
increased dramatically from 1920 to 1960. Because very few jobs
were available to teens coming out of eighth grade, there was an
increase in high school attendance in the 1930s
(Zimmerman & Schunk, 2003). The progressive movement in the
United States took off at this time and led to the idea of progressive
education. John Flanagan, an educational psychologist, developed
tests for combat trainees and instructions in combat training. In
1954, the work of Kenneth Clark and his wife on the effects of
segregation on black and white children was influential in the
Supreme Court case Brown v. Board of Education (Hergenhahn,
2009). From the 1960s to the present day, educational psychology
has switched from a behaviorist perspective to a more cognitive-
based perspective because of the influence and development
of cognitive psychology at this time (Zimmerman & Schunk, 2003).

18 | Educational Psychology
Jerome Bruner

                                                  Jerome Bruner is notable for
                                                  integrating Piaget's cognitive
                                                  approaches into educational
                                                  psychology. He advocated for
                                                  discovery learning where
                                                  teachers create a problem-
                                                  solving environment that
                                                  allows the student to question,
                                                  explore, and experiment. In his
                                                  book, The Process of Education
                                                  Bruner stated that the
structure of the material and the cognitive abilities of the person
are important in learning. He emphasized the importance of the
subject matter. He also believed that how the subject was
structured was important for the student's understanding of the
subject and it is the goal of the teacher to structure the subject in a
way that was easy for the student to understand. In the early 1960s,
Bruner went to Africa to teach math and science to school children,
which influenced his view of schooling as a cultural institution.
Bruner was also influential in the development of Man: a Course of
Study (M.A.C.O.S.) which was an educational program that
combined anthropology and science. The program explored human
evolution and social behavior. He also helped with the development
of the Head Start program. He was interested in the influence of
culture on education and looked at the impact of poverty on
educational development (Zimmerman & Schunk, 2003).

                                                                  Educational Psychology | 19
Benjamin Bloom

Benjamin Bloom (1903-1999) spent

over 50 years at the University of

Chicago, where he worked in the

department of education. He

believed that all students can learn.

He developed a taxonomy of

educational                  objectives

(Zimmerman & Schunk, 2003). The

taxonomy     provided        broad

educational objectives that could be

used to help expand the curriculum

to match the ideas in the taxonomy.

The taxonomy is used in every

aspect of education from the

training of the teachers to the development of testing material.

Bloom believed in communicating clear learning goals and

promoting an active student. He thought that teachers should

provide feedback to the students on their strengths and

weaknesses. Bloom also did research on college students and their

problem-solving processes. He found that they differ in

understanding the basis of the problem and the ideas in the

problem. He also found that students differ in the process of

problem-solving in their approach and attitude toward the problem

(Zimmerman & Schunk, 2003).

20 | Educational Psychology
Nathaniel Gage

                                           Nathaniel Gage (1917 -2008) is an
                                           important figure in educational
                                           psychology as his research focused
                                           on improving teaching and
                                           understanding the processes
                                           involved in teaching. He edited the
                                           book Handbook of Research on
                                           Teaching (1963), which helped
                                           develop early research in teaching
                                           and educational psychology. Gage
                                           founded the Stanford Center for
                                           Research and Development in
Teaching, which contributed to research on teaching as well as
influenced the education of important educational psychologists
(Zimmerman & Schunk, 2003).
CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Educational Psychology. Provided by: Wikipedia. Project:
      https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Educational_psychology.
      License: CC BY: Attribution

CC licensed content, Specific attribution

   Schemas, assimilation, and accommodation. Provided by: Khan
      Academy . Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/xoAUMmZ0pzc.
      License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

Public domain content

   Image of Johann Herbart. Provided by: Wikipedia. Retrieved
      from: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
      Johann_Friedrich_Herbart#/media/
      File:Johann_F_Herbart.jpg. License: Public Domain: No Known

                                                                   Educational Psychology | 21
      Copyright
   Image of Alfred Binet. Provided by: Wikipedia. Retrieved from:

      https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alfred_Binet#/media/
      File:Alfred_Binet.jpg. License: Public Domain: No Known
      Copyright
   Image of Edward Thorndike. Provided by: Wikipedia. Retrieved
      from: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
      Edward_Thorndike#/media/
      File:PSM_V80_D211_Edward_Lee_Thorndike.png. License:
      Public Domain: No Known Copyright
   Image of John Dewey. Provided by: Wikipedia. Retrieved from:
      https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Dewey#/media/
      File:John_Dewey_cph.3a51565.jpg. License: Public Domain: No
      Known Copyright
   Image of Jean Piaget. Provided by: Wikipedia. Retrieved from:
      https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jean_Piaget#/media/
      File:Jean_Piaget_in_Ann_Arbor.png. License: Public Domain:
      No Known Copyright
   Image of Benjamin Bloom. Provided by: Wikipedia. Retrieved
      from: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
      Benjamin_Bloom#/media/File:Benjamin_Bloom_photo.jpg.
      License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright

22 | Educational Psychology
Educational Psychology: Art
or Science?

A basic human characteristic is the need to understand our world.
Both art and science are attempts to understand and describe that
world. Depending on whether we approach a subject as an art or
science will impact the methods of study, expression, and
application of our understanding.

   Art is defined as the "skill acquired by experience, study, or
observation...an occupation requiring knowledge or skill"
(Merriam-Webster, 2020a). It is an expression of thoughts and ideas;
a manifestation of experience and understanding. Art is the practice
of what we know and involves creativity in how we approach the
world. However, to be creative, to make something new, requires a
level of knowledge and expertise.

   Science is "the state of knowing...something that may be studied
or learned like systematized knowledge...knowledge or a system
of knowledge covering general truths or the operation of general
laws especially as obtained and tested through scientific method...a
system or method reconciling practical ends with scientific laws"
(Merriam-Webster, 2020b). Science is the process of acquiring
understanding and discovering truths. Systematic study helps us
acquire knowledge about our world.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=27#oembed-1

                                                                  Educational Psychology | 23
Video 1.3.1. The Art of Science explains how scientists integrate art
and science in their field.

   Educational psychology is both an art and a science. Researchers
in educational psychology use the scientific method and research
designs to study phenomena that influence learning and education,
which can be applied to the art of teaching. Education practitioners
use this research to hone their craft and become effective teachers.
With expertise comes innovation. And with innovation comes more
questions for systematic study.
Throughout this
All rights reserved content

   The Art of Science. Authored by: Milo Mitchell. Provided by:
      UCLA Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center. Retrieved from:
      https://youtu.be/OvNcN1ifRmM. License: All Rights Reserved

24 | Educational Psychology
The Nature of Teaching

 Exercise 1.1. Your Core Convictions and Teaching
Goals

   Learning is an active process. Reflecting on what you
already know and what you are learning enhances
understanding and application of course content. Before
you read further, consider your current teaching beliefs,
values, and priorities. For example, what is the role of the
teacher? Which skills are required? How should teachers
support student development? Motivation? Which
instructional techniques are best? How will you know what
students have learned? List your core convictions and
teaching goals. These lists will help you formulate your
teaching philosophy later.

Core Convictions About  Teaching Goals
Teaching & Learning

                        Educational Psychology | 25
        Source: Adapted from The nature of teaching (n.d.).

Teaching is Multidimensional

Teaching involves many domains, which we will explore throughout
this course. Not only do teachers need to be experts on content,
but they also need to understand student development, the learning
process, factors that influence learning, classroom management,
instructional techniques, and assessment. All of these domains
impact the effectiveness of the teacher and the ability for students
to learn.

   Whether working with preschoolers, elementary children,
adolescents, or adults, teachers must understand their student's
development. Cognitively, learners may be in different stages,
possessing varying capacities for thinking, learning, and decision-
making. Physically, brain maturation, sensory-perceptual abilities,
and motor skills will change with age. Psychosocial development
will affect social relationships, self-regulation, and emotion
management. Understanding the cognitive, physical, and
psychosocial development of the students we serve makes us more
effective teachers.

   Teachers must learn the theories and practices of the learning
processes from various approaches. These different approaches
may be utilized depending on what and how something is to be
learned. The behavioral approach is a set of learning theories that
focuses on how we are conditioned to respond to events or stimuli
with predictable, observable behavior. These theories explain how
experience determines behavior. In the 1950s. the cognitive
approach gained attention as new disciplinary perspectives in
linguistics, neuroscience, and computer science were emerging,
and these areas revived interest in the mind as a focus of scientific

26 | Educational Psychology
inquiry. The contextual approach considered the relationship
between individuals and their physical, cognitive, and social worlds.
They also examine socio-cultural and environmental influences on
development. Biopsychology explores how our biology influences
our behavior. and thinking. Neuroscience has helped us understand
more about how the structure of the brain, neuro-communication,
and neurochemistry allows us to learn. An educational psychologist
would be interested in how these physiological systems impact
learning.

   Helping students learn also requires understanding motivation
and learning differences. Some students are highly motivated to
learn, while others need to be motivated by external factors. In
some cases, there may be factors that interfere with the motivation
to learn. In addition, students may have learning differences that
also impact learning. Teachers need to be aware of how factors like
intelligence, learning disabilities, or mental health issues can affect
students' learning and how a teacher can assist students.

   A significant domain for teachers to consider is classroom
management and instruction. Teachers learn many techniques for
how to manage student behavior, structure their classrooms and
instructional time, as well as many teaching strategies. Approaches
that work well with one class or student may not work well with
another. Choosing the best techniques and strategies to be effective
is part of the art of teaching.

   Teachers cannot assume that what they teach is what students
learn. Assessment, both informal and formal, helps teachers
understand what students know and do not know. In some cases,
assessment is meant to inform teaching so the teacher can create
opportunities for additional learning. In other cases, assessment is
the final summary of what students have learned about a subject.
Assessments may be teacher-created or standardized, but
regardless, how, when, and what to assess must be considered as
part of a complete teaching plan for effective teaching.

                                                                  Educational Psychology | 27
Teachers are Part of a System

Teachers are not an island. They, and their students, are part of
a larger system with this microcosm at the core of the system.
Teachers are directly influenced by the policies and practices of
their departments, schools, districts, and states. School systems
are influenced by larger macrosystems, such as laws, professional
organization recommendations, and cultural norms.

           Figure 1.4.1. Circles of systemic influence on teachers.
   At the macrosystem level, federal legislation dictates that all
states and school districts adhere to specific mandates that
guarantee access to education and protects students' rights (many
of those laws are linked below). These laws are the basis for state
and local regulations, policies, and practices. Professional
organizations, such as the National Board for Professional Teaching
Standards, provide standards for teacher proficiency to promote
effective teaching and improvement in schools. Historical and
cultural contexts also influence the classroom. Consider the
increase in school shootings in the United States in recent decades.
28 | Educational Psychology
Active shooter plans are now required by state and local policies.
Active shooter drills have become a regular practice. The anxiety
associated with this risk is now woven into the school and American
culture.

     Federal Education Legislation

        Legislation, regulations, guidance, and other policy
     documents can be found here for the Every Student
     Succeeds Act (ESSA), and other topics.

        Please note that in the U.S., the federal role in education
     is limited. Because of the Tenth Amendment, most
     education policy is decided at the state and local levels. So,
     if you have a question about a policy or issue, you may want
     to check with the relevant organization in your state or
     school district.

        Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965
     (ESEA), as amended

          Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Information
             page

          ESEA Flexibility: Information about flexibility from
             certain No Child Left Behind requirements that ED is
             offering to states.

          Text of the Elementary and Secondary Education
             Act of 1965, as amended by ESSA and the National
             Defense Authorization Act, 2017:
             Introductory materials -- Title I -- Title II -- Title
             III -- Title IV -- Title V -- Title VI -- Title VII -- Title
             VIII

          Text of No Child Left Behind Act: For certain ESEA

                                                                  Educational Psychology | 29
             programs, the requirements of NCLB apply through
             the 2016-2017 school year.
          Guidance and Regulations
        FERPA (Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act)

          Overview
          Regulations
        Civil Rights

          Disability Discrimination (Title II of the Americans
             with Disabilities Act)

          Sex Discrimination (Title IX of the Education
             Amendments of 1972)

          Race and National Origin Discrimination (Title VI of
             the Civil Rights Act of 1964)

        IDEA (Individuals with Disabilities Education Act)

          IDEA Website
          Text of the Individuals with Disabilities Education

             Act (PDF, 529KB)
        WIOA (Workforce Innovation and Opportunities Act)

          WIOA Information Page
          Text of the Workforce Innovation and

             Opportunities Act
        Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended through P.L.
     114-95

          Text of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (PDF, 505KB)
        Higher Education Act

30 | Educational Psychology
          Text of the Higher Education Opportunity Act
          Postsecondary Policy Initiatives

Teachers and students are directly influenced by the exosystem.
These are the policies, practices, and standards established by state
and local agencies. The curriculum that is mandated, the teaching
materials adopted, the technology available, and the assessments
required will directly impact a teacher's choices in the classroom
and students' achievement. When considering what to teach, how
to teach it, and when, teachers will need to follow the standards
and curriculum set form by this ecosystem. Students' learning
experiences may be enhanced or hindered by their exosystem.

     The Digital Divide

        The expanding use of technology affects the lives of
     students both inside and outside the classroom. While
     exposure to learning technology inside schools and
     classrooms is important, access can also differ once those
     students are in their homes. It's important for educators to
     be aware of the potential barriers to technology and
     internet access that students may face. A recent report
     from NCES, Student Access to Digital Learning Resources
     Outside the Classroom, highlighted some differences in
     home internet access for students.

        The percentage of 5- to 17-year-old students with
     either no internet access or only dial-up access differed by
     students' race/ethnicity.

                                                                  Educational Psychology | 31
        Access also differed geographically. Remote rural locales
     had the highest percentage of students with either no
     internet access or only dial-up access at home. Within
     these remote rural areas, the percentage of students
     lacking access differed by students' race/ethnicity. Forty-
     one percent of Black students and 26 percent of Hispanic
     students living in remote rural areas had either no internet
     access or only dial-up access at home. This was higher than
     the percentage of White students (13 percent) and Asian
     students (11 percent) living in remote rural areas who had
     either no internet access or only dial-up access at home.

        The percentage of students who had no access to the
     Internet or only dial-up access was higher for students

32 | Educational Psychology
     living below the poverty threshold (26 percent) than for
     students living between 100 and 185 percent of the poverty
     threshold (15 percent) and at greater than 185 percent of
     the poverty threshold (4 percent).

        In 2015, the two most common main reasons for children
     ages 3 to 18 to not have home internet access were that it
     was too expensive or that the family did not believe they
     needed it/ were not interested in having it (38 percent
     each). Other main reasons for not having home internet
     access included that the home lacked a computer or a
     computer adequate for internet use (8 percent), internet
     service was not available in the area (5 percent), the
     Internet could be used somewhere else (3 percent), and
     privacy and security concerns (i.e., online privacy and
     cybersecurity and personal safety concerns) (2 percent).

What Teachers Should Know and Be Able to Do

The National Board for Professional Teaching Standards proposes
five core propositions for teaching. These five propositions provide

                                                                  Educational Psychology | 33
a vision for accomplished teaching and are the basis for National
Board Certification.

 1. Accomplished teachers are committed to their students and their
      learning. They recognize individual differences and adjust their
      teaching according to their students' needs. Teachers
      understand how their students develop and learn, but
      understand that their mission goes beyond students' cognitive
      development. They treat students equitably.

2. Accomplished teachers know their subject and know how to
      teach their subjects to students. They understand how
      knowledge in their subject is created, organized, and linked to
      other subjects. They also know how to convey their subject to
      students by utilizing multiple paths to knowledge.

3. Accomplished teachers are responsible for managing and
      monitoring student learning. They utilize multiple methods for
      meeting their instructional goals and supporting student
      learning in various settings. Teachers engage students in the
      learning process and value student participation. They also
      regularly assess student progress.

4. Accomplished teachers think systematically about their teaching
      and learn from their experience. They use feedback and
      research to improve their practice and make difficult choices
      that challenge their professional judgment.

5. Accomplished teachers are members of learning communities.
      They collaborate with other professionals, families, and the
      community.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=28#oembed-2

34 | Educational Psychology
Video 1.4.1. What Teachers Should Know reviews the National Board
for Professional Teach Standards five core propositions.

     Exercise 1.2. Self-Assessment of Teaching

        Questionnaire for self-assessment of teaching. Reflect on
     these characteristics and consider which skills you will
     improve during this course.

                                                                  Educational Psychology | 35
                                          Stron                           Stron
                                           gly                             gly
                                       Disagree                          Agree

I can explain how people develop and learn. 1                       2 3  4

I know my subject matter and can explain it to others. 1            2 3  4

I can identify several ways to

get to know my students and what       1                            2 3  4

they know.

I know what content standards

are and can plan a lesson that         1                            2 3  4

meets those standards.

I can demonstrate more than one instructional strategy. 1           2 3  4

I can assess other's learning

using a traditional test and at least  1                            2 3  4

one other measure.

I often reflect on teaching and

learning and can identify how I

can modify my teaching based on        1                            2 3  4

data collected about student

learning.

I can identify several ways to demonstrate respect for students. 1  2 3  4

I can identify at least three

members of my learning                 1                            2 3  4

community.

Source: Adapted from The nature of teaching (n.d.).

36 | Educational Psychology
Effective Teaching

Exercise 1.3. Traits of an Effective Teacher

   Think about the most effective teachers in your
experience. What made them effective? What
characteristics, attributes, or skills did they possess that
made them effective?

Personal Attributes    Professional Skills,
                     Attributes, Abilities

        Source: Adapted from The nature of teaching (n.d.).

What is an effective teacher? Walker (2008) asked in-service and
pre-service teachers to identify characteristics of their most
effective teachers-"effective" meaning that these
teachers made the most significant and positive impact on their
lives. From those responses, twelve characteristics emerged.

                                                                  Educational Psychology | 37
 1. Prepared. Effective teachers are prepared for each class and
      are ready to teach. Time on task is a priority. Students report
      that it is easy to learn because the teacher is prepared and
      time passes quickly because they are engaged in learning.

 2. Positive. Effective teachers are optimistic about teaching and
      about their students. They look for the positives in every
      situation. They also are available to students, communicate
      with students about their progress, and give praise. These
      teachers also support students to respond positively to each
      other.

 3. Hold High Expectations. Effective teachers hold the highest
      standards and believe that all students can be successful. They
      challenge their students to do their best and build students'
      confidence.

 4. Creative. Effective teachers are resourceful and inventive. They
      will do things outside of the norm to keep students engaged
      and motivated.

 5. Fair. Effective teachers are fair in how they handle students
      and grading. They allow students equal opportunities. They
      give clear and consistent expectations. They also recognize
      that not all students learn the same way, and "fair" does
      necessarily mean treating everyone the same.

 6. Display a Personal Touch. Effective teachers are approachable
      and connect with their students personally. They share
      experiences and take an interest in their students.

 7. Cultivate a Sense of Belonging. Effective teachers project that
      their preferred place is in the classroom and they make
      students feel welcome and comfortable there as well.

 8. Compassionate. Effective teachers are concerned about
      students' academics, but also their personal issues. They show
      sensitivity and compassion toward their students.

 9. Have a Sense of Humor. Effective teachers can make learning
      fun and do not take everything seriously. They use humor
      while teaching and dealing with difficult situations.

10. Respect Students. Effective teachers give the highest respect

38 | Educational Psychology
      and get the highest respect from students. They do not
      deliberately embarrass students. They respect their privacy
      and speak to students alone about sensitive issues, grades, or
      conduct.
11. Forgiving. Effective teachers forgive students for inappropriate
      behavior and do not hold grudges. They refuse to give up on
      difficult students.
12. Admit Mistakes. Effective teachers admit when they are wrong
      and apologize for mistakes.

     What Makes a Good Teacher Great?

                          One or more interactive elements has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You can
              view them online here:
              https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=28#oe
              mbed-1

        Video 1.4.2. What Makes a Good Teacher Great discusses
     some of the lessons Azul Terronez learned about being an
     effective teacher from his students.

     Exercise 1.4. Traits that Make Me an Effective

                                                                  Educational Psychology | 39
Teachers

   Which of these personal and professional characteristics
and skills do you possess? When you formulate your
teaching philosophy, you can discuss the characteristics of
an effective teacher that you possess.

My Personal Attributes  My Professional Skills,
                        Attributes, Abilities

        Source: Adapted from The nature of teaching (n.d.).

CC licensed content, Shared previously
   Adolescent Psychology. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      adolescent. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike

40 | Educational Psychology
All rights reserved content
   What Teachers Should Know. Provided by: National Board for
      Professional Teach Standards. Retrieved from:
      https://youtu.be/J4_o20MgLqg. License: Public Domain: No
      Known Copyright
   What Makes a Good Teacher Great. Authored by: Azuel
      Terronez. Provided by: Ted. Retrieved from:
      https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vrU6YJle6Q4. License: All
      Rights Reserved

Public domain content
   Laws & Guidance. Provided by: U.S. Department of Education.
      Retrieved from: https://www2.ed.gov/policy/
      landing.jhtml?src=ft. License: CC0: No Rights Reserved
   The Digital Divide: Differences in Home Internet Access.
      Authored by: Lauren Musu. Provided by: National Center for
      Education Statistics. Retrieved from: https://nces.ed.gov/
      blogs/nces/post/the-digital-divide-differences-in-home-
      internet-access. License: CC0: No Rights Reserved

                                                                   Educational Psychology | 41
Teacher Development

How does a beginning teacher develop into a mature, confident,
and competent professional? What conditions must you
experience? What knowledge must you acquire? What skills must
you develop? Educators and educational psychologists have studied
the developmental process of teachers from pre-service to in-
services and have found that it unfolds in some predictable ways.
We will discuss the stages of development that all teachers go
through on the way to becoming expert practitioners.

Stages of Teacher Development

At this point in your training, you probably see yourself in the role of
a teacher, and you may have constructed some images or pictures
of your first class. You may have promised yourself that you are
going to be better than some of the teachers who taught you when
you were in elementary or high school. You probably hope to be
as good as some other teachers you have known. But as you begin
your first regular teaching assignment you will find that there is a
difference between your student teaching experiences and the "real
world of teaching." First, the classrooms you have been in came with
a made-to-order instructional and behavior management system.
All you had to do was adjust to it. Soon, no such system will exist,
and you will have to create one of your own. Second, during student
teaching, you have had instructional materials and lessons to draw
on as aids to help you plan and teach. This may not be the case when
you start your first teaching assignment. You will have to make
many decisions about what, for how long, and in what manner to
teach a group of learners you know little about. Finally, your
cooperating teacher has been an important advisor and confidante
during your student teaching experience, someone you could

42 | Educational Psychology
approach for advice on how to teach particular learners or how to
cope with the psychological and physical demands of teaching. It
is possible that such a mentor may not exist in your first regular
teaching assignment.

The Survival Stage

This transition to the real world of teaching ushers in the first
stage of teacher development, sometimes called the survival stage
(Borich, 1993; Burden, 1986; Fuller, 1969; Ryan, 1992). The
distinguishing feature of the survival stage of teaching is that your
concerns will focus on your own well-being more than on
the teaching task or your learners. Bullough (1989) has described
this stage as "the fight for one's professional life" (p. 16). During this
stage, you will typically have the following concerns:

   Will my learners like me?
   Will they listen to what I say?
   What will parents and teachers think of me?
   Will I do well when the principal observes me?
   Will I ever have time to myself?

Typically, during this time you become so focused on behavior
management concerns that you feel like you are struggling merely
to survive the day-to-day give-and-take of classroom life. Listen to
Kerrie, a first-year teacher, reflect on some assumptions she made
during the fall semester of her first teaching assignment:

      ...I thought that if you planned the curriculum really
      well, the management just falls into place. I really
      thought that when I was student teaching. If you are
      not well planned you are going to have problems, but
      planning well doesn't solve those problems; you still

                                                                  Educational Psychology | 43
      have management problems. At first...I thought that
      you could plan your curriculum and [good] behavior
      would fall into place; you could handle it as it comes.
      But you really can't. The other half of planning is what
      you will require behaviorally and you can plan
      for that. Now [sixth month] I plan a lot more things,
      like transition time and walking into the other room
      [to check on students]. (Bullough, 1989, pp. 25-26)

The Task Stage

For most teachers, survival concerns and concerns about self begin
to diminish rapidly during the first months of teaching, but there
is no precise time when they are over. What signals their end is
the transition to a new set of concerns and a gradual diminishing
of concerns about your own well-being. This new set of concerns
focuses on how best to deliver instruction. Various labels have been
used to describe this second stage, such as the mastery stage of
teaching (Ryan, 1992), consolidation and exploration (Burden, 1986),
and trial and error (Sacks & Harrington, 1982). Fuller (1969)
described this as the task stage: the stage in which the new teacher
focuses on the teaching task itself. At this stage, you begin to feel
confident that you can manage the day-to-day
routines of the classroom and deal with a variety of behavior
problems. You are at the point where you can plan your lessons
without an exclusive focus on managing the classroom. Your focus
turns toward improving your teaching skills and achieving greater
mastery over the content you are teaching.

   Typically, your concerns during this second stage of teacher
growth and development are these:

   How good are my instructional materials?
   Will I have enough time to cover all the content?

44 | Educational Psychology
   How can I add variety to my presentations?
   Where can I get some ideas for a learning center?
   What's the best way to teach writing skills?

The Impact Stage

The final stage of teacher growth and development is characterized
by concerns that have to do less with management and lesson
delivery and more with the impact of your teaching on learners.
This point in a teacher's career is sometimes referred to as the
impact stage. At this time, you will naturally view learners as
individuals and will be concerned that each of your students fulfills
his or her potential. At this stage, your principal concerns might be
these:

   How can I increase my learners' feelings of accomplishment?
   How do I meet my learners' social and emotional needs?
   What is the best way to challenge my unmotivated learners?
   What skills do they need to best prepare them for the next

      grade?

If you are a typical beginning teacher, your thoughts and concerns
will focus at first on your own well-being and only later on the
teaching task and your students. Fuller (1969), for example, found
that during the early, middle, and late phases of student teaching,
preservice teachers' concerns shifted from a focus on self (Will
the students like me? Can I control the class?) to concerns that
emphasized the teaching task (Are there sufficient instructional
materials? Is there time to cover all the content?) to concerns that
emphasized the needs of pupils (Are the pupils learning? Can they
apply what they've learned?). Fuller speculated that concerns for
self, task, and impact are the natural stages that most teachers pass
through, representing a developmental growth pattern extending

                                                                  Educational Psychology | 45
over months and even years of a teacher's career. Although some
teachers pass through these stages more quickly than others and at
different levels of intensity, Fuller suggested almost all teachers can
be expected to move from one to another, with the most effective
and experienced teachers expressing student-centered (impact)
concerns at a high level
of commitment.

   Concerns theory grew out of the analysis of recorded transcripts
of interviews with student teachers. Over an extended period of
time, these records were used to identify and classify problems
that student teachers experienced and the concerns they expressed
about these problems. These expressed concerns, when grouped
into developmental and sequential stages, showed that student
teachers with the least experience were concerned about self and
self-survival, while student teachers with more experience and in-
service teachers were concerned about student achievement and
learning.

   Stated in its simplest terms, concerns theory conceptualizes the
learning process for a prospective teacher as a natural flow from
concerns for self (teacher) to task (teaching) to impact (pupil). The
physical, mental, and emotional states of the prospective teacher
play an important role in the shift of focus from self to the task
to impact. The lack of adequate knowledge or emotional support
during the critical pre-teaching and student teaching periods can
result in a slower, more labored shift of focus to the task. This,
in turn, can result in failure on the part of the teacher to reach a
concern for his or her impact on students.

   Fuller's concerns theory has several other implications. A teacher
may return to an earlier stage of concern, for example, from a
concern for pupils back to a concern for the task as a result of
suddenly having to teach a new grade or subject. Or, she may move
from a concern for task back to a concern for self as a result of
having to teach in a different and unfamiliar school. Thus, teacher
concerns may not always be determined developmentally but can
be context-dependent as well. The time spent in a given stage the

46 | Educational Psychology
second time may be shorter than the first. Finally, the three stages
of concern need not be exclusive of one another. A teacher may have
concerns predominately in one area and still have concerns of lesser
intensity in one or both of the other stages.

Educational Psychology and Teacher Growth and
Development

An important question for any teacher is this: What type of
knowledge and experiences are needed to pass successfully from
an exclusive concern for self-survival to a concern for the impact
the teacher is having on the students? Another question: What role
can the study of educational psychology play in this passage from
survival to impact?

   Shulman (1992) identifies four types of knowledge that are crucial
for teacher growth and development: (1) practical knowledge, which
comes from student field experiences, student teaching, and
regular teaching; (2) case knowledge, which comes from reading
about what both successful and unsuccessful teachers have done;
(3) theoretical knowledge, which comes from reading about
important ideas, conceptual systems, and paradigms for thinking
about teaching; and (4) empirical knowledge, which comes from
reading what the research says about a particular subject and how
to teach it.

   Educational psychology is a discipline of inquiry that focuses
primarily on the latter two categories of knowledge. We'll look at
how this knowledge is developed and used by educational
psychologists to solve important classroom learning problems. But
before learning how educational psychologists provide information
to help teachers progress through the stages of teacher concerns,
you may want to determine your own levels of concern for self,
task, and impact at this point in your teaching career. In the
accompanying box, you will find a Teacher Concerns Checklist. By

                                                                  Educational Psychology | 47
completing this checklist and scoring your responses according to
the directions provided, you can determine which stage of concern
you presently identify with most closely. You may also want to
complete the checklist again at the end of your educational
psychology course and compare your scores to determine how
much your levels of concern have changed from self to impact.

     Exercise 1.5 Teacher Concerns Checklist

        This checklist explores what teachers are concerned
     about at different stages of their careers. There are no right
     or wrong answers because each teacher has their own
     concerns. The following are statements of concerns you
     might have. Read each statement and ask yourself: WHEN I
     THINK ABOUT TEACHING, AM I CONCERNED ABOUT
     THIS?

48 | Educational Psychology
                           1          2            3           4        5

                         not       Little     Moderat       Very  Preoccupi
                   concerned  concerned         ely    concerned  ed with
                                                                  concern
                                           concerned

   Whether
students respect
me.

   Doing well
when I'm
observed.

   Managing my
time efficiently.

   Losing the
respect of my
peers.

   My ability to
prepare
adequate lesson
plans.

   Having my
inadequacies
become known
to other
teachers.

   What the
principal may
think if there is
too much noise
in my classroom.

   Obtaining a
favorable
evaluation of my
teaching.

   Losing the
respect of my
students.

                              Educational Psychology | 49
          My ability to
       maintain the
       appropriate
       degree of class
       control.

          Getting
       students to
       behave.

          Having an
       embarrassing
       incident occur in
       my classroom
       for which I
       might be judged
       responsible.

          That my peers
       may think I'm
       not doing an
       adequate job.

          Appearing
       competent to
       parents.

          Teaching
       effectively when
       another teacher
       is present.

               SUBTOTAL
           SELF SCORES

          Insufficient
       clerical help for
       teachers.

          Too many
       extra duties and
       responsibilities.

          Insufficient
       time for rest and
       class
       preparation.

50 | Educational Psychology
   Not enough
assistance from
specialized
teachers.

   Not enough
time for grading
and testing.

   The
inflexibility of
the curriculum.

   Too many
standards and
regulations set
for teachers.

   The rigid
instructional
routine.

   Having too
many students
in a class.

   Lack of public
support for
schools.

   Not having
sufficient time
to plan.

   Not being able
to cope with
troublemakers in
my classes.

   My ability to
work with
disruptive
students.

   The large
number of
administrative
interruptions.

                   Educational Psychology | 51
          Working with
       too many
       students each
       day.

               SUBTOTAL
          TASK SCORES

          Helping
       students to
       value learning.

          Increasing
       students'
       feelings of
       accomplishment.

          Diagnosing
       student learning
       problems.

          Whether each
       student is
       reaching his or
       her potential.

          Recognizing
       the social and
       emotional needs
       of students.

          Challenging
       unmotivated
       students.

          Understandin
       g why certain
       students make
       slow progress.

          Understandin
       g ways in which
       student health
       and nutrition
       problems can
       affect learning.

52 | Educational Psychology
   Meeting the
needs of
different kinds
of students.

   Seeking
alternative ways
to ensure that
students learn
the subject
matter.

   Understandin
g the
psychological
and cultural
differences that
can affect my
students'
behavior.

   Adapting
myself to the
needs of
different
students.

   Guiding
students toward
intellectual and
emotional
growth.

   Whether
students can
apply what they
learn.

   Understandin
g what factors
motivate
students to
learn.

       SUBTOTAL
            IMPACT
            SCORES

                    Educational Psychology | 53
        To determine your score, total the number of responses
     in each of the three categories of concern--self, task, and
     impact. The higher your score in a category (out of a
     maximum 75 points), the more you are identified with that
     stage of concern.

        Source: Adapted from Borich and Tombari (1997).

CC licensed content, Shared previously
   Educational Psychology: A Contemporary Approach. Authored
      by: Gary D. Borich and Martin L. Tombari. Retrieved from:
      http://sites.edb.utexas.edu/uploads/sites/113/2017/01/
      chapter1.pdf. License: CC BY: Attribution

54 | Educational Psychology
Teaching Philosophy

A philosophy grounds or guides practice in the study of existence
and knowledge while developing an ontology (the study of being)
on what it means for something or someone to be--or exist.
Educational philosophy, then, provides a foundation that constructs
and guides the ways knowledge is generated and passed on to
others. Therefore, it is of critical import that teachers begin to
develop a clear understanding of philosophical traditions and how
the philosophical underpinnings inform their educational
philosophies; because a clear educational philosophy will help guide
and develop cohesive reasons for how each teacher designs
classroom spaces and learning interactions with both teachers and
students. A clear philosophy also frames the curriculum along a
spectrum from teacher-centered curriculum to student-centered
curriculum to society-centered curriculum.

   There are many different ways to teach, varying circumstances to
take into account, and philosophies to apply to each classroom. And
what better way to have a positive impact on the world than to offer
knowledge for consumption? The term `teacher' can be applied to
anyone who imparts knowledge of any topic, but it is generally more
focused on those who are hired to do so. In imparting knowledge
to our students, it is inevitable that we must consider our own
personal philosophies, or pedagogies, and determine not only how
we decide what our philosophies are, but also how those impact our
students.

In order to develop a teaching philosophy, a teacher should examine
and continuously reflect on the following:

   Creation of an articulated philosophy that can become a
      foundation upon which an individual's life work can be built.

   Consideration of how your attitude is a function of who you
      are, how it affects your philosophy towards education, and

                                                                  Educational Psychology | 55
      how it shapes who you are as a teacher.
   Formulation of a teaching style that integrates teaching

      strategies with one's own personality and philosophy.

     Exercise 1.6 Educational Philosophies
   Self-Assessment Survey

        Before reading about the various philosophies, take this
     assessment to find with which you most align. This
     assessment will assist you in writing your teaching
     philosophy.

         1. Complete the Educational Philosophies Self-
             Assessment Survey

        2. Compile your score using Educational Philosophies
             Self-Assessment Scoring Guide

        What does this survey reveal about your underlying
     philosophy?

Lessons in Pedagogy

Teacher preparation classes frequently separated the concept of
philosophy into separate schools. "Philosophy has been taught in
the theoretical realm rather than the practical sense," meaning that
the ideas were placed before the teachers without the scaffolding
to create a bridge into the classroom (Roberson, 2000, p. 7). The
teachers, as students, were given a body of thought and expected
to translate that into lessons for their own students. Once you have
the idea, how do you apply it to teaching?

56 | Educational Psychology
   What, exactly, are teaching philosophies? According to Thelma
Roberson (2000), most prospective teachers confuse their beliefs
with the ideas of teaching. Teaching philosophies, then, are not
what you want to do in class to aid learning, but why you do them
and how they work. For example, Roberson's students state they
"want to use cooperative learning techniques" in their classroom.
The question posed is, why? "[I]s cooperative learning a true
philosophy or is it something you do in the classroom because of
your belief about the way children learn?" (Roberson, 2000, p. 6).
Philosophies need to translate ideas into action - if you want to
use certain techniques, then you need to understand how they are
effective in the classroom to create that portion of your teaching
philosophy. It helps to have an overview of the various schools out
there.

Ontological Frameworks of Philosophy

Generally, four ontological perspectives frame schools of
educational philosophy. Two ontological frameworks, idealism and
realism, stem from Ancient Greece. The Ancient Greek philosopher
Plato developed the tradition of idealism; whereas, Aristotle, Plato's
student, formed an antithetical ontology of realism. Progressivism
and existentialism grew from the philosophical remnants of the Age
of Enlightenment in the 19th century. Pragmatism formed within the
United States during the late 1800s; at the same time, existentialism
developed as a continental philosophy in Europe. While the early
public education system in the United States was guided by idealism
and realism, pragmatism and existentialism have served as the
influential foundations of the 20th and 21st-century educational
philosophies.

                                                                  Educational Psychology | 57
Idealism

For Idealists, ideas are the only true reality. Conscious reasoning is
the only way to locate what is true, beautiful, and just. Plato founded
Idealism and outlined its tenets in his book The Republic. For Plato,
there are two worlds. The first world is home to the spiritual or
mental world where universal ideas and truth were permanent;
this world can only be found through conscious reasoning. The
second world is the world of appearances and imperfection; a world
experienced through sensory experiences of sight, sound, touch,
smell, and taste. Plato outlines this duality between the two worlds
in "The Allegory of the Cave." In this famous allegory, people are
chained against walls with a fire behind them. What the people
perceive as real are only shadowed projections on the wall of the
cave. If one were to break free, leave the cave, and discover the
sun, this new "realm" would discover the true source of everything
that was previously known. It would be the realm of pure fact and
form. This is the source of all that is real. The real world is just an
imperfect projection of these ideas, forms, and truth.

                                                     Almost two centuries

later, Dutch philosopher Ren Descartes shifted Platonic Idealism
58 | Educational Psychology
toward mind-body dualism with his famous phrase "Cogito, ergo
sum (I think; therefore, I am)." For Descartes, the only proof of his
existence is his thinking--a thinking being. Like Plato, Descartes
outlined a rationale for why perceptions are unreliable, and the
external world is illusory. Only through rational deduction could
one obtain truth. While Plato described a dualism between two
separate worlds, Descartes established an Idealism founded on
mind-body dualism where the thinking mind is given privilege over
the physical body and external world. This dualism would heavily
influence philosophy and educational philosophy well into the
20th century.

   Teaching, for Idealists, focuses on moral excellence that will
benefit society. Students should focus on subjects of the mind like
literature, history, and philosophy. Students will demonstrate
understanding through participation in lectures and through
Socratic-dialogues, which engage students in introspection and
insight that bring to consciousness the universal forms and
concepts.

   Figure 1.6.1. Plato.

Realism

Realism's central tenet is based on reality, or the external universe,
independent from the human mind. Aristotle, Plato's student,
contradicted his teacher's Idealist philosophy and formulated a
philosophy on determining truth through observation. Reality can
be truly understood by careful observation of all the data. Because
of his emphasis on careful observation, Aristotle is often referred to
as the Father of the Scientific Method. Through logic, humans can

reason about the physical universe. The essence of things
or substances, therefore, can be determined by
examination of the object or substance. Aristotle's
logic, then, emphasizes induction as well as

                                                                  Educational Psychology | 59
deduction, and the real world can be determined
through both.

                                         During the Enlightenment, Common
                                      Sense Realism began to counter the
                                      Idealism of Descartes. Rather than the
                                      skepticism of the external world
                                      espoused by Idealists, the Common
                                      Sense Realists, like John Locke, argue
                                      that ordinary experiences intuit a self
                                      and the physical world without the
                                      skepticism of the real world outside the
                                      mind. This realism would influence the
                                      development of Empiricism and
                                      Pragmatism later in the Enlightenment.
   For realists, teaching methods should focus on basic skills and
memorization and mastery of facts. Students demonstrate content
mastery of these skills through critical observation and applied
experimentation.
   Figure 1.6.2. Aristotle. viena-Wien. Kunsthistorisches Museum.
Cap d'Aristotil. Copia romana d' un original qrez. Ca. 320 Dc." by Pilar
Torres.

Pragmatism

Like Realism, Pragmatism requires empirical observation of the real
world; however, unlike Realism and Idealism, the real world is not an
unchanging whole but is evolving and changing according to how
thought is applied to action towards a problem. Thought cannot
or should not describe or represent reality, but rather, should be
applied by the practical applying thoughts and experiences to
problems that arise. The universe, then, is always evolving according
to new applied thoughts turned into actions. Pragmatism's founder

60 | Educational Psychology
Charles Sanders Pierce posits thought must produce action towards
an ever-changing universe.

   John Dewey, the founder of Progressivism, believed that
experience is central to explaining the world; moreover, the
experience is what is needed to be explained. One needs practical
experiences and uses explanations to find models that would best
fit any given problem or situation. As new experiences and
explanations arise, reality will evolve or change to new situations
and problems.

   Pragmatists focus on hands-on, experiential learning tasks such
as experimenting, and working on projects in groups. Students will
demonstrate understanding through applied learning tasks to
concrete problems or tasks.

Existentialism

Existentialism grew from the continental philosophies forming in
Europe during the 19th and early 20th centuries, most notably
hermeneutic phenomenology--the examination of lived experience.
Hermeneutic phenomenology and existentialism countered the
dualisms inherent in both Idealism and Realism. The world does
not have any meaning outside human existence within a world. The
mind/body or mind/physical world duality and cannot have any
meaning without a human being actively absorbed in the world.
Jean-Paul Sarte posited that "existence precedes essence," which
means one's existence comes before the nature, or fact, of a thing.
This means that individual human beings are free to determine
their own meaning for life and do not possess any inherent identity
different than one the individual chooses or creates.

   Existentialists position the individual as responsible for their own
being, or existence. "Who am I? What should I do?" become central
questions for an individual's project in being. If one identifies with
being a teacher, or any other identity like being a parent, then one

                                                                  Educational Psychology | 61
must evaluate what does one who teaches (or any other identity)
do? After thoughtful and careful reflection, one must choose to
authentically do the project of being a teacher (or any other
identity). Acting in accordance with one's chosen beliefs and values
despite social pressures is the way to have an authentic existence.
However, acting or adopting false values based on social pressures
would be acting in "bad faith," and one would be living an
inauthentic existence, according to Sartre.

   In educational settings, Existentialists focus on giving students
personal choices where they must confront others' views in order
to clarify and develop authentic actions in terms of the students'
developing identities. Existentialists have difficulty positioning
students as objects to be measured, tracked, or standardized.
Teachers who adhere to an Existentialist ontology create activities
that guide students to self-direction and self-actualization.

Philosophical Perspective of Education

There are several philosophical perspectives currently used in
educational settings. Unlike the more abstract ontology, these
perspectives focus primarily on what should be taught and how it
should be taught, i.e., the curriculum.

Essentialism

Essentialism adheres to a belief that a core set of essential skills
must be taught to all students, a universal pool of knowledge needed
by all. Essentialists tend to traditional academic disciplines that will
develop prescribed skills and objectives in different content areas
as well as develop a common culture. Typically, essentialism argues
for a back-to-basics approach to teaching intellectual and moral

62 | Educational Psychology
standards. Schools should prepare all students to be productive
members of society.

   The fundamentals of teaching are the basis of the curriculum:
math, science, history, foreign language, and English. Vocational
classes are not seen as a necessary part of educational training.
Schools should be sites of rigor where students learn to work hard
and respect authority. Because of this stance, essentialism tends
to subscribe to tenets of realism. Essentialist classrooms tend to
be teacher-centered in instructional delivery with an emphasis on
lecture and teacher demonstrations. Assessments are
predominately through testing, and there are few, if any, projects or
portfolios. These instructors easily accept the No Child Left Behind
Act because test scores are the main form of evaluation (Ornstein &
Levine, 2003).

Perennialism

Perennialism advocates for seeking, teaching, and learning universal
truths that span across the ages. These truths, Perennialists argue,
have everlasting importance in helping humans solve problems
regardless of time and place. While Perennialism resembles
essentialism at first glance, perennialism focuses on the individual
development of the student rather than emphasizing skills.
Perennialism supports liberal arts curricula that help produces
well-rounded individuals with some knowledge across the arts and
sciences. All students should take classes in English Language Arts,
foreign languages, mathematics, natural sciences, fine arts, and
philosophy. Like Essentialism, Perennialism may tend to favor
teacher-centered instruction; however, Perennialists do utilize
student-centered instructional activities like Socratic Seminar,
which values and encourages students to think, rationalize, and
develop their own ideas on topics.

   Perennialists are instructors who believe that knowledge passed

                                                                  Educational Psychology | 63
through the ages should continue to be the basis of the curriculum,
like the classic works of Plato and Einstein. Perennialists base their
teachings on reason, logic, and analytical thought. Only information
that stood the test of time is relevant. They do not elicit student
input. The classes most likely to be considered under this approach
would be history, science, math, and religion classes (Ganly, 2007).

Positivism

Positivism is a philosophical theory that believes information is
derived from sensory experience and interpreted through reason
and logic. The instructors whose teaching philosophies are based
on documented facts and objective truths are normally those who
would be in the math and science departments. These teachers
do not feel that religion and the supernatural should be a part of
the thinking process. The idea of uncertainty and the unknown is
considered illogical (Ganly, 2007).

Behaviorism

Behaviorists believe in rewards and punishments as an approach
to controlling the teaching environment due to their belief in the
intrinsic nature of humans to react to internal or external stimuli.
This teacher-centered system ultimately allows the students to be
controlled by the educator, who makes the environment pleasant
or unpleasant, depending on the students' behavior (Ornstein &
Levine, 2003).

64 | Educational Psychology
Progressivism

               Progressivism focuses its

               educational             stance                      on

               experiential learning with a

               focus on developing the whole

               child. Students learn by doing

               rather than being lectured to by

               teachers. This pedagogy is a

               student-centered form of

               instruction where students

               follow the scientific method of

               questioning and searching for

               the answer. Students work in

               cooperative/collaborative

               groups to do project-based,

               expeditionary, problem-based,

or service-learning activities, and students have opportunities to

follow their interests. The teacher is a facilitator rather than the

center of the educational process, and students have shared

authority in planning and decision-making with teachers (Ganly,

2007).

The curriculum is usually integrated across contents instead of

siloed into different disciplines. Progressivism's stance is in stark

contrast to both Essentialism and Perennialism in this manner.

Progressivism follows an explicit pragmatic ontology where the

learner focuses on solving real-world problems through real

experiences. Current events are used to keep students interested in

the required subject matter. Students are active learners as opposed

to passive learners. Evaluations include projects and portfolios.

Figure 1.6.3. Progressive John Dewey.

                                       Educational Psychology | 65
Social Reconstructionism & Critical Pedagogy

                             Social reconstructionism was

                             founded as a response to the

                             atrocities of World War II and

                             the Holocaust to assuage

                             human cruelty. Social reform in

                             response     to  helping

                             prepare students to make a

                             better world through instilling

                             democratic values. Critical

                             pedagogy emerged from the

                             foundation of the early social

reconstructionist movement.

Critical pedagogy is the application of critical theory to

education. For critical pedagogues, teaching and learning is

inherently a political act, and they declare that knowledge and

language are not neutral, nor can they be objective. Therefore,

issues involving social, environmental, or economic justice cannot

be separated from the curriculum. Critical pedagogy's goal is to

emancipate marginalized or oppressed groups by developing,

according to Paulo Freire, conscientiza豫o, or critical

consciousness in students.

Figure 1.6.4. Gloria Jean Watkins, better known by her pen name

bell hooks.

Critical pedagogy de-centers the traditional classroom, which

positions the teacher at the center. The curriculum and classroom

with a critical pedagogy stance are student-centered strives to

instill a desire to make the world a better place. It places a focus on

controversial world issues and uses current events as a springboard

for the thinking process. These students are taught the importance

of working together to bring about change. These teachers

incorporate what is happening in the world with what they are

learning in the classroom (Ganly, 2007).

66 | Educational Psychology
Constructivism

Active participation is the key to this teaching style. Students are
free to explore their own ideas and share concepts with one another
in nontraditional ways. "Hands on activity [...] is the most effective
way of learning and is considered true learning" (Ganly, 2007).

Humanism/ Existentialism

Also a student-centered philosophy, this educational method is
based on the idea that the students should be presented with
choices about the learning process. Students are engaged in all
aspects of learning and work together with the teacher and her
peers to develop a curriculum and evaluation system that allows for
individual interests and abilities (Ganly, 2007).

               "Your philosophy of education is what you believe about
               education and the way children learn"

                (Roberson, 2000, p. 4).

Four Philosophies in Assessment

In addition, the `constructivist' school of philosophy, rooted in the
Pragmatic pedagogy and branched off from the `Social
Reconstructivist' school, has gained much popularity. Around the
turn of the century (the early 1990s), many teachers felt the rote
memorization and mindless routine that was common at that time
was ineffective and began to look for alternate ways to reach their
students (Ornstein & Levine, 2003). Through the constructivist
approach, "students "construct" knowledge through an interaction
between what they already think and know and with new ideas

                                                                  Educational Psychology | 67
and experiences" (Roberson, 2000, p. 8). This is an active learning
process that leads to a deeper understanding of the concepts
presented in class and is based on the abilities and readiness of
the children rather than set curriculum guidelines. Constructivism
"emphasizes socially interactive and process-oriented `hands-on'
learning in which students work collaboratively to expand and
revise their knowledge base" (Ornstein & Levine, 2003, p. 112).
Essentially, knowledge that is shaped by experience is
reconstructed, or altered, to assist the student in understanding
new concepts (Ornstein & Levine, 2003). You, as the teacher, help
the students build the scaffolding they need to maintain the
information even after the test is taken and graded.

   Once you know how you want to lead your classroom, it is
important to consider how to assess your students' progress. And
when we think of school, we automatically consider the threesome
subjects, Reading, Writing, and `Rithmatic. In all aspects of learning,
however, the ability to communicate comes to the forefront.
Communication is used in-class discussion as well as unit test short
answers. Writing is present in almost all subjects in some form, and
writing translates to communication. Richard Fulkerson (2000), in
his article "Four Philosophies of Composition," questions whether
"a [...] set of four philosophies of composition might exist, each
one stressing a different element in the communicative transaction"
(p. 3). Fulkerson's schools of communicative philosophy fall into the
following categories:

   Expressionism: a way of writing that demonstrates the
      students' thoughts and can be led by "non-directive teachers,
      some of whom insist that one neither can nor should evaluate
      writing" or more hands-on teachers who "design classroom
      activities to maximize student self-discovery" (p. 5). This
      school of thought emphasizes the student.

   Rhetorical: this school states that good writing is adapted to
      achieve a specific reaction from the audience (p. 6). This is
      focused on the connection between goal and process in

68 | Educational Psychology
      completing assignments, and it emphasizes the audience.
   Mimesis: states that "a clear connection exists between good

      writing and good thinking" and focuses on logic and reason as
      exemplified in the completion of assignments (p. 5). This
      school emphasizes a well-rounded student in that, research,
      prior knowledge, and the ability to recognize both sides of an
      argument are necessary for success (p. 6).
   Formalism: this school focuses primarily on the form of the
      assignment - it disregards content to the extent that poor
      grammar can distract the audience from absorbing the
      content, and therefore, the work is judged "primarily by
      whether it shows certain internal [mistakes]" (p. 4).

While most teachers fall primarily into one school of composition
pedagogy, Fulkerson (2000) points out that it is necessary to hold on
to them all when he states "they are not mutually exclusive" (p. 6).
The trick is to learn when each is applicable and to what extent it
should be employed.

Conclusion

Teaching philosophies are as abundant. How do you narrow the
choices down? And even though the difference between one
philosophy and the next seems small at the onset, the two are by no
means exactly alike. Your classes will be just as diverse. You will have
students from all economic classes, with differing levels of language
ability, and all bringing various and beautiful experiences to your
class. How do you reach each individual?

   Knowing who you are as a teacher before you enter the classroom
will help significantly. Teaching is so much more than just the
content. Teaching is a learning curve on a philosophy that will never
be finished. Just as your classroom will change every year, continue

                                                                  Educational Psychology | 69
to alter your philosophies. See what works for you and your
students on a collaborative level.

"A working philosophy is never completely developed, the

ultimate working philosophy never reached. We're always

moving toward, hopefully, a more complete, and thus

more useful, working philosophy"    (Apps, 1973, p. 1).

Exercise 1.7 Draft Your Philosophy

   While your teaching philosophy will never be finished,
now is a good time to start writing one. This will be your
first of many drafts. With each domain of teaching that you
explore, you should expect that your new understanding
will help you further develop and refine your philosophy.

   Here are some helpful tools to get started:

   Teaching Perspectives Inventory

   Teaching Styles Inventory

   Teaching Goals Inventory

   Statement of Teaching Philosophy - Questions to
Consider

   Writing Your Teaching Philosophy

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Foundations of Education. Provided by: SUNY Oneonta
      Education Department. Retrieved from:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-oneonta-
      education106/. License: CC BY: Attribution

70 | Educational Psychology
   What are Education Philosophies?. Authored by: Dionne
      Nichols. Provided by: Wikibooks. Retrieved from:
      https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/
      Foundations_of_Education_and_Instructional_Assessment/
      Educational_Philosophy/Defined. License: CC BY-SA:
      Attribution-ShareAlike

All rights reserved content
   Educational Philosophies Self-Assessment. Authored by:
      LeoNora M. Cohen. Provided by: Oregon State University.
      Retrieved from: http://oregonstate.edu/instruct/ed416/
      selfassessment.html. License: All Rights Reserved
   Educational Philosophies Self-Assessment Scoring Guide.
      Authored by: LeoNora M. Cohen. Provided by: Oregon State
      University. Retrieved from: http://oregonstate.edu/instruct/
      ed416/scoringguide.html. License: All Rights Reserved

                                                                   Educational Psychology | 71
Chapter Summary: The Study
of Educational Psychology

Although the term learning has many possible meanings, the term

as used by teachers emphasizes its relationship to curriculum, to

teaching, and to the issues of sequencing, readiness, and transfer.

Viewed in this light, the two major psychological perspectives of

learning--behaviorist and constructivist--have important ideas to

offer educators. Within the behaviorist perspective one of the most

relevant theories is operant conditioning, which describes how the

consequences and cues for a behavior can cause the behavior to

become more frequent. Operant conditioning is especially relevant

for understanding much of what students do; it offers less help in

understanding how they think.

The  other                          major           psychological

perspective--constructivism--describes how individuals build or

"construct" knowledge by engaging actively with their experiences.

Psychological constructivism emphasizes the learners' individual

responses to experience--their tendency both to assimilate it and to

accommodate to it. Social constructivism (or sociocultural theory)

emphasizes how other, more expert individuals can create

opportunities for the learner to construct new knowledge. Social

constructivism suggests that a teacher's role must include

deliberate, scaffolded dialogue. It also needs to include deliberate

instructional planning, such as facilitated by Bloom's taxonomy of

learning objectives. Both of these strategies can promote students'

metacognition, or ability to monitor their own learning.

Psychological emphasizes the teacher's responsibility for arranging

a rich learning environment and for emphasizing rich sensory,

motor, and concrete experiences wherever possible.

72 | Chapter Summary: The Study of
Educational Psychology
Glossary

behavioral approach: the approach that suggests that the keys to
understanding development are observable behavior and outside
stimuli in the environment

   biopsychology: how our biology influences our behavior
   cognitive approach: an approach that focuses on the process that
allows people to know, understand and think about the world
   concerns theory: conceptualizes the learning process for a
prospective teacher as a natural flow from concerns for self
(teacher) to task (teaching) to impact (pupil)
   contextual approach: a theory that considers the relationship
between individuals and their physical, cognitive, and social worlds
   educational psychology: branch of psychology concerned with
the scientific study of human learning

                                                                  Educational Psychology | 73
References

Apps, J. W. (1973). Toward a working philosophy of adult education.

Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University.

Berliner, D.C. (1993). The 100-Year journey of educational

psychology: from interest, to disdain, to respect for practice. In T.

K. Fagan & G. R. VandenBos (Eds.), Master lectures in psychology.

Exploring applied psychology: Origins and critical analyses (p. 37-78).

American Psychological Association. https://doi.org/10.1037/

11104-002

Borich, G. (1993). Clearly outstanding: making each day count in

your classroom. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.

Borich, G. D. & Tombari, M. L. (1997). Educational Psychology

(2ed.).          New  York:             Pearson.       Retrieved

from http://ows.edb.utexas.edu/site/dr-gary-d-borich/

educational-psychology-contemporary-approach#0

Cadenas, H. G. (1999). Revitalize your teaching--four key elements

for success. Contemporary Education, 70 (2), 5-7. Retrieved on

January          28,  2008,             from      Wilsonweb.com

website: http://vnweb.hwwilsonweb.com.proxy.lib.odu.edu/hww/

jumpstart.jhtml?recid=0bc05f7a67b1790e1e9c442f93fe94fd3dd814f5

b54d3854a715b6e9cc14f3538d830ddf5e8d15a6&fmt=H

Dewey J. (1910). How we think. New York D.C. Heath & Co.

Fulkerson, R. (2000). Four philosophies of composition. In E.

Corbett, N. Myers and G. Tate (Eds.), The writing teacher's

sourcebook (4th ed.) (pp. 3-8). New York: Oxford University Press.

Fuller, F.F. (1969). Concerns of teachers: A developmental

conceptualization. American Educational Research Journal, 6,

207-226.

Ganly, S. (2007). Educational philosophies in the classroom: the

categories of various teaching philosophies. Retrieved February 17,

2009,                 from https://archive.is/20130628165859/

74 | References
www.associatedcontent.com/article/352631/

educational_philosophies_in_the_classroom_pg2.html?cat=4

James, W. (1983). Talks to teachers on psychology and to students

on some of life's ideals. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

(Original work published 1899)

Hergenhahn, B.R. (2009). An introduction to the history of

psychology. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.

Marchant, V. (2000, May 29). Why not teach next? Time. Retrieved

on        January        28,    2008,  from             Time.com

website: http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/

0,9171,997031-1,00.html

Merriam-Webster Dictionary. (2020a). Art. Retrieved May 10, 2020

from https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/art

Merriam-Webster Dictionary. (2020b). Science. Retrieved May 10,

2020      from https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/

science

National Board for Professional Teaching Standards. (2016). What

teachers should know and be able to do. Retrieved from

http://accomplishedteacher.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/

NBPTS-What-Teachers-Should-Know-and-Be-Able-to-Do-.pdf

Ornstein, A. & Levine, D. (2003). Foundations of education (8th ed.).

Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.

Roberson, T. (2000 September 29). Philosophy of philosophy:

making the connection between philosophy and pedagogy for

preservice teachers (Paper presented at Meeting for the Society for

Philosophy and History of Education, Biloxi, MS 2000).

Shulman, L.S. (1991). Classroom casebooks. Educational

Leadership, 49 (3), 28-31.

Snowman, Jack (1997). Educational Psychology: What Do We

Teach, What Should We Teach?. "Educational Psychology", 9,

151-169.

The nature of teaching (n.d.). Pearson. Retrieved

from https://www.pearsonhighered.com/assets/samplechapter/

0/1/3/2/0132565498.pdf

                                             References | 75
   Thorndike, E.L. (1912). Education: A first book. New York:
MacMillan.

   Walker, J. (2008). Twelve characteristics of an effective teacher:
a longitudinal, qualitative, quasi-research study of in-service and
pre-service teachers' opinions. educational HORIZONS. Retrieved
from https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ815372.pdf

   Zimmerman, B.J. & Schunk, D.H. (Eds.) (2003). Educational
psychology: A century of contributions. Mahwah, NJ, US: Erlbaum.

76 | References
USING SCIENCE TO
INFORM EDUCATIONAL
PRACTICES

     Theme: The Science of Teaching

        Outline of Concepts:
          The science of studying educational psychology
        Learning Objectives:
          Determine elements of research studies that make

             a study worth of consideration
          Differentiate between quantitative, qualitative and

             mixed-method studies
          Differentiate between research methods:

             descriptive, correlational, and experimental
          Identify the strengths and weaknesses of each

             method of data collection
          Differentiate between developmental designs:

             longitudinal, cross-sectional, and sequential

                                                       Using Science to Inform Educational
                                                                                       Practices | 77
The Science of Educational
Psychology

Teaching is often perceived to be an art and not a science. Because
it has not traditionally been seen as an evidence-based profession,
it has subject to interventions from politicians, based on ideology
rather than on evidence. Ben Goldacre (2013) argues that teaching
should be an evidence-based profession and that this would lead to
better outcomes for children. In particular, he suggests that:

   a change in culture is needed, where we recognize that we
      don't necessarily `know' what works best - we need evidence
      that something works

   teachers need better access to the outcomes of research
   teachers need to understand how research works so that they

      can become critical consumers
   teachers need access to networks where they can engage with

      others who are interested in research.

The main assumption here is that evidence-based practice is a good
thing and that the changes advocated by Goldacre can be achieved
through research. And not just research by academics and theorists,
but through teachers researching their own practice. Indeed,
research practices are embedded in an increasing number of
schools and there is a recognition that this can contribute to school
improvement.

Research in Educational Psychology

An essential part of learning any science is having a basic knowledge
of the techniques used in gathering information. The hallmark of

                                                                  Educational Psychology | 79
scientific investigation is that of following a set of procedures
designed to keep questioning or skepticism alive while describing,
explaining, or testing any phenomenon. Not long ago, a friend said
to me that he did not trust academicians or researchers because
they always seem to change their story. That, however, is precisely
what science is all about; it involves continuously renewing our
understanding of the subjects in question and an ongoing
investigation of how and why events occur. Science is a vehicle
for going on a never-ending journey. In the area of development,
we have seen changes in recommendations for nutrition, in
explanations of psychological states as people age, and in parenting
advice. So think of learning about human development as a lifelong
endeavor.

Personal Knowledge

How do we know what we know? Take a moment to identify two
things that you know about adolescence. Now, how do you
know? Chances are you know these things based on your own
history (experiential reality), what others have told you, or cultural
ideas (agreement reality) (Seccombe and Warner, 2004). There are
several problems with personal inquiry, or drawing conclusions
based on our personal experiences. Read the following sentence
aloud:

   Paris in the
the spring

   Are you sure that is what it said? Read it again.
   If you read it differently the second time (adding the second
"the"), you just experienced one of the problems with relying on
personal inquiry; that is, the tendency to see what we believe. Our
assumptions very often guide our perceptions; consequently, when
we believe something, we tend to see it even if it is not there. Have
you heard the saying, "seeing is believing"? Well, the truth is just the

80 | Educational Psychology
opposite: believing is seeing. This problem may just be a result of
cognitive `blinders,' or it may be part of a more conscious attempt
to support our own views. Confirmation bias is the tendency to
look for evidence that we are right, and in so doing, we ignore
contradictory evidence.

   Philosopher Karl Popper suggested that the distinction between
that which is scientific and that which is unscientific is that science
is falsifiable; scientific inquiry involves attempts to reject or refute
a theory or set of assumptions (Thornton, 2005). A theory that
cannot be falsified is not scientific. And much of what we do in
personal inquiry involves drawing conclusions based on what we
have personally experienced or validating our own experience by
discussing what we think is true with others who share the same
views.

   Science offers a more systematic way to make comparisons and
guard against bias. One technique used to avoid sampling bias is to
select participants for a study in a random way. This means using
a technique to ensure that all members have an equal chance of
being selected. Simple random sampling may involve using a set
of random numbers as a guide in determining who is to be
selected. For example, if we have a list of 400 people and wish to
randomly select a smaller group or sample to be studied, we use
a list of random numbers and select the case that corresponds
with that number (Case 39, 3, 217, etc.). This is preferable to asking
only those individuals with whom we are familiar to participate in
a study; if we conveniently chose only people we know, we know
nothing about those who had no opportunity to be selected. There
are many more elaborate techniques that can be used to obtain
samples that represent the composition of the population we are
studying. But even though a randomly selected representative
sample is preferable, it is not always used because of costs and
other limitations. As a consumer of research, however, you should
know how the sample was obtained and keep this in mind when
interpreting results. It is possible that what was found was limited to

                                                                  Educational Psychology | 81
that sample or similar individuals and not generalizable to everyone
else.
CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Psychological Research. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      adolescent/part/psychological-research/. License: CC BY-
      NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

   Learning to Teach: An Introduction to Classroom Research.
      Provided by: Open Learn. Retrieved from:
      https://www.open.edu/openlearn/education-development/
      learning-teach-introduction-classroom-research/content-
      section-0?active-tab=description-tab. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

82 | Educational Psychology
The Scientific Method

The general scientific approach has three fundamental features
(Stanovich, 2010). The first is systematic empiricism. Empiricism
refers to learning based on observation, and scientists learn about
the natural world systematically, by carefully planning, making,
recording, and analyzing observations of it. The second feature of
the scientific approach is that it is concerned with empirical
questions. These are questions about the way the world actually
is and, therefore, can be answered by systematically observing it.
The third feature is that it creates public knowledge. After asking
empirical questions, making observations and drawing their
conclusions, scientists publish their work. This usually means
writing an article for publication in a professional journal, in which
they put their research question in the context of previous research,
describe in detail the methods they used to answer their question,
and clearly present their results and conclusions. Publication is an
essential feature of science for two reasons. One is that science is a
social process--a large-scale collaboration among many researchers
distributed across both time and space. Our current scientific
knowledge of most topics is based on many different studies
conducted by many different researchers who have shared their
work with each other over the years. The second is that publication
allows science to be self-correcting. Individual scientists
understand that despite their best efforts, their methods can be
flawed, and their conclusions incorrect. Publication allows others
in the scientific community to detect and correct these errors so
that, over time, scientific knowledge increasingly reflects the way
the world actually is.

                                                                  Educational Psychology | 83
     Figure 2.2.1. Simple model of scientific research in psychology.
   Figure 2.1 is a simple model of scientific research in psychology
and presents a more specific model of scientific research in
psychology. The researcher (who more often than not is really a
small group of researchers) formulates a research question,
conducts a study designed to answer the question, analyzes the
resulting data, draws conclusions about the answer to the question,
and publishes the results so that they become part of the research
literature. Because the research literature is one of the primary
sources of new research questions, this process can be thought
of as a cycle. New research leads to new questions, which lead to
new research, and so on. The model also indicates that research
questions can originate outside of this cycle, either with informal
observations or with practical problems that need to be solved. But

84 | Educational Psychology
even in these cases, the researcher would start by checking the
research literature to see if the question had already been answered
and to refine it based on what previous research had already found.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=36#oembed-1

Video 2.2.1. The Scientific Method explains the basic steps taken for
most scientific inquiry.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=36#oembed-2

CC licensed content, Original

   The Scientific Method. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/
      chapter/the-scientific-method/. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   The Scientific Method. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
                                                                  Educational Psychology | 85
      adolescent/chapter/the-scientific-method/. License: CC BY-
      NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

86 | Educational Psychology
Quantitative and Qualitative
Approaches to Research

When designing a study, typically, researchers choose a quantitative
or qualitative research design. In some cases, a mixed-method
approach may be appropriate. Which approach used will develop
on the research question and the type of information sought.
Quantitative methods may be better for understanding what is
happening, while qualitative methods may be better for
understanding the hows and why of a phenomenon.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=37#video-37-1

Video 1. Types of Research explains the difference between
qualitative and quantitative research. A closed-captioned version of
this video is available here.

Quantitative Research

Quantitative research typically starts with a focused research
question or hypothesis, collects a small amount of data from each
of a large number of individuals, describes the resulting data using
statistical techniques, and draws general conclusions about some
large population. The strength of quantitative research is its ability

                                                                  Educational Psychology | 87
to provide precise answers to specific research questions and to
draw general conclusions about human behavior; however, it is not
nearly as good at generating novel and interesting research
questions. Likewise, while quantitative research is good at drawing
general conclusions about human behavior, it is not nearly as good
at providing detailed descriptions of the behavior of particular
groups in particular situations. And it is not very good at all at
communicating what it is actually like to be a member of a particular
group in a particular situation. But the relative weaknesses of
quantitative research are the relative strengths of qualitative
research.

Qualitative Research

Although this is by far the most common approach to conducting
empirical research in psychology, there is a vital alternative called
qualitative research. Qualitative research can help researchers to
generate new and interesting research questions and hypotheses.
Qualitative researchers generally begin with a less focused research
question, collect large amounts of relatively "unfiltered" data from
a relatively small number of individuals, and describe their data
using nonstatistical techniques. They are usually less concerned
with drawing general conclusions about human behavior than with
understanding in detail the experience of their research
participants. Qualitative research can also provide rich and detailed
descriptions of human behavior in the real-world contexts in which
it occurs. Similarly, qualitative research can convey a sense of what
it is actually like to be a member of a particular group or in a
particular situation--what qualitative researchers often refer to as
the `lived experience' of the research participants.

88 | Educational Psychology
Mixed-Methods

Given their differences, it may come as no surprise that quantitative
and qualitative research do not coexist in complete harmony. Some
quantitative researchers criticize that qualitative methods lack
objectivity, are challenging to evaluate, and do not allow
generalization to other people or situations. At the same time, some
qualitative researchers criticize that quantitative methods overlook
the richness of behavior and experience, and instead answer simple
questions about easily quantifiable variables. However, many
researchers from both camps now agree that the two approaches
can and should be combined into what has come to be called mixed-
methods research (Todd, Nerlich, McKeown, & Clarke, 2004). One
approach to combining quantitative and qualitative research is to
use qualitative research for hypothesis generation and quantitative
research for hypothesis testing. A second approach to combining
quantitative and qualitative research is referred to as triangulation.
The idea is to use both quantitative and qualitative methods
simultaneously to study the same general questions and to compare
the results. If the results of the quantitative and qualitative methods
converge on the same general conclusion, they reinforce and enrich
each other. If the results diverge, then they suggest an interesting
new question: Why do the results diverge, and how can they be
reconciled?

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=37#oembed-1

Video 2.3.1. What are Qualitative and Quantitative Variables explains

                                                                  Educational Psychology | 89
the difference between quantitative and qualitative variables that
may be used in research.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=37#oembed-2

Becoming Familiar with Research

An excellent way to become more familiar with these research
approaches, both quantitative and qualitative, is to look at journal
articles, which are written in sections that follow these steps in the
scientific process. Most psychological articles and many papers in
the social sciences follow the writing guidelines and format dictated
by the American Psychological Association (APA). In general, the
structure follows: abstract (summary of the article), introduction or
literature review, methods explaining how the study was conducted,
results of the study, discussion and interpretation of findings, and
references.

     The Aftermath of Teenage Suicide: A
   Qualitative Study of the Psychosocial
   Consequences for the Supervising Family

        Per Lindqvist and his colleagues (2008), wanted to learn

90 | Educational Psychology
     how the families of teenage suicide victims cope with their
     loss. They did not have a specific research question or
     hypothesis, such as, what percentage of family members
     join suicide support groups? Instead, they wanted to
     understand the variety of reactions that families had, with a
     focus on what it is like from their perspectives. To do this,
     they interviewed the families of 10 teenage suicide victims
     in their homes in rural Sweden. The interviews were
     relatively unstructured, beginning with a general request
     for the families to talk about the victim and ending with an
     invitation to talk about anything else that they wanted to
     tell the interviewer. One of the most important themes that
     emerged from these interviews was that even as life
     returned to "normal," the families continued to struggle
     with the question of why their loved one committed
     suicide. This struggle appeared to be especially difficult for
     families in which the suicide was most unexpected. This
     relationship can now be explored using quantitative
     research. But it is unclear whether this question would have
     arisen at all without the researchers sitting down with the
     families and listening to what they themselves wanted to
     say about their experience.

CC licensed content, Original

   Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches to Research.
      Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van Hoose. Provided by: Hudson
      Valley Community College. Retrieved from:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/chapter/
      quantitative-and-qualitative-approaches-to-research/.
      License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

                                                                  Educational Psychology | 91
CC licensed content, Shared previously
   Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches to Research.
      Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van Hoose. Provided by: Hudson
      Valley Community College. Retrieved from:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/adolescent/chapter/
      quantitative-and-qualitative-approaches-to-research/.
      License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

92 | Educational Psychology
Descriptive Research

There are many research methods available to psychologists in their
efforts to understand, describe, and explain behavior. Some
methods rely on observational techniques. Other approaches
involve interactions between the researcher and the individuals who
are being studied--ranging from a series of simple questions to
extensive, in-depth interviews--to well-controlled experiments.
The main categories of psychological research are descriptive,
correlational, and experimental research. Each of these research
methods has unique strengths and weaknesses, and each method
may only be appropriate for certain types of research questions.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=38#oembed-1

Research studies that do not test specific relationships between
variables are called descriptive studies. For this method, the
research question or hypothesis can be about a single variable (e.g.,
How accurate are people's first impressions?) or can be a broad and
exploratory question (e.g., What is it like to be a working mother
diagnosed with depression?). The variable of the study is measured
and reported without any further relationship analysis. A researcher
might choose this method if they only needed to report information,
such as a tally, an average, or a list of responses. Descriptive
research can answer interesting and important questions, but what
it cannot do is answer questions about relationships between
variables.

                                                                  Educational Psychology | 93
                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=38#video-38-1

Video 2.4.1. Descriptive Research Design provides explanation and
examples for quantitative descriptive research. A closed-captioned
version of this video is available here.

   Descriptive research is distinct from correlational research, in
which researchers formally test whether a relationship exists
between two or more variables. Experimental research goes a step
further beyond descriptive and correlational research and randomly
assigns people to different conditions, using hypothesis testing to
make inferences about causal relationships between variables. We
will discuss each of these methods more in-depth later.

   Table 2.4.1. Comparison of research design methods

94 | Educational Psychology
Research       Goal           Advantages              Disadvantages
design

Descriptive    To create a    Provides a relatively   Does not assess
               snapshot of    complete picture of     relationships
               the current    what is occurring at a  among variables.
               state of       given time. Allows the  Maybe unethical
               affairs        development of          if participants do
                              questions for further   not know they
                              study.                  are being
                                                      observed.

Correlational  To assess the  Allows testing of       Cannot be used
               relationships  expected relationships  to draw
               between and    between and among       inferences about
               among two or   variables and the       the causal
               more           making of predictions.  relationships
               variables      Can assess these        between and
                              relationships in        among the
                              everyday life events.   variables.

Experimental   To assess the  Allows drawing          Cannot
               causal impact  conclusions about the   experimentally
               of one or      causal relationships    manipulate
               more           among variables.        many important
               experimental                           variables. May be
               manipulations                          expensive and
               on a                                   time-consuming.
               dependent
               variable

Source: Stangor, 2011.

           One or more interactive elements has been excluded
           from this version of the text. You can view them online
here:
https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=38#oembed-2

CC licensed content, Original

   Descriptive Research. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van Hoose.
      Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College. Retrieved
      from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/chapter/

                                                                  Educational Psychology | 95
      descriptive-research/. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike
CC licensed content, Shared previously
   Descriptive Research. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van Hoose.
      Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College. Retrieved
      from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/adolescent/
      chapter/descriptive-research/. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

96 | Educational Psychology
Methods of Data Collection

Regardless of the method of research, data collection will be
necessary. The method of data collection selected will primarily
depend on the type of information the researcher needs for their
study; however, other factors, such as time, resources, and even
ethical considerations can influence the selection of a data
collection method. All of these factors need to be considered when
selecting a data collection method because each method has unique
strengths and weaknesses. We will discuss the uses and assessment
of the most common data collection methods: observation, surveys,
archival data, and tests.

Observation

The observational method involves the watching and recording of
a specific behavior of participants. In general, observational studies
have the strength of allowing the researcher to see for themselves
how people behave. However, observations may require more time
and man-power than other data collection methods, often resulting
in smaller samples of participants. Researchers may spend
significant time waiting to observe a behavior, or the behavior may
never occur during observation. It is important to remember
that people tend to change their behavior when they know they are
being watched (known as the Hawthorne effect).

   Observations may be done in a naturalist setting to reduce the
likelihood of the Hawthorne effect. During naturalistic observations,
the participants are in their natural environment and are usually
unaware that they are being observed. For example, observing
students participating in their class would be a naturalist
observation. The downside of a naturalistic setting is that the
research doesn't have control over the environment. Imagine that

                                                                  Educational Psychology | 97
the researcher goes to the classroom to observe those students,
and there is a substitute teacher. The change in instructor that day
could impact student behavior and skew the data.

   If controlling the environment is a concern, a laboratory setting
may be a better choice. In the laboratory environment, the
researcher can manage confounding factors or distractions that
might impact the participants' behavior. Of course, there are
expenses associated with maintaining a laboratory setting,
increasing the cost of the study, that would not be associated with
naturalist observations. And, again, the Hawthorne effect may
impact behavior.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=39#oembed-1

Surveys

                                                     Surveys are familiar to most
                                                  people because they are so
                                                  widely used. This method
                                                  enhances accessibility to
                                                  subjects because they can be
                                                  conducted in person, over the
                                                  phone, through the mail, or
                                                  online, and are commonly used
by researchers to gather information on many variables in a
relatively short period of time.
   Most surveys involve asking a standard set of questions to a group

98 | Educational Psychology
of participants. In a highly structured survey, subjects are forced to
choose from a response set such as "strongly disagree, disagree,
undecided, agree, strongly agree"; or "0, 1-5, 6-10, etc." One of the
benefits of having forced-choice items is that each response is
coded so that the results can be quickly entered and analyzed using
statistical software. While this type of survey typically yields surface
information on a wide variety of factors, they may not allow for an
in-depth understanding of human behavior.

   Of course, surveys can be designed in a number of ways. Some
surveys ask open-ended questions, allowing each participant to
devise their own response, allowing for a variety of answers. This
variety may provide deeper insight into the subject than forced-
choice questions, but makes comparing answers challenging.
Imagine a survey question that asked participants to report how
they are feeling today. If there were 100 participants, there could
be 100 different answers, which is more challenging and takes more
time to code and analyze.

   Surveys are useful in examining stated values, attitudes, opinions,
and reporting on practices. However, they are based on self-report,
and this can limit accuracy. For a variety of reasons, people may
not provide honest or complete answers. Participants may be
concerned with projecting a particular image through their
responses, they may be uncomfortable answering the questions,
inaccurately assess their behavior, or they may lack awareness of
the behavior being assessed. So, while surveys can provide a lot
of information for many participants quickly and easily, the self-
reporting may not be as accurate as other methods.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=39#oembed-2

                                                                  Educational Psychology | 99
Content Analysis of Archival data

Content analysis involves looking at media such as old texts,
pictures, commercials, lyrics, or other materials to explore patterns
or themes in culture. An example of content analysis is the classic
history of childhood by Aries (1962) called "Centuries of Childhood"
or the analysis of television commercials for sexual or violent
content or for ageism. Passages in text or television programs can
be randomly selected for analysis as well. Again, one advantage of
analyzing work such as this is that the researcher does not have
to go through the time and expense of finding respondents, but
the researcher cannot know how accurately the media reflects the
actions and sentiments of the population.

   Secondary content analysis, or archival research, involves
analyzing information that has already been collected or examining
documents or media to uncover attitudes, practices, or
preferences. There are a number of data sets available to those who
wish to conduct this type of research. The researcher conducting
secondary analysis does not have to recruit subjects but does need
to know the quality of the information collected in the original
study. And unfortunately, the researcher is limited to the questions
asked and data collected originally.

100 | Educational Psychology
Tests

                     Many variables studied by

                     psychologists--perhaps the

                     majority--are  not  so

                     straightforward or simple to

                     measure. These kinds of

                     variables           are

                     called constructs and include

                     personality traits, emotional

                     states, attitudes, and abilities.

                     Psychological  constructs

                     cannot be observed directly.

                     One reason is that they often

                     represent tendencies to think,

                     feel, or act in certain ways. For

                     example, to say that a particular

                     college student is highly

extroverted does not necessarily mean that she is behaving in an

extroverted way right now. Another reason psychological

constructs cannot be observed directly is that they often involve

internal processes, like thoughts or feelings. For these psychological

constructs, we need another means for collecting data. Tests will

serve this purpose.

A good test will aid researchers in assessing a particular

psychological construct. What is a good test? Researchers want a

test that is standardized, reliable, and valid. A standardized test is

one that is administered, scored, and analyzed in the same way for

each participant. This minimizes differences in test scores due to

confounding factors, such as variability in the testing environment

or scoring process, and assures that scores are comparable.

Reliability refers to the consistency of a measure. Researchers

consider three types of consistency: over time (test-retest

reliability), across items (internal consistency), and across different

                     Educational Psychology | 101
researchers (interrater reliability). Validity is the extent to which
the scores from a measure represent the variable they are intended
to. When a measure has good test-retest reliability and internal
consistency, researchers should be more confident that the scores
represent what they are supposed to.

   There are various types of tests used in psychological research.
Self-report measures are those in which participants report on their
own thoughts, feelings, and actions, such as the Rosenberg Self-
Esteem Scale or the Big Five Personality Test. Some tests measure
performance, ability, aptitude, or skill, like the Stanford-Binet
Intelligence Scale or the SATs.There are also tests that measure
physiological states, including electrical activity or blood flow in the
brain.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=39#video-39-1

Video 2.5.1. Methods of Data Collection explains various means for
gathering data for quantitative and qualitative research. A closed-
captioned version of this video is available here.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=39#oembed-3

102 | Educational Psychology
Reliability and Validity

Reliability and validity are two important considerations that must
be made with any type of data collection. Reliability refers to the
ability to consistently produce a given result. In the context of
psychological research, this would mean that any instruments or
tools used to collect data do so in consistent, reproducible ways.
Unfortunately, being consistent in measurement does not
necessarily mean that you have measured something correctly. To
illustrate this concept, consider a kitchen scale that would be used
to measure the weight of cereal that you eat in the morning. If the
scale is not properly calibrated, it may consistently under- or
overestimate the amount of cereal that's being measured. While the
scale is highly reliable in producing consistent results (e.g., the
same amount of cereal poured onto the scale produces the same
reading each time), those results are incorrect. This is where
validity comes into play. Validity refers to the extent to which a
given instrument or tool accurately measures what it's supposed to
measure. While any valid measure is by necessity reliable, the
reverse is not necessarily true. Researchers strive to use
instruments that are both highly reliable and valid.
https://lumenlearning.h5p.com/content/1290477372809028568/
embed

     Everyday Connection: How Valid Is the SAT?

        Standardized tests like the SAT are supposed to measure
     an individual's aptitude for a college education, but how
     reliable and valid are such tests? Research conducted by
     the College Board suggests that scores on the SAT have
     high predictive validity for first-year college students' GPA

                                                                 Educational Psychology | 103
     (Kobrin, Patterson, Shaw, Mattern, & Barbuti, 2008). In this
     context, predictive validity refers to the test's ability to
     effectively predict the GPA of college freshmen. Given that
     many institutions of higher education require the SAT for
     admission, this high degree of predictive validity might be
     comforting.

        However, the emphasis placed on SAT scores in college
     admissions has generated some controversy on a number
     of fronts. For one, some researchers assert that the SAT is a
     biased test that places minority students at a disadvantage
     and unfairly reduces the likelihood of being admitted into a
     college (Santelices & Wilson, 2010). Additionally, some
     research has suggested that the predictive validity of the
     SAT is grossly exaggerated in how well it is able to predict
     the GPA of first-year college students. In fact, it has been
     suggested that the SAT's predictive validity may be
     overestimated by as much as 150% (Rothstein, 2004). Many
     institutions of higher education are beginning to consider
     de-emphasizing the significance of SAT scores in making
     admission decisions (Rimer, 2008).

        In 2014, College Board president David Coleman
     expressed his awareness of these problems, recognizing
     that college success is more accurately predicted by high
     school grades than by SAT scores. To address these
     concerns, he has called for significant changes to the SAT
     exam (Lewin, 2014).

CC licensed content, Original

   Methods of Data Collection. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/

104 | Educational Psychology
      chapter/methods-of-data-collection/. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
CC licensed content, Shared previously
   Methods of Data Collection. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      adolescent/chapter/methods-of-data-collection/. License:
      CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

                                                                 Educational Psychology | 105
Analyzing Data: Correlational
and Experimental Research

Did you know that as sales in ice cream increase, so does the overall
rate of crime? Is it possible that indulging in your favorite flavor of
ice cream could send you on a crime spree? Or, after committing a
crime, do you think you might decide to treat yourself to a cone?
There is no question that a relationship exists between ice cream
and crime (e.g., Harper, 2013), but does one thing actually caused the
other to occur.

   It is much more likely that both ice cream sales and crime rates
are related to the temperature outside. When the temperature is
warm, there are lots of people out of their houses, interacting with
each other, getting annoyed with one another, and sometimes
committing crimes. Also, when it is warm outside, we are more
likely to seek a refreshing treat like ice cream. How do we determine
if there is indeed a relationship between two things? And when
there is a relationship, how can we discern whether it is attributable
to coincidence or causation? We do this through statistical analysis
of the data. Which analysis we use will depend on several conditions
outlined next.

106 | Analyzing Data: Correlational
and Experimental Research
Introduction to Statistical Thinking

Does drinking coffee actually

increase your life expectancy?

A recent study (Freedman, Park,

Abnet, Hollenbeck, & Sinha,

2012) found that men who

drank at least six cups of coffee

a day had a 10% lower chance of

dying (women 15% lower) than

those who drank none. Does         Figure 2.6.1. People around the world
this mean you should pick up or    differ in their preferences for drinking
increase your own coffee habit?    coffee versus drinking tea. Would the
Modern society has become          results of the coffee study be the same
awash in studies such as this;     in Canada as in China? [Image:
                                   Duncan, https://goo.gl/vbMyTm, CC
                                   BY-NC 2.0, https://goo.gl/l8UUGY]

you can read about several such

studies in the news every day. Conducting such a study well, and

interpreting the results of such studies requires understanding

basic ideas of statistics, the science of gaining insight from data.

Key components to a statistical investigation are:

 Planning the study: Start by asking a testable research question
   and deciding how to collect data. For example, how long was
   the study period of the coffee study? How many people were
   recruited for the study, how were they recruited, and from
   where? How old were they? What other variables were
   recorded about the individuals? Were changes made to the
   participants' coffee habits during the course of the study?

 Examining the data: What are appropriate ways to examine the
   data? What graphs are relevant, and what do they reveal? What
   descriptive statistics can be calculated to summarize relevant
   aspects of the data, and what do they reveal? What patterns do
   you see in the data? Are there any individual observations that
   deviate from the overall pattern, and what do they reveal? For

Analyzing Data: Correlational and Experimental Research | 107
      example, in the coffee study, did the proportions differ when
      we compared the smokers to the non-smokers?
   Inferring from the data: What are valid statistical methods for
      drawing inferences "beyond" the data you collected? In the
      coffee study, is the 10%-15% reduction in risk of death
      something that could have happened just by chance?
   Drawing conclusions: Based on what you learned from your
      data, what conclusions can you draw? Who do you think these
      conclusions apply to? (Were the people in the coffee study
      older? Healthy? Living in cities?) Can you draw a cause-and-
      effect conclusion about your treatments? (Are scientists now
      saying that the coffee drinking is the cause of the decreased
      risk of death?)

Notice that the numerical analysis ("crunching numbers" on the
computer) comprises only a small part of overall statistical
investigation. In this section, you will see how we can answer some
of these questions and what questions you should be asking about
any statistical investigation you read about.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=40#oembed-1

Video 2.6.1. Types of Statistical Studies explains the differences
between correlational and experimental research.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online

108 | Analyzing Data: Correlational and Experimental Research
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=40#oembed-2

Distributional Thinking

When data are collected to address a particular question, an
important first step is to think of meaningful ways to organize and
examine the data. Let's take a look at an example.

   Example 1: Researchers investigated whether cancer pamphlets
are written at an appropriate level to be read and understood by
cancer patients (Short, Moriarty, & Cooley, 1995). Tests of reading
ability were given to 63 patients. In addition, readability level was
determined for a sample of 30 pamphlets, based on characteristics
such as the lengths of words and sentences in the pamphlet. The
results, reported in terms of grade levels, are displayed in Figure
2.6.2.

   Figure 2.6.2. Frequency tables of patient reading levels and
pamphlet readability levels.

   Testing these two variables reveal two fundamental aspects of
statistical thinking:

   Data vary. More specifically, values of a variable (such as
      reading level of a cancer patient or readability level of a cancer
      pamphlet) vary.

   Analyzing the pattern of variation, called the distribution of
      the variable, often reveals insights.

                  Analyzing Data: Correlational and Experimental Research | 109
Addressing the research question of whether the cancer pamphlets
are written at appropriate levels for the cancer patients requires
comparing the two distributions. A nave comparison might focus
only on the centers of the distributions. Both medians turn out to
be ninth grade, but considering only medians ignores the variability
and the overall distributions of these data. A more illuminating
approach is to compare the entire distributions, for example with a
graph, as in Figure 2.6.3.

   Figure 2.6.3. makes clear that the two distributions are not well
                                      aligned at all.

   The most glaring discrepancy is that many patients (17/63, or
27%, to be precise) have a reading level below that of the most
readable pamphlet. These patients will need help to understand
the information provided in the cancer pamphlets. Notice that this
conclusion follows from considering the distributions as a whole,
not simply measures of center or variability, and that the graph
contrasts those distributions more immediately than the frequency
tables.

110 | Analyzing Data: Correlational and Experimental Research
                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=40#oembed-3

Statistical Significance

Even when we find patterns in data, often there is still uncertainty
in various aspects of the data. For example, there may be potential
for measurement errors (even your own body temperature can
fluctuate by almost 1캟 over the course of the day). Or we may only
have a "snapshot" of observations from a more long-term process
or only a small subset of individuals from the population of interest.
In such cases, how can we determine whether patterns we see
in our small set of data is convincing evidence of a systematic
phenomenon in the larger process or population? Let's take a look
at another example.

   Example 2: In a study reported in the November 2007 issue of
Nature, researchers investigated whether pre-verbal infants take
into account an individual's actions toward others in evaluating that
individual as appealing or aversive (Hamlin, Wynn, & Bloom, 2007).
In one component of the study, 10-month-old infants were shown a
"climber" character (a piece of wood with "googly" eyes glued onto
it) that could not make it up a hill in two tries. Then the infants
were shown two scenarios for the climber's next try, one where
the climber was pushed to the top of the hill by another character
("helper"), and one where the climber was pushed back down the hill
by another character ("hinderer"). The infant was alternately shown
these two scenarios several times. Then the infant was presented

                   Analyzing Data: Correlational and Experimental Research | 111
with two pieces of wood (representing the helper and the hinderer
characters) and asked to pick one to play with.

   The researchers found that of the 16 infants who made a clear
choice, 14 chose to play with the helper toy. One possible
explanation for this clear majority result is that the helping behavior
of the one toy increases the infants' likelihood of choosing that toy.
But are there other possible explanations? What about the color of
the toy? Well, prior to collecting the data, the researchers arranged
so that each color and shape (red square and blue circle) would be
seen by the same number of infants. Or maybe the infants had right-
handed tendencies and so picked whichever toy was closer to their
right hand?

   Well, prior to collecting the data, the researchers arranged it so
half the infants saw the helper toy on the right and half on the
left. Or, maybe the shapes of these wooden characters (square,
triangle, circle) had an effect? Perhaps, but again, the researchers
controlled for this by rotating which shape was the helper toy,
the hinderer toy, and the climber. When designing experiments, it
is important to control for as many variables as might affect the
responses as possible. It is beginning to appear that the researchers
accounted for all the other plausible explanations. But there is one
more important consideration that cannot be controlled--if we did
the study again with these 16 infants, they might not make the same
choices. In other words, there is some randomness inherent in their
selection process.

P-value

Maybe each infant had no genuine preference at all, and it was
simply "random luck" that led to 14 infants picking the helper toy.
Although this random component cannot be controlled, we can
apply a probability model to investigate the pattern of results that
would occur in the long run if random chance were the only factor.

112 | Analyzing Data: Correlational and Experimental Research
   If the infants were equally likely to pick between the two toys,
then each infant had a 50% chance of picking the helper toy. It's like
each infant tossed a coin, and if it landed heads, the infant picked
the helper toy. So if we tossed a coin 16 times, could it land heads
14 times? Sure, it's possible, but it turns out to be very unlikely.
Getting 14 (or more) heads in 16 tosses is about as likely as tossing a
coin and getting 9 heads in a row. This probability is referred to as
a p-value. The p-value represents the likelihood that experimental
results happened by chance. Within psychology, the most common
standard for p-values is "p < .05". What this means is that there is
less than a 5% probability that the results happened just by random
chance, and therefore a 95% probability that the results reflect a
meaningful pattern in human psychology. We call this statistical
significance.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=40#oembed-4

So, in the study above, if we assume that each infant was choosing
equally, then the probability that 14 or more out of 16 infants would
choose the helper toy is found to be 0.0021. We have only two
logical possibilities: either the infants have a genuine preference for
the helper toy, or the infants have no preference (50/50), and an
outcome that would occur only 2 times in 1,000 iterations happened
in this study. Because this p-value of 0.0021 is quite small, we
conclude that the study provides very strong evidence that these
infants have a genuine preference for the helper toy.

   If we compare the p-value to some cut-off value, like 0.05, we
see that the p=value is smaller. Because the p-value is smaller than
that cut-off value, then we reject the hypothesis that only random

                  Analyzing Data: Correlational and Experimental Research | 113
chance was at play here. In this case, these researchers would
conclude that significantly more than half of the infants in the study
chose the helper toy, giving strong evidence of a genuine preference
for the toy with the helping behavior.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=40#oembed-5

Generalizability

One limitation to the study

mentioned previously about the

babies choosing the "helper"

toy is that the conclusion only

applies to the 16 infants in the

study. We don't know much         Figure 2.6.4. Generalizability is an
about how those 16 infants        important research consideration: The
were selected. Suppose we         results of studies with widely
want to select a subset of        representative samples are more likely
individuals (a sample) from a     to generalize to the population. [Image:
much larger group of              Barnacles Budget Accommodation]

individuals (the population) in such a way that conclusions from the

sample can be generalized to the larger population. This is the

question faced by pollsters every day.

Example 3: The General Social Survey (GSS) is a survey on societal

trends conducted every other year in the United States. Based on

a sample of about 2,000 adult Americans, researchers make claims

about what percentage of the U.S. population consider themselves

114 | Analyzing Data: Correlational and Experimental Research
to be "liberal," what percentage consider themselves "happy," what
percentage feel "rushed" in their daily lives, and many other issues.
The key to making these claims about the larger population of all
American adults lies in how the sample is selected. The goal is
to select a sample that is representative of the population, and a
common way to achieve this goal is to select a random sample that
gives every member of the population an equal chance of being
selected for the sample. In its simplest form, random sampling
involves numbering every member of the population and then using
a computer to randomly select the subset to be surveyed. Most
polls don't operate exactly like this, but they do use probability-
based sampling methods to select individuals from nationally
representative panels.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=40#oembed-6

In 2004, the GSS reported that 817 of 977 respondents (or 83.6%)
indicated that they always or sometimes feel rushed. This is a clear
majority, but we again need to consider variation due to random
sampling. Fortunately, we can use the same probability model we
did in the previous example to investigate the probable size of this
error. (Note, we can use the coin-tossing model when the actual
population size is much, much larger than the sample size, as then
we can still consider the probability to be the same for every
individual in the sample.) This probability model predicts that the
sample result will be within 3 percentage points of the population
value (roughly 1 over the square root of the sample size, the margin
of error). A statistician would conclude, with 95% confidence, that

                  Analyzing Data: Correlational and Experimental Research | 115
between 80.6% and 86.6% of all adult Americans in 2004 would have
responded that they sometimes or always feel rushed.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=40#oembed-7

The key to the margin of error is that when we use a probability
sampling method, we can make claims about how often (in the long
run, with repeated random sampling) the sample result would fall
within a certain distance from the unknown population value by
chance (meaning by random sampling variation) alone. Conversely,
non-random samples are often suspect to bias, meaning the
sampling method systematically over-represents some segments of
the population and under-represents others. We also still need to
consider other sources of bias, such as individuals not responding
honestly. These sources of error are not measured by the margin of
error.

Cause and Effect Conclusions

In many research studies, the primary question of interest concerns
differences between groups. Then the question becomes how were
the groups formed (e.g., selecting people who already drink coffee
vs. those who don't). In some studies, the researchers actively form
the groups themselves. But then we have a similar question--could
any differences we observe in the groups be an artifact of that
group-formation process? Or maybe the difference we observe in

116 | Analyzing Data: Correlational and Experimental Research
the groups is so large that we can discount a "fluke" in the group-
formation process as a reasonable explanation for what we find?

   Example 4: A psychology study investigated whether people tend
to display more creativity when they are thinking about intrinsic
(internal) or extrinsic (external) motivations (Ramsey & Schafer,
2002, based on a study by Amabile, 1985). The subjects were 47
people with extensive experience with creative writing. Subjects
began by answering survey questions about either intrinsic
motivations for writing (such as the pleasure of self-expression) or
extrinsic motivations (such as public recognition). Then all subjects
were instructed to write a haiku, and those poems were evaluated
for creativity by a panel of judges. The researchers conjectured
beforehand that subjects who were thinking about intrinsic
motivations would display more creativity than subjects who were
thinking about extrinsic motivations. The creativity scores from the
47 subjects in this study are displayed in Figure 2.6.5, where higher
scores indicate more creativity.

  Figure 2.6.3. Comparison of patient reading levels and pamphlet
                                   readability levels.

   In this example, the key question is whether the type of
motivation affects creativity scores. In particular, do subjects who
were asked about intrinsic motivations tend to have higher
creativity scores than subjects who were asked about extrinsic
motivations?

   Figure 2.6.5 reveals that both motivation groups saw considerable
variability in creativity scores, and these scores have considerable
overlap between the groups. In other words, it's certainly not always
the case that those with extrinsic motivations have higher creativity
than those with intrinsic motivations, but there may still be a

                   Analyzing Data: Correlational and Experimental Research | 117
statistical tendency in this direction. (Psychologist Keith Stanovich
(2013) refers to people's difficulties with thinking about such
probabilistic tendencies as "the Achilles heel of human cognition.")

   The mean creativity score is 19.88 for the intrinsic group,
compared to 15.74 for the extrinsic group, which supports the
researchers' conjecture. Yet comparing only the means of the two
groups fails to consider the variability of creativity scores in the
groups. We can measure variability with statistics using, for
instance, the standard deviation: 5.25 for the extrinsic group and
4.40 for the intrinsic group. The standard deviations tell us that
most of the creativity scores are within about 5 points of the mean
score in each group. We see that the mean score for the intrinsic
group lies within one standard deviation of the mean score for the
extrinsic group. So, although there is a tendency for the creativity
scores to be higher in the intrinsic group, on average, the difference
is not extremely large.

   We again want to consider possible explanations for this
difference. The study only involved individuals with extensive
creative writing experience. Although this limits the population to
which we can generalize, it does not explain why the mean
creativity score was a bit larger for the intrinsic group than for
the extrinsic group. Maybe women tend to receive higher creativity
scores? Here is where we need to focus on how the individuals
were assigned to the motivation groups. If only women were in
the intrinsic motivation group and only men in the extrinsic group,
then this would present a problem because we wouldn't know if
the intrinsic group did better because of the different types of
motivation or because they were women. However, the researchers
guarded against such a problem by randomly assigning the
individuals to the motivation groups. Like flipping a coin, each
individual was just as likely to be assigned to either type of
motivation. Why is this helpful? Because this random assignment
tends to balance out all the variables related to creativity we can
think of, and even those we don't think of in advance, between the
two groups. So we should have a similar male/female split between

118 | Analyzing Data: Correlational and Experimental Research
the two groups; we should have a similar age distribution between
the two groups; we should have a similar distribution of educational
background between the two groups; and so on. Random
assignment should produce groups that are as similar as possible
except for the type of motivation, which presumably eliminates
all those other variables as possible explanations for the observed
tendency for higher scores in the intrinsic group.

   But does this always work? No, so by "luck of the draw" the
groups may be a little different prior to answering the motivation
survey. So then the question is, is it possible that an unlucky random
assignment is responsible for the observed difference in creativity
scores between the groups? In other words, suppose each
individual's poem was going to get the same creativity score no
matter which group they were assigned to, that the type of
motivation in no way impacted their score. Then how often would
the random-assignment process alone lead to a difference in mean
creativity scores as large (or larger) than 19.88 - 15.74 = 4.14 points?

   We again want to apply a probability model to approximate a
p-value, but this time the model will be a bit different. Think of
writing everyone's creativity scores on an index card, shuffling up
the index cards, and then dealing out 23 to the extrinsic motivation
group and 24 to the intrinsic motivation group, and finding the
difference in the group means. We (better yet, the computer) can
repeat this process over and over to see how often, when the scores
don't change, random assignment leads to a difference in means at
least as large as 4.41. Figure 2.6.6 shows the results from 1,000 such
hypothetical random assignments for these scores.

                  Analyzing Data: Correlational and Experimental Research | 119
                   Only 2 of the 1,000 simulated random

                   assignments produced a difference in group

                   means of 4.41 or larger. In other words, the

                   approximate p-value is 2/1000 = 0.002. This

                   small p-value indicates that it would be very

Figure 2.6.6.      surprising for the random assignment process
Differences in     alone to produce such a large difference in
group means under  group means. Therefore, as with Example 4, we
random assignment  have strong evidence that focusing on intrinsic
alone.             motivations tends to increase creativity scores,

as compared to thinking about extrinsic motivations.

Notice that the previous statement implies a cause-and-effect

relationship between motivation and creativity score; is such a

strong conclusion justified? Yes, because of the random assignment

used in the study. That should have balanced out any other variables

between the two groups, so now that the small p-value convinces

us that the higher mean in the intrinsic group wasn't just a

coincidence, the only reasonable explanation left is the difference

in the type of motivation. Can we generalize this conclusion to

everyone? Not necessarily--we could cautiously generalize this

conclusion to individuals with extensive experience in creative

writing similar to the individuals in this study, but we would still

want to know more about how these individuals were selected to

participate.

           One or more interactive elements has been excluded
           from this version of the text. You can view them online
here:
https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=40#oembed-8

120 | Analyzing Data: Correlational and Experimental Research
Conclusion

                                          Statistical thinking involves

                                          the careful design of a study to

                                          collect meaningful data to

                                          answer a focused research

                                          question, detailed analysis of

                                          patterns in the data, and

                                          drawing conclusions that go

Figure 2.6.7. Researchers employ the      beyond the observed data.
scientific method that involves a great   Random sampling is paramount
deal of statistical thinking: generate a  to generalizing results from our
hypothesis -> design a study to test      sample to a larger population,
that hypothesis -> conduct the study      and random assignment is key
-> analyze the data -> report the         to drawing cause-and-effect
results. [Image: widdowquinn]

                                          conclusions. With both kinds of

randomness, probability models help us assess how much random

variation we can expect in our results, in order to determine

whether our results could happen by chance alone and to estimate

a margin of error.

So where does this leave us with regard to the coffee study

mentioned previously (the Freedman, Park, Abnet, Hollenbeck, &

Sinha, 2012 found that men who drank at least six cups of coffee a

day had a 10% lower chance of dying (women 15% lower) than those

who drank none)? We can answer many of the questions:

 This was a 14-year study conducted by researchers at the
   National Cancer Institute.

 The results were published in the June issue of the New
   England Journal of Medicine, a respected, peer-reviewed
   journal.

 The study reviewed coffee habits of more than 402,000 people
   ages 50 to 71 from six states and two metropolitan areas. Those
   with cancer, heart disease, and stroke were excluded at the

Analyzing Data: Correlational and Experimental Research | 121
      start of the study. Coffee consumption was assessed once at
      the start of the study.
   About 52,000 people died during the course of the study.
   People who drank between two and five cups of coffee daily
      showed a lower risk as well, but the amount of reduction
      increased for those drinking six or more cups.
   The sample sizes were fairly large and so the p-values are quite
      small, even though the percent reduction in risk was not
      extremely large (dropping from a 12% chance to about
      10%-11%).
   Whether coffee was caffeinated or decaffeinated did not
      appear to affect the results.
   This was an observational study, so no cause-and-effect
      conclusions can be drawn between coffee drinking and
      increased longevity, contrary to the impression conveyed by
      many news headlines about this study. In particular, it's
      possible that those with chronic diseases don't tend to drink
      coffee.

This study needs to be reviewed in the larger context of similar
studies and consistency of results across studies, with the constant
caution that this was not a randomized experiment. Whereas a
statistical analysis can still "adjust" for other potential confounding
variables, we are not yet convinced that researchers have identified
them all or completely isolated why this decrease in death risk is
evident. Researchers can now take the findings of this study and
develop more focused studies that address new questions.

     Learn More

        Explore these outside resources to learn more about
     applied statistics:

122 | Analyzing Data: Correlational and Experimental Research
          Video about p-values: P-Value Extravaganza
          Interactive web applets for teaching and learning

             statistics
          Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social

             Research where you can find and analyze data.
          The Consortium for the Advancement of

             Undergraduate Statistics

CC licensed content, Original

   Analyzing Data: Correlational and Experimental Research.
      Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van Hoose. Provided by: Hudson
      Valley Community College. Retrieved from:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/chapter/
      analyzing-data/. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Analyzing Data: Correlational and Experimental Research.
      Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van Hoose. Provided by: Hudson
      Valley Community College. Retrieved from:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/adolescent/chapter/
      analyzing-data-correlational-and-experimental-research/.
      License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

                  Analyzing Data: Correlational and Experimental Research | 123
Correlational Research

Correlation means that there is a relationship between two or more
variables (such as ice cream consumption and crime), but this
relationship does not necessarily imply cause and effect. When two
variables are correlated, it simply means that as one variable
changes, so does the other. We can measure correlation by
calculating a statistic known as a correlation coefficient.
A correlation coefficient is a number from -1 to +1 that indicates the
strength and direction of the relationship between variables. The
correlation coefficient is usually represented by the letter r.

   The number portion of the correlation coefficient indicates the
strength of the relationship. The closer the number is to 1 (be it
negative or positive), the more strongly related the variables are,
and the more predictable changes in one variable will be as the
other variable changes. The closer the number is to zero, the weaker
the relationship and the less predictable the relationship between
the variables becomes. For instance, a correlation coefficient of 0.9
indicates a far stronger relationship than a correlation coefficient
of 0.3. If the variables are not related to one another at all, the
correlation coefficient is 0. The example above about ice cream and
crime is an example of two variables that we might expect to have
no relationship to each other.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=41#oembed-2

The sign--positive or negative--of the correlation coefficient
indicates the direction of the relationship (Figure 2.2). A positive

124 | Educational Psychology
correlation means that the variables move in the same direction.
Put another way, it means that as one variable increases so does
the other, and conversely, when one variable decreases so does
the other. A negative correlation means that the variables move
in opposite directions. If two variables are negatively correlated, a
decrease in one variable is associated with an increase in the other
and vice versa.

   Figure 2.7.1. Scatterplots are a graphical view of the strength and
 direction of correlations. The stronger the correlation, the closer
the data points are to a straight line. In these examples, we see that
 there is (a) a positive correlation between weight and height, (b) a
 negative correlation between tiredness and hours of sleep, and (c)

          no correlation between shoe size and hours of sleep.
   The example of ice cream and crime rates is a positive correlation
because both variables increase when temperatures are warmer.
Other examples of positive correlations are the relationship
between an individual's height and weight or the relationship
between a person's age and number of wrinkles. One might expect
a negative correlation to exist between someone's tiredness during
the day and the number of hours they slept the previous night: the
amount of sleep decreases as the feelings of tiredness increase. In a
real-world example of negative correlation, student researchers at
the University of Minnesota found a weak negative correlation (r =
-0.29) between the average number of days per week that students
got fewer than 5 hours of sleep and their GPA (Lowry, Dean, &
Manders, 2010). Keep in mind that a negative correlation is not the

                                                                 Educational Psychology | 125
same as no correlation. For example, we would probably find no
correlation between hours of sleep and shoe size.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=41#video-41-1

Video 2.7.1. Correlational Research Design provides explanation and
examples for correlational research. A closed-captioned version of
this video is available here.

     Exercise 2.1. Manipulating Scatterplots

        Manipulate this interactive scatterplot to practice your
     understanding of positive and negative correlations.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=41#oembed-3

As mentioned earlier, correlations have predictive value. Imagine
that you are on the admissions committee of a major university.
You are faced with a massive number of applications, but you are
126 | Educational Psychology
able to accommodate only a small percentage of the applicant pool.
How might you decide who should be admitted? You might try
to correlate your current students' college GPA with their scores
on standardized tests like the SAT or ACT. By observing which
correlations were strongest for your current students, you could
use this information to predict the relative success of those
students who have applied for admission into the university.

Correlation Does Not Indicate Causation

Correlational research is useful because it allows us to discover
the strength and direction of relationships that exist between two
variables. However, correlation is limited because establishing the
existence of a relationship tells us little about cause and effect.
While variables are sometimes correlated because one does cause
the other, it could also be that some other factor, a confounding
variable, is actually causing the systematic movement in our
variables of interest. In the ice cream/crime rate example
mentioned earlier, temperature is a confounding variable that could
account for the relationship between the two variables.

   Even when we cannot point to clear confounding variables, we
should not assume that a correlation between two variables implies
that one variable causes changes in another. This can be frustrating
when a cause-and-effect relationship seems clear and intuitive.
Think back to our discussion of the research done by the American
Cancer Society and how their research projects were some of the
first demonstrations of the link between smoking and cancer. It
seems reasonable to assume that smoking causes cancer, but if we
were limited to correlational research, we would be overstepping
our bounds by making this assumption.

   Unfortunately, people mistakenly make claims of causation as a
function of correlations all the time. Such claims are especially
common in advertisements and news stories. For example, recent

                                                                 Educational Psychology | 127
research found that people who eat cereal on a regular basis achieve
healthier weights than those who rarely eat cereal (Frantzen,
Trevio, Echon, Garcia-Dominic, & DiMarco, 2013; Barton et al.,
2005). Guess how the cereal companies report this finding. Does
eating cereal really cause an individual to maintain a healthy weight,
or are there other possible explanations, such as, someone at a
healthy weight is more likely to regularly eat a healthy breakfast
than someone who is obese or someone who avoids meals in an
attempt to diet? While correlational research is invaluable in
identifying relationships among variables, a significant limitation
is the inability to establish causality. Psychologists want to make
statements about cause and effect, but the only way to do that is
to conduct an experiment to answer a research question. The next
section describes how scientific experiments incorporate methods
that eliminate or control for alternative explanations, which allow
researchers to explore how changes in one variable cause changes
in another variable.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=41#oembed-1

Video 2.7.2. Correlation and Causality provides explanationfor why
correlation does not imply causality.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online

128 | Educational Psychology
here:
https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=41#oembed-4

Illusory Correlations

The temptation to make erroneous cause-and-effect statements
based on correlational research is not the only way we tend to
misinterpret data. We also tend to make the mistake of illusory
correlations, especially with unsystematic observations. Illusory
correlations, or false correlations, occur when people believe that
relationships exist between two things when no such relationship
exists. One well-known illusory correlation is the supposed effect
that the moon's phases have on human behavior. Many people
passionately assert that human behavior is affected by the phase of
the moon, and specifically, that people act strangely when the moon
is full (Figure 2).

                                      There is no denying that the

                                      moon exerts a powerful

                                      influence on our planet. The

                                      ebb and flow of the ocean's

                                      tides are tightly tied to the

                                      gravitational forces of the

Figure 2. Many people believe that a  moon. Many people believe,
full moon makes people behave oddly.  therefore, that it is logical that
(credit: Cory Zanker)                 we are affected by the moon as

                                      well. After all, our bodies are

largely made up of water. A meta-analysis of nearly 40 studies

consistently demonstrated, however, that the relationship between

the moon and our behavior does not exist (Rotton & Kelly, 1985).

                                      Educational Psychology | 129
While we may pay more attention to odd behavior during the full
phase of the moon, the rates of odd behavior remain constant
throughout the lunar cycle. Why are we so apt to believe in illusory
correlations like this? Often we read or hear about them and simply
accept the information as valid. Or, we have a hunch about how
something works and then look for evidence to support that hunch,
ignoring evidence that would tell us our hunch is false; this is known
as confirmation bias. Other times, we find illusory correlations
based on the information that comes most easily to mind, even if
that information is severely limited. And while we may feel confident
that we can use these relationships to better understand and
predict the world around us, illusory correlations can have
significant drawbacks. For example, research suggests that illusory
correlations--in which certain behaviors are inaccurately attributed
to certain groups--are involved in the formation of prejudicial
attitudes that can ultimately lead to discriminatory behavior
(Fiedler, 2004).
CC licensed content, Original

   Correlational Research. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/
      chapter/correlational-research/. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Correlational Research. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      adolescent/chapter/correlational-research/. License: CC BY-
      NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

130 | Educational Psychology
Experimental Research

As you've learned, the only way to establish that there is a cause-
and-effect relationship between two variables is to conduct a
scientific experiment. Experiment has a different meaning in the
scientific context than in everyday life. In everyday conversation,
we often use it to describe trying something for the first time, such
as experimenting with a new hairstyle or new food. However, in
the scientific context, an experiment has precise requirements for
design and implementation.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=42#video-42-1

Video 2.8.1. Experimental Research Design provides explanation and
examples for correlational research. A closed-captioned version of
this video is available here.

The Experimental Hypothesis

In order to conduct an experiment, a researcher must have a
specific hypothesis to be tested. As you've learned, hypotheses can
be formulated either through direct observation of the real world or
after careful review of previous research. For example, if you think
that children should not be allowed to watch violent programming
on television because doing so would cause them to behave more
violently, then you have basically formulated a hypothesis--namely,

                                                                  Experimental Research | 131
that watching violent television programs causes children to behave
more violently. How might you have arrived at this particular
hypothesis? You may have younger relatives who watch cartoons
featuring characters using martial arts to save the world from
evildoers, with an impressive array of punching, kicking, and
defensive postures. You notice that after watching these programs
for a while, your young relatives mimic the fighting behavior of the
characters portrayed in the cartoon. Seeing behavior like this right
after a child watches violent television programming might lead you
to hypothesize that viewing violent television programming leads
to an increase in the display of violent behaviors. These sorts of
personal observations are what often lead us to formulate a specific
hypothesis, but we cannot use limited personal observations and
anecdotal evidence to test our hypothesis rigorously. Instead, to
find out if real-world data supports our hypothesis, we have to
conduct an experiment.

Designing an Experiment

The most basic experimental design involves two groups: the
experimental group and the control group. The two groups are
designed to be the same except for one difference-- experimental
manipulation. The experimental group gets the experimental
manipulation--that is, the treatment or variable being tested (in
this case, violent TV images)--and the control group does not. Since
experimental manipulation is the only difference between the
experimental and control groups, we can be sure that any
differences between the two are due to experimental manipulation
rather than chance.

   In our example of how violent television programming might
affect violent behavior in children, we have the experimental group
view violent television programming for a specified time and then
measure their violent behavior. We measure the violent behavior

132 | Experimental Research
in our control group after they watch nonviolent television
programming for the same amount of time. It is important for the
control group to be treated similarly to the experimental group,
with the exception that the control group does not receive the
experimental manipulation. Therefore, we have the control group
watch non-violent television programming for the same amount of
time as the experimental group.

   We also need to define precisely, or operationalize, what is
considered violent and nonviolent. An operational definition is a
description of how we will measure our variables, and it is important
in allowing others to understand exactly how and what a researcher
measures in a particular experiment. In operationalizing violent
behavior, we might choose to count only physical acts like kicking
or punching as instances of this behavior, or we also may choose
to include angry verbal exchanges. Whatever we determine, it is
important that we operationalize violent behavior in such a way that
anyone who hears about our study for the first time knows exactly
what we mean by violence. This aids peoples' ability to interpret our
data as well as their capacity to repeat our experiment should they
choose to do so.

   Once we have operationalized what is considered violent
television programming and what is considered violent behavior
from our experiment participants, we need to establish how we
will run our experiment. In this case, we might have participants
watch a 30-minute television program (either violent or nonviolent,
depending on their group membership) before sending them out to
a playground for an hour where their behavior is observed and the
number and type of violent acts are recorded.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online

                                                                  Experimental Research | 133
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=42#oembed-3

Ideally, the people who observe and record the children's behavior
are unaware of who was assigned to the experimental or control
group, in order to control for experimenter bias. Experimenter
bias refers to the possibility that a researcher's expectations might
skew the results of the study. Remember, conducting an experiment
requires a lot of planning, and the people involved in the research
project have a vested interest in supporting their hypotheses. If the
observers knew which child was in which group, it might influence
how much attention they paid to each child's behavior as well as
how they interpreted that behavior. By being blind to which child
is in which group, we protect against those biases. This situation is
a single-blind study, meaning that the participants are unaware as
to which group they are in (experiment or control group) while the
researcher knows which participants are in each group.

   In a double-blind study, both the researchers and the
participants are blind to group assignments. Why would a
researcher want to run a study where no one knows who is in which
group? Because by doing so, we can control for both experimenter
and participant expectations. If you are familiar with the
phrase placebo effect, you already have some idea as to why this
is an important consideration. The placebo effect occurs when
people's expectations or beliefs influence or determine their
experience in a given situation. In other words, simply expecting
something to happen can actually make it happen.

134 | Experimental Research
                                                     The placebo effect is
                                                  commonly described in terms
                                                  of testing the effectiveness of a
                                                  new medication. Imagine that
                                                  you work in a pharmaceutical
                                                  company, and you think you
                                                  have a new drug that is
                                                  effective in treating depression.
                                                  To demonstrate that your
medication is effective, you run an experiment with two groups: The
experimental group receives the medication, and the control group
does not. But you don't want participants to know whether they
received the drug or not.
   Why is that? Imagine that you are a participant in this study,
and you have just taken a pill that you think will improve your
mood. Because you expect the pill to have an effect, you might feel
better simply because you took the pill and not because of any drug
actually contained in the pill--this is the placebo effect.
   To make sure that any effects on mood are due to the drug and
not due to expectations, the control group receives a placebo (in
this case, a sugar pill). Now everyone gets a pill, and once again,
neither the researcher nor the experimental participants know who
got the drug and who got the sugar pill. Any differences in mood
between the experimental and control groups can now be
attributed to the drug itself rather than to experimenter bias or
participant expectations.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=42#oembed-1

                                                                  Experimental Research | 135
Video 2.8.2. Introduction to Experimental Design introduces
fundamental elements for experimental research design.

Independent and Dependent Variables

In a research experiment, we strive to study whether changes in
one thing cause changes in another. To achieve this, we must pay
attention to two important variables, or things that can be changed,
in any experimental study: the independent variable and the
dependent variable. An independent variable is manipulated or
controlled by the experimenter. In a well-designed experimental
study, the independent variable is the only important difference
between the experimental and control groups. In our example of
how violent television programs affect children's display of violent
behavior, the independent variable is the type of program--violent
or nonviolent--viewed by participants in the study (Figure 2.3).
A dependent variable is what the researcher measures to see how
much effect the independent variable had. In our example, the
dependent variable is the number of violent acts displayed by the
experimental participants.

136 | Experimental Research
   Figure 2.8.1. In an experiment, manipulations of the independent
     variable are expected to result in changes in the dependent
                                         variable.

   We expect that the dependent variable will change as a function
of the independent variable. In other words, the dependent
variable depends on the independent variable. A good way to think
about the relationship between the independent and dependent
variables is with this question: What effect does the independent
variable have on the dependent variable? Returning to our example,
what effect does watching a half-hour of violent television
programming or nonviolent television programming have on the
number of incidents of physical aggression displayed on the
playground?

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=42#oembed-4

Selecting and Assigning Experimental
Participants

Now that our study is designed, we need to obtain a sample of
individuals to include in our experiment. Our study involves human
participants, so we need to determine who to
include. Participants are the subjects of psychological research,
and as the name implies, individuals who are involved in
psychological research actively participate in the process. Often,
psychological research projects rely on college students to serve
as participants. In fact, the vast majority of research in psychology

                                                                  Experimental Research | 137
subfields has historically involved students as research participants
(Sears, 1986; Arnett, 2008). But are college students truly
representative of the general population? College students tend to
be younger, more educated, more liberal, and less diverse than
the general population. Although using students as test subjects is
an accepted practice, relying on such a limited pool of research
participants can be problematic because it is difficult to generalize
findings to the larger population.

   Our hypothetical experiment involves children, and we must first
generate a sample of child participants. Samples are used because
populations are usually too large to reasonably involve every
member in our particular experiment (Figure 2.4). If possible, we
should use a random sample (there are other types of samples, but
for the purposes of this chapter, we will focus on random samples).
A random sample is a subset of a larger population in which every
member of the population has an equal chance of being selected.
Random samples are preferred because if the sample is large
enough we can be reasonably sure that the participating individuals
are representative of the larger population. This means that the
percentages of characteristics in the sample--sex, ethnicity,
socioeconomic level, and any other characteristics that might affect
the results--are close to those percentages in the larger population.

   In our example, let's say we decide our population of interest is
fourth graders. But all fourth graders is a very large population, so
we need to be more specific; instead, we might say our population of
interest is all fourth graders in a particular city. We should include
students from various income brackets, family situations, races,
ethnicities, religions, and geographic areas of town. With this more
manageable population, we can work with the local schools in
selecting a random sample of around 200 fourth-graders that we
want to participate in our experiment.

   In summary, because we cannot test all of the fourth graders
in a city, we want to find a group of about 200 that reflects the
composition of that city. With a representative group, we can

138 | Experimental Research
generalize our findings to the larger population without fear of our
sample being biased in some way.

   Figure 2.8.2. Researchers may work with (a) a large population or
      (b) a sample group that is a subset of the larger population.

   Now that we have a sample, the next step of the experimental
process is to split the participants into experimental and control
groups through random assignment. With random assignment, all
participants have an equal chance of being assigned to either group.
There is statistical software that will randomly assign each of the
fourth graders in the sample to either the experimental or the
control group.

   Random assignment is critical for sound experimental design.
With sufficiently large samples, random assignment makes it
unlikely that there are systematic differences between the groups.
So, for instance, it would be improbable that we would get one
group composed entirely of males, a given ethnic identity, or a given
religious ideology. This is important because if the groups were
systematically different before the experiment began, we would not
know the origin of any differences we find between the groups:
Were the differences preexisting, or were they caused by
manipulation of the independent variable? Random assignment
allows us to assume that any differences observed between
experimental and control groups result from the manipulation of
the independent variable.

                                                                  Experimental Research | 139
     Exercise 2.2 Randomization in Sampling and
   Assignment

        Use this online tool to generate randomized numbers
     instantly and to learn more about random sampling and
     assignments.

Issues to Consider

While experiments allow scientists to make cause-and-effect
claims, they are not without problems. True experiments require
the experimenter to manipulate an independent variable, and that
can complicate many questions that psychologists might want to
address. For instance, imagine that you want to know what effect
sex (the independent variable) has on spatial memory (the
dependent variable). Although you can certainly look for differences
between males and females on a task that taps into spatial memory,
you cannot directly control a person's sex. We categorize this type
of research approach as quasi-experimental and recognize that we
cannot make cause-and-effect claims in these circumstances.

   Experimenters are also limited by ethical constraints. For
instance, you would not be able to conduct an experiment designed
to determine if experiencing abuse as a child leads to lower levels
of self-esteem among adults. To conduct such an experiment, you
would need to randomly assign some experimental participants to a
group that receives abuse, and that experiment would be unethical.

140 | Experimental Research
Interpreting Experimental Findings

Once data is collected from both the experimental and the control
groups, a statistical analysis is conducted to find out if there are
meaningful differences between the two groups. The statistical
analysis determines how likely any difference found is due to chance
(and thus not meaningful). In psychology, group differences are
considered meaningful, or significant, if the odds that these
differences occurred by chance alone are 5 percent or less. Stated
another way, if we repeated this experiment 100 times, we would
expect to find the same results at least 95 times out of 100.

   The greatest strength of experiments is the ability to assert that
any significant differences in the findings are caused by the
independent variable. This occurs because of random selection,
random assignment, and a design that limits the effects of both
experimenter bias and participant expectancy should create groups
that are similar in composition and treatment. Therefore, any
difference between the groups is attributable to the independent
variable, and now we can finally make a causal statement. If we find
that watching a violent television program results in more violent
behavior than watching a nonviolent program, we can safely say
that watching violent television programs causes an increase in the
display of violent behavior.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=42#oembed-2

                                                                  Experimental Research | 141
                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=42#oembed-5

CC licensed content, Original
   Experimental Research. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/
      chapter/experimental-research/. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously
   Experimental Research. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      adolescent/chapter/experimental-research/. Project:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/adolescent/chapter/
      experimental-research/. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike

142 | Experimental Research
Developmental Research
Designs

Sometimes, especially in developmental research, the researcher is
interested in examining changes over time and will need to consider
a research design that will capture these changes.
Remember, research methods are tools that are used to collect
information, while research design is the strategy or blueprint for
deciding how to collect and analyze information. Research design
dictates which methods are used and how. There are three types of
developmental research designs: cross-sectional, longitudinal, and
sequential.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=43#oembed-2

Video 2.9.1. Developmental Research Design summarizes the benefits
of challenges of the three developmental design models.

Cross-Sectional Designs

The majority of developmental studies use cross-sectional designs
because they are less time-consuming and less expensive than
other developmental designs. Cross-sectional research designs are
used to examine behavior in participants of different ages who are
tested at the same point in time. Let's suppose that researchers are

                                                                        Developmental Research
                                                                                       Designs | 143
interested in the relationship between intelligence and aging. They
might have a hypothesis that intelligence declines as people get
older. The researchers might choose to give a particular
intelligence test to individuals who are 20 years old, individuals
who are 50 years old, and individuals who are 80 years old at the
same time and compare the data from each age group. This
research is cross-sectional in design because the researchers plan
to examine the intelligence scores of individuals of different ages
within the same study at the same time; they are taking a "cross-
section" of people at one point in time. Let's say that the
comparisons find that the 80-year-old adults score lower on the
intelligence test than the 50-year-old adults, and the 50-year-old
adults score lower on the intelligence test than the 20-year-old
adults. Based on these data, the researchers might conclude
that individuals become less intelligent as they get older. Would
that be a valid (accurate) interpretation of the results?

         Figure 2.9.1. Example of cross-sectional research design
   No, that would not be a valid conclusion because the researchers
did not follow individuals as they aged from 20 to 50 to 80 years
old. One of the primary limitations of cross-sectional research is
that the results yield information about age differences not
necessarily changes over time. That is, although the study described

144 | Developmental Research Designs
above can show that the 80-year-olds scored lower on the
intelligence test than the 50-year-olds, and the 50-year-olds scored
lower than the 20-year-olds, the data used for this conclusion were
collected from different individuals (or groups). It could be, for
instance, that when these 20-year-olds get older, they will still score
just as high on the intelligence test as they did at age 20. Similarly,
maybe the 80-year-olds would have scored relatively low on the
intelligence test when they were young; the researchers don't know
for certain because they did not follow the same individuals as they
got older.

   With each cohort being members of a different generation, it is
also possible that the differences found between the groups are not
due to age, per se, but due to cohort effects. Differences between
these cohorts' IQ results could be due to differences in life
experiences specific to their generation, such as differences in
education, economic conditions, advances in technology, or
changes in health and nutrition standards, and not due to age-
related changes.

   Another disadvantage of cross-sectional research is that it is
limited to one time of measurement. Data are collected at one point
in time, and it's possible that something could have happened in that
year in history that affected all of the participants, although possibly
each cohort may have been affected differently.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=43#oembed-1

                                                    Developmental Research Designs | 145
Longitudinal Research Designs

                                                  Longitudinal research involves
                                                  beginning with a group of
                                                  people who may be of the same
                                                  age and background (cohort)
                                                  and measuring them repeatedly
                                                  over a long period of time. One
                                                  of the benefits of this type of
                                                  research is that people can be
followed through time and be compared with themselves when they
were younger; therefore, changes with age over time are measured.
What would be the advantages and disadvantages of longitudinal
research? Problems with this type of research include being
expensive, taking a long time, and subjects dropping out over time.
   Longitudinal research designs are used to examine behavior in
the same individuals over time. For instance, with our example of
studying intelligence and aging, a researcher might conduct a
longitudinal study to examine whether 20-year-olds become less
intelligent with age over time. To this end, a researcher might give
an intelligence test to individuals when they are 20 years old, again
when they are 50 years old, and then again when they are 80 years
old. This study is longitudinal in nature because the researcher
plans to study the same individuals as they age. Based on these data,
the pattern of intelligence and age might look different than from
the cross-sectional research; it might be found that participants'
intelligence scores are higher at age 50 than at age 20 and then
remain stable or decline a little by age 80. How can that be when
cross-sectional research revealed declines in intelligence with age?

146 | Developmental Research Designs
          Figure 2.9.2. Example of a longitudinal research design
   Since longitudinal research happens over a period of time (which
could be short-term, as in months, but is often longer, as in years),
there is a risk of attrition. Attrition occurs when participants fail
to complete all portions of a study. Participants may move, change
their phone numbers, die, or simply become disinterested in
participating over time. Researchers should account for the
possibility of attrition by enrolling a larger sample into their study
initially, as some participants will likely drop out over time. There
is also something known as selective attrition--this means that
certain groups of individuals may tend to drop out. It is often the
least healthy, least educated, and lower socioeconomic participants
who tend to drop out over time. That means that the remaining
participants may no longer be representative of the whole
population, as they are, in general, healthier, better educated, and
have more money. This could be a factor in why our hypothetical
research found a more optimistic picture of intelligence and aging
as the years went by. What can researchers do about selective
attrition? At each time of testing, they could randomly recruit more
participants from the same cohort as the original members to
replace those who have dropped out.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=43#oembed-3

The results from longitudinal studies may also be impacted by
repeated assessments. Consider how well you would do on a math
test if you were given the exact same exam every day for a week.
Your performance would likely improve over time, not necessarily
because you developed better math abilities, but because you were

                                                    Developmental Research Designs | 147
continuously practicing the same math problems. This phenomenon
is known as a practice effect. Practice effects occur when
participants become better at a task over time because they have
done it again and again (not due to natural psychological
development). So our participants may have become familiar with
the intelligence test each time (and with the computerized testing
administration).

   Another limitation of longitudinal research is that the data are
limited to only one cohort. As an example, think about how
comfortable the participants in the 2010 cohort of 20-year-olds are
with computers. Since only one cohort is being studied, there is
no way to know if findings would be different from other cohorts.
In addition, changes that are found as individuals age over time
could be due to age or to time of measurement effects. That is,
the participants are tested at different periods in history, so the
variables of age and time of measurement could be confounded
(mixed up). For example, what if there is a major shift in workplace
training and education between 2020 and 2040, and many of the
participants experience a lot more formal education in adulthood,
which positively impacts their intelligence scores in 2040?
Researchers wouldn't know if the intelligence scores increased due
to growing older or due to a more educated workforce over time
between measurements.

Sequential Research Designs

Sequential research designs include elements of both longitudinal
and cross-sectional research designs. Similar to longitudinal
designs, sequential research features participants who are followed
over time; similar to cross-sectional designs, sequential research
includes participants of different ages. This research design is also
distinct from those that have been discussed previously in
that individuals of different ages are enrolled into a study at various

148 | Developmental Research Designs
points in time to examine age-related changes, development within
the same individuals as they age, and to account for the possibility
of cohort and/or time of measurement effects

   Consider, once again, our example of intelligence and aging. In
a study with a sequential design, a researcher might recruit three
separate groups of participants (Groups A, B, and C). Group A would
be recruited when they are 20 years old in 2010 and would be tested
again when they are 50 and 80 years old in 2040 and 2070,
respectively (similar in design to the longitudinal study described
previously). Group B would be recruited when they are 20 years old
in 2040 and would be tested again when they are 50 years old in
2070. Group C would be recruited when they are 20 years old in
2070, and so on.

             Figure 2.9.3. Example of sequential research design
   Studies with sequential designs are powerful because they allow
for both longitudinal and cross-sectional comparisons--changes
and/or stability with age over time can be measured and compared
with differences between age and cohort groups. This research
design also allows for the examination of cohort and time of
measurement effects. For example, the researcher could examine
the intelligence scores of 20-year-olds at different times in history
and different cohorts (follow the yellow diagonal lines in figure
2.9.3). This might be examined by researchers who are interested in
sociocultural and historical changes (because we know that lifespan

                                                   Developmental Research Designs | 149
development is multidisciplinary). One way of looking at the
usefulness of the various developmental research designs was
described by Schaie and Baltes (1975): cross-sectional and
longitudinal designs might reveal change patterns while sequential
designs might identify developmental origins for the observed
change patterns.

   Since they include elements of longitudinal and cross-sectional
designs, sequential research has many of the same strengths and
limitations as these other approaches. For example, sequential work
may require less time and effort than longitudinal research (if data
are collected more frequently than over the 30-year spans in our
example) but more time and effort than cross-sectional research.
Although practice effects may be an issue if participants are asked
to complete the same tasks or assessments over time, attrition
may be less problematic than what is commonly experienced in
longitudinal research since participants may not have to remain
involved in the study for such a long period of time.

Comparing Developmental Research Designs

When considering the best research design to use in their research,
scientists think about their main research question and the best way
to come up with an answer. A table of advantages and disadvantages
for each of the described research designs is provided here to help
you as you consider what sorts of studies would be best conducted
using each of these different approaches.

   Table 2.9.1. Advantages and disadvantages of different research
designs

150 | Developmental Research Designs
                 Advantages                   Disadvantages

Cross-Sectional   Examines changes            Cannot
                     between participants of      examine
                     different ages at the        change over
                     same point in time           time

                  Provides information on     Limited to
                     age differences              one time in
                                                  history

                                               Cohort
                                                  differences
                                                  confounded
                                                  with age
                                                  differences

Longitudinal      Examines changes            Expensive
                     within individuals over   Takes a long
                     time
                                                  time
                  Provides a                  Participant
                     developmental analysis
                                                  attrition
                                               Possibility of

                                                  practice
                                                  effects
                                               Limited to
                                                  one cohort
                                               Time in
                                                  history
                                                  effects
                                                  confounded
                                                  with age
                                                  changes

Sequential        Examines changes            May be
                     within individuals over      expensive
                     time
                                               May take a
                  Examines changes               long time
                     between participants of
                     different ages at the     Possibility of
                     same point in time           practice
                                                  effects
                  Can be used to examine
                     cohort effects            Some
                                                  participant
                  Can be used to examine         attrition
                     time in history effects

                             Developmental Research Designs | 151
                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=43#oembed-4

CC licensed content, Original
   Developmental Research Design. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-
      Van Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/
      chapter/developmental-research-designs/. License: CC BY-
      NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously
   Developmental Research Designs. Authored by: Nicole
      Arduini-Van Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community
      College. Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      adolescent/chapter/developmental-research-design/.
      License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

152 | Developmental Research Designs
Teachers as Researchers

A good teacher will evaluate their own practice and reflect on how
they can improve. That evaluation will almost certainly involve
analysing data, and assessing the work students produce. It may
also involve talking to students about what they enjoyed, or found
difficult, or asking them to complete a short questionnaire. It may
involve asking a colleague to observe you teach, or you observing
someone else's lesson. The results of the evaluations will influence
your planning and hopefully, will encourage you to try new things.
So when does `good practice' become `research'? And what are the
advantages of engaging in research?

   `Research' is defined by the Chambers dictionary as: `systematic
investigation towards increasing the sum of knowledge'. This
definition provides some clues. It is suggested that a piece of
inquiry, evaluation, or development work becomes `research' when
the following apply:

   the work involves capturing data: Conversations or lessons
      might be recorded so that they can be used outside the
      context in which the events took place. Students' work might
      also be used as evidence.

   participants are being asked to do something out of the
      ordinary: You might ask people to take part in a focus group,
      or an interview that disrupts their normal routine in some way.

   the output is public: If the output is public then it can
      contribute to the `sum of knowledge'. However, if the results of
      the piece of work are to be made public, people need to be
      confident that this new knowledge is based on reliable
      evidence, that the conclusions are valid and that the research
      has been carried out properly.

                                                                Teachers as Researchers | 153
The advantage of conducting research is that it is systematic and
contributes knowledge to the field, which in this is case is
`education'. The `knowledge' is based on evidence, can be defended
and explained, and is therefore likely to be taken more seriously
than accounts of personal experience. A piece of research is also
likely to take place over a significant period of time, and if
conducted properly will help you to consider what works and also
provide insights into why it works.

   If these conditions apply, then the work does constitute `research'.
This has further implications:

   The work should take account of other studies in the field.
      Studying the literature will also give you some ideas about how
      you might tackle the issue that you are concerned about.

   The work should be systematic and purposeful. It should be
      underpinned by a clear philosophy and set of beliefs. There
      should be specific research questions and an ethical design
      that will give reliable results that are likely to be considered to
      be valid, by others.

     Exercise 2.1. Thinking About Research

        The following activities will help you to think about how
     to design good research - starting with thinking about
     what you might research.

        Choose an area of particular interest to you and answer
     the following questions:

          What do you want to find out more about and why?
          What could you focus a piece of research on?
          Suggest a working title for your study.

154 | Teachers as Researchers
          Write down two or three specific research
             questions.

     Exercise 2.2. Start Researching

        Spend about 30 minutes searching the internet for
     material related to your chosen area or topic and begin to
     explore other work in the field. The aim is to become
     familiar with the field as this might affect the questions you
     want to consider. You will want to see what research has
     already be done in this area and consider how this might
     refine your own research. You may find that your question
     has already been answered, that your question may need to
     be modified, or that your research is brand new.

Conductin Research

As a teacher undertaking a study in your own classroom, it is likely
that it will be relatively small-scale and short-term. The
methodologies that will be of most use to you are case studies and
action research.

                                                                Teachers as Researchers | 155
Case study

There are many definitions of case studies in the literature, and
many different types of case study (Yin, 2003; Stake, 1995; Gillham,
2000; Bassey, 1999). However, they all have the following features:

   they are `bounded' in space and time
   the research takes place in the natural context and draws on

      multiple methods of collecting data
   the purpose is to inform practitioners, policymakers, or

      theoreticians.

A case study might be designed to find out more about a situation; it
might be designed to test a particular theory or it might be designed
to try and explain an observed phenomenon.

   The main criticism of case studies is that the findings cannot be
generalized. This can be addressed by making the context clear to
the reader in a detailed report; it is then up to the reader to take
from the study information and ideas that might apply to their own
situation.

Action research

Action research is best considered to be a strategy rather than
a specific method (McNiff and Whitehead, 2011; Wilson, 2013). It
involves practitioners systematically investigating their own
practice, with a view to improving it. Action research involves the
following steps:

   Identify a problem that you want to solve in your classroom
      This might be something quite specific such as why certain
      pupils do not answer questions or find an aspect of your
      subject hard or de-motivating, or it might be something more

156 | Teachers as Researchers
      general like how to organise group work effectively.
   Define the purpose and clarify what form the intervention

      might take. This will involve consulting the literature and
      finding out what is already known about this issue.
   Plan an intervention designed to tackle the issue.
   Collect empirical data and analyze it
   Plan another intervention This will be based on what you find
      and will be designed to further understand the issue that you
      have identified.
Action research is a cyclical process. Through repeated intervention
and analysis, you will come to understand the issue or problem and
hopefully to do something about it.

                                                                Teachers as Researchers | 157
                        Figure 2.10.1 Action research cycle.
   Action research suffers from some of the same criticisms as case
studies: can the results be generalized? Rigour in this case comes
from careful planning and clear reporting. The findings will be
`believable' if the researchers explain what they hope to achieve
and how the intended actions link specifically to the problem. The
process needs to be explicit and underpinned by a clear framework
of ideas against which the findings will be judged (Kemmis, 1993).

     Exercises 2.3. Planning Research Design

        Given your research question and the previous research
     on this topic, which research design would you use? Case
     study? Action research? Or one of the traditional empirical
     designs discussed earlier in the chapter (descriptive,
     correlational, experimental)?

Collecting Data

Earlier in this chapter, we discussed various data collection methods
used in research. Having decided on the research question and
the research approach, the next decision is the method of data
collection that will help answer the research question. Evidence
from several sources of data will aid in the confidence of findings.

158 | Teachers as Researchers
   Figure 2.10.2. Overview of different data collection methods. See
    the previous section on data collection for more information.

     Exercise 2.4. Data Collection

        Based on your research question and planned research
     approach, which data collection method(s) might be
     appropriate?

Disseminating Research

Classrooms can be private places in which a teacher and the class
                                                                Teachers as Researchers | 159
get on with the business of teaching and learning. If you undertake
a piece of research in your classroom and discover something
exciting then your instinct will be to tell people and to perhaps do
a presentation at a departmental meeting. People might listen with
interest, but it will not necessarily change their behavior.

   David Frost (2006) argues that you have to plan for impact. An
effective way to do this is to work collaboratively from the outset.
Involve colleagues in your plans, invite them into your classroom
and engage them in discussions about aspects of your project. In
this way your department will become a `learning community' and
you are likely to get some help with your work.

     Exercise 2.5. Disseminating Your Research

        Go back to your research plan and think about how you
     might involve a colleague, or your department or someone
     else in your school.

          Who do you need to influence?
          What might they do to help?
          What will the benefits be?

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Learning to teach: an introduction to classroom research.
      Provided by: Open Learn. Retrieved from:
      https://www.open.edu/openlearn/education-development/
      learning-teach-introduction-classroom-research/content-
      section-0?active-tab=description-tab. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

160 | Teachers as Researchers
Chapter Summary: Using
Science to Inform Classroom
Practices

                                                        Chapter Summary: Using Science to
                                                            Inform Classroom Practices | 161
Glossary

attrition: reduction in the number of research participants as some
drop out over time

   case study: exploring a single case or situation in great detail.
Information may be gathered with the use of observation,
interviews, testing, or other methods to uncover as much as
possible about a person or situation

   cohort: a group of people who are born at roughly the same
period in a particular society. Cohorts share histories and contexts
for living

   content analysis: involves looking at media such as old texts,
pictures, commercials, lyrics or other materials to explore patterns
or themes in culture

   control group: a comparison group that is equivalent to the
experimental group, but is not given the independent variable

   correlation: the relationship between two or more variables;
when two variables are correlated, one variable changes as the
other does

   correlation coefficient: number from -1 to +1, indicating the
strength and direction of the relationship between variables, and
usually represented by r

   correlational research: research that formally tests whether a
relationship exists between two or more variables, however,
correlation does not imply causation

   cross-sectional research: used to examine behavior in
participants of different ages who are tested at the same point in
time; may confound age and cohort differences

   dependent variable: the outcome or variable that is supposedly
affected by the independent variable

   descriptive studies: research focused on describing an
occurrence

   double-blind: a research design in which neither the participants

162 | Glossary
nor the researchers know whether an individual is assigned to the
experimental group or the control group

   experimental group: the group of participants in an experiment
who receive the independent variable

   experimental research: research that involves randomly
assigning people to different conditions and using hypothesis
testing to make inferences about how these conditions affect
behavior; the only method that measures cause and effect between
variables

   experiments: designed to test hypotheses in a controlled setting
in efforts to explain how certain factors or events produce
outcomes; the only research method that measures cause and effect
relationships between variables

   explanatory studies: research that tries to answer the question
"why"

   Hawthorne effect: individuals tend to change their behavior when
they know they are being watched

   hypotheses: specific statements or predictions about the
relationship between variables

   independent variable: something that is manipulated or
introduced by the researcher to the experimental group; treatment
or intervention

   longitudinal research: studying a group of people who may be
of the same age and background (cohort), and measuring them
repeatedly over a long period of time; may confound age and time of
measurement effects

   negative correlation: two variables change in different directions,
with one becoming larger as the other becomes smaller; a negative
correlation is not the same thing as no correlation

   observational studies: also called naturalistic observation,
involves watching and recording the actions of participants

   operationalized: concepts transformed into variables that can be
measured in research

   positive correlation: two variables change in the same direction,
both becoming either larger or smaller

                                                                                      Glossary | 163
   qualitative research: theoretical ideas are "grounded" in the
experiences of the participants, who answer open-ended questions

   quantitative research: involves numerical data that are quantified
using statistics to understand and report what has been studied

   reliability: when something yields consistent results
   research design: the strategy or blueprint for deciding how to
collect and analyze information; dictates which methods are used
and how
   scatterplot: a plot or mathematical diagram consisting of data
points that represent two variables
   secondary content analysis: archival research, involves analyzing
information that has already been collected or examining
documents or media to uncover attitudes, practices or preferences
   selective attrition: certain groups of individuals may tend to drop
out more frequently resulting in the remaining participants longer
being representative of the whole population
   sequential research design: combines aspects of cross-sectional
and longitudinal designs, but also adding new cohorts at different
times of measurement; allows for analyses to consider effects of
age, cohort, time of measurement, and socio-historical change
   survey: asking a standard set of questions to a group of subjects
   validity: when something yields accurate results
   variables: factors that change in value

164 | Glossary
References

BERA, (1992) https://www.bera.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/02/BERA-
Ethical-Guidelines-2011.pdf downloaded on 12/03/06.

   Bassey, M. (1999) Case Study Research in Educational Settings,
Buckingham, Open University Press.

   Bond, T. (2005) `Researching Education: A Question of Trust?'
Keynote lecture given on the MEd course, University of Cambridge
Faculty of Education, 2 March 2005.

   Checkland, P. and Holwell, S. (1998) `Action Research: Its Nature
and Validity', Systemic Practice and Action Research, vol. 11, no. 1, pp.
9-21.

   Cohen, L., Manion, L. and Morrison, K. (2000) Research Methods in
Education, London, RoutledgeFalmer.

   Cognitive Acceleration through Maths Education (CAME),
http://www.school-portal.co.uk/
GroupRenderCustomPage.asp?GroupID=255682&ResourceID=3376
237 (Accessed 13 September 2013).

   Denscombe, M. (2003) The Good Research Guide, Maidenhead,
McGraw-Hill.

   Driver, R., Squires, A., Rushworth, P. and Wood-Robinson, V. (1994)
Making Sense of Secondary Science, London, RoutledgeFalmer.

   Gillham, B. (2000) Case Study Research Methods, London,
Continuum.

   Hargreaves, D. (1996) `Teaching as a Research Based profession:
Possibilities and prospects' Teacher Training Agency Annual
Lecture.

   Hargreaves, D. (1999) `The Knowledge Creating School', British
Journal of Educational Studies, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 122-144.

   Kemmis, S. (1993) `Action Research' in: Hammersley, M. Ed.
Educational Research: current issues London, Paul Chapman.

   Kemmis, S. and MacTaggart, R. (1988) The Action Research Reader,

                                                                                   References | 165
Waurn Ponds, Victoria, Deakin University Open campus Program,
School of Education.

   MacGilchrist, B., Myers, K. and Reed, J. (2004) The Intelligent
School, London, Sage.

   Stake, R. (1995) The Art of Case Study Research, London, Sage.
   Stutchbury, K. and Fox, A. (2009) `Ethics in Educational Research:
introducing a methodological tool for effective ethical analysis',
Cambridge Journal of Education, vol 39, no.4, pp. 489-504.
   Thinking Together, http://thinkingtogether.educ.cam.ac.uk/
(Accessed 13 September 2013).
   Wilson, E. (Ed) (2013) `School-based Research: a guide for
education students'.
   Yin, R. (2003) Case Study Research: Design and Methods, London,
Sage.

166 | References
THE DEVELOPING
LEARNER

     Theme: How Learner Develop Physically,
   Cognitively, and Psychosocially

        Outline of Concepts:

          Foundations of Development
          Physical & Brain Development
          Cognitive Development
          Psychosocial Development
        Learning Objectives:

          Describe fundamental issues in the study of
             development

          Explain Bronfenbrenner's Bioecological Theory
          Identify physical development issues and explain

             how they are relevant to teaching
          Identify contributions from neuroscience to our

             understanding of learning
          Contrast psychological versus social constructivism
          Explain Piaget's Stages of Cognitive Development
          Describe Vygotsky's Zone of Proximal Development
          Explain factors that contribute to language

             development and differences in language skills
          Describe Erikson's Stages of Psychosocial

             Development

                                                                 The Developing Learner | 167
          Compare and contrast self-concept and self-
             esteem

          Describe Marcia's identity statuses and the
             development of identity

          Explain how moral reasoning issues become more
             sophisticated and gender differences in moral
             reasoning

          Describe how peer interactions influence schooling
          Explain the cognitive and social levels of play

168 | The Developing Learner
Why Development Matters

Students' development matters for teachers, but the way it matters
depends partly on how schooling is organized. In teaching a single,
"self-contained" grade-level, the benefits of knowing about
development will be less explicit, but just as real, as if you teach
many grade levels. Working exclusively with a single grade (like,
say, a third-grade classroom) highlights differences among students
that happen in spite of their similar ages, and
obscures similarities that happen because of having similar ages.
Under these conditions it is still easy to notice students' diversity,
but harder to know how much of it comes from differences in
long-term development, compared to differences in short-term
experiences. Knowledge about long term changes is still useful,
however, in planning appropriate activities and in holding
appropriate expectations about students. What changes in students
can you expect relatively soon simply from your current program of
activities, and which ones may take a year or more to show up? This
is a question that developmental psychology can help to answer.

   If you teach multiple grade levels, as often is true of specialists
or teachers in middle school or high school, then your need for
developmental knowledge will be more obvious because you will
confront wide age differences on a daily basis. As a physical
education teacher, for example, you may teach kindergarten
children at one time during the day, but sixth-graders at another
time, or teach seventh-graders at one time but twelfth-graders
at another. Students will differ more obviously because of age, in
addition to differing due to other factors like skills or knowledge
learned recently. Nonetheless, the instructional challenge will be
the same as the one faced by teachers of single-grade classes: you
will want to know what activities and expectations are appropriate
for your students. To answer this question, you will need to know
something not only about how your students are unique but also

                                                            Why Development Matters | 169
about general trends of development during childhood and
adolescence.

   Note that developmental trends vary in two important ways. The
first, as indicated already, is in their generality. Some theories or
models of development boldly assert that certain changes happen
to virtually every person on the planet, and often at relatively
predictable points in life. For example, a theory might assert that
virtually every toddler acquires a spoken language, or
that every teenager forms a sense of personal identity. Individuals
who do not experience these developments would be rare, though
not necessarily disabled as a result. Other theories propose
developmental changes that are more limited, claiming only that the
changes happen to some people or only under certain conditions.
Developing a female gender role, for example, does not happen to
everyone, but only to the females in a population, and the details
vary according to the family, community, or society in which a child
lives.

   The second way that developmental trends vary is in how strictly
they are sequenced and hierarchical. In some views of development,
changes are thought to happen in a specific order and to build
on each other--sort of a "staircase" model of development (Case,
1991, 1996). For example, a developmental psychologist (and many of
the rest of us) might argue that young people must have tangible,
hands-on experience with new materials before they can reason
about the materials in the abstract. The order cannot be reversed.
In other views of development, change happens, but not with a
sequence or endpoint that is uniform. This sort of change is more
like a "kaleidoscope" than a staircase (Levinson, 1990; Lewis, 1997;
Harris, 2006). A person who becomes permanently disabled, for
example, may experience complex long-term changes in personal
values and priorities that are different both in timing and content
from most people's developmental pathways.

   When addressing teachers and other educators, educational
psychologists have tended to emphasize explanations of
development that are relatively general, universal, and sequential,

170 | Why Development Matters
rather than specific to particular cultures or that are not sequenced
or kaleidoscopic. Such models (sometimes called "grand theories")
have the advantage of concisely integrating many features of
development, while also describing the kind of people children or
adolescents usually end up to be. The preference for integrative
perspectives makes sense given educators' need to work with and
teach large numbers of diverse students both efficiently and
effectively. But the approach also risks overgeneralizing or
oversimplifying the experiences of particular children and youth.
It can also confuse what does happen as certain children (like the
middle-class ones) develop with what should happen to children. To
understand this point, imagine two children of about the same age
who have dramatically very different childhood experiences--for
example, one who grows up in poverty and another who grows
up financially well-off. In what sense can we say that these two
children experience the same underlying developmental changes as
they grow up? And how much should they even be expected to do
so? Developmental psychology, and especially the broad theories
of developmental psychology, highlight the "sameness" or common
ground between these two children. As such, it serves as a
counterpoint to knowledge of their obvious uniqueness and places
their uniqueness in a broader perspective.

   In this chapter we discuss development in four major domains.
The first is physical development. We begin by describing the
physical changes that typically happen to children across the school
years--changes in size, the effects of puberty, the growth in motor
skills, maturation of senses, health trends, and brain development
across childhood and adolescence. Physical development is not a
central concern for most teachers, but as we point out, it does affect
students' school experiences indirectly. We then move to cognitive
development, specifically constructivist and information processing
theories, as well as language development. Third, the domain of
psychosocial development, with attention to the development of
self. Finally, we will discuss moral development, a domain that spans
both cognitive and social development. We look in particular at the

                                                             Why Development Matters | 171
theoretical frameworks of Lawrence Kohlberg and Carol Gilligan,
and end with suggestions for how their ideas can be translated
into useful strategies for encouraging the moral development of
students.
CC licensed content, Original

   Why Development Matters. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously
   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution
   License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright

172 | Why Development Matters
Fundamentals of
Development

Domains of Development

Development refers to the physical, cognitive, and psychosocial
development of humans throughout the lifespan. What types of
development are involved in each of these three domains, or areas,
of life? Physical development involves growth and changes in the
body and brain, the senses, motor skills, and health and wellness.
Cognitive development involves learning, attention, memory,
language, thinking, reasoning, and creativity. Psychosocial
development involves emotions, personality, and social
relationships.

                                                                 Educational Psychology | 173
    Figure 3.2.1. Physical, cognitive, and psychosocial development
                                    are interrelated.

Physical Domain

Many of us are familiar with the height and weight charts that
pediatricians consult to estimate if babies, children, and teens are
growing within normative ranges of physical development. We may
also be aware of changes in children's fine and gross motor skills,
as well as their increasing coordination, particularly in terms of
playing sports. But we may not realize that physical development
also involves brain development, which not only enables childhood
motor coordination but also greater coordination between
emotions and planning in adulthood, as our brains are not done
developing in infancy or childhood. Physical development also
includes puberty, sexual health, fertility, menopause, changes in our
senses, and healthy habits with nutrition and exercise.

Cognitive Domain

If we watch and listen to infants and toddlers, we can't help but
wonder how they learn so much so fast, particularly when it comes
to language development. Then as we compare young children to
those in middle childhood, there appear to be considerable
differences in their ability to think logically about the concrete
world around them. Cognitive development includes mental
processes, thinking, learning, and understanding, and it doesn't stop
in childhood. Adolescents develop the ability to think logically about
the abstract world (and may like to debate matters with adults as
they exercise their new cognitive skills!). Moral reasoning develops
further, as does practical intelligence--wisdom may develop with

174 | Educational Psychology
experience over time. Memory abilities and different forms of
intelligence tend to change with age. Brain development and the
brain's ability to adapt and compensate for losses is significant to
cognitive functions across the lifespan, too.

Psychosocial Domain

Development in this domain involves what's going on both
psychologically and socially. Early on, the focus is on infants and
caregivers, as temperament and attachment are significant. As the
social world expands and the child grows psychologically, different
types of play, and interactions with other children and teachers
become essential. Psychosocial development involves emotions,
personality, self-esteem, and relationships. Peers become more
important for adolescents, who are exploring new roles and forming
their own identities. Dating, romance, cohabitation, marriage,
having children, and finding work or a career are all parts of the
transition into adulthood. Psychosocial development continues
across adulthood with similar (and some different) developmental
issues of family, friends, parenting, romance, divorce, remarriage,
blended families, caregiving for elders, becoming grandparents and
great grandparents, retirement, new careers, coping with losses,
and death and dying.

   As you may have already noticed, physical, cognitive, and
psychosocial development are often interrelated, Puberty
exemplifies this interaction well. Puberty is a biological change that
releases hormones that spurs the maturation of sex organs and
physical growth. However, puberty also triggers changes within the
brain that affect cognition, emotions, and social relationships.
Puberty often comes with mood swings, but also, an improved
ability to self-regulate. Puberty is also when relationships change
with parents and peers. While puberty may be a topic within the
physical domain, there is clearly an interaction with the other areas.

                                                                 Educational Psychology | 175
                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=50#oembed-1

Video 3.2.1. Domains in Development describes the three domains
and how those domains interact.

Development in Context

The contextual approach to development considered the
relationship between individuals and their physical, cognitive, and
social worlds. They also examine socio-cultural and environmental
influences on development. Urie Bronfenbrenner developed the
ecological systems theory to explain how everything in a child and
the child's environment affects how a child grows and develops. He
labeled different aspects or levels of the environment that influence
children's development.

Bronfenbrenner's Ecological Systems Theory

Another psychologist who recognized the importance of the
environment on development was American psychologist Urie
Bronfenbrenner (1917-2005), who formulated the ecological
systems theory to explain how the inherent qualities of a child
and their environment interact to influence how they will grow
and develop. The term "ecological" refers to a natural environment;
human development is understood through this model as a long-

176 | Educational Psychology
lasting transformation in the way one perceives and deals with
the environment. Bronfenbrenner's ecological theory stresses the
importance of studying children in the context of multiple
environments because children typically find themselves enmeshed
simultaneously in different ecosystems. Each of these systems
inevitably interacts with and influences each other in every aspect
of the child's life, from the most intimate level to the
broadest. Furthermore, he eventually renamed his theory
the bioecological model in order to recognize the importance of
biological processes in development. However, he only recognized
biology as producing a person's potential, with this potential being
realized or not via environmental and social forces.

    Figure 3.2.2. Bronfenbrenner's ecological theory emphasizes the
      influence of microsystems, mesosystems, exosystems, and
                                                                 Educational Psychology | 177
 macrosystems on an individual. Not pictured is the chronosystem,
     or the historical context and timeframe, which provides the
    context for all the other systems. The chronosystem includes

 environmental events, major life transitions, and historical events.
   An individual is impacted by microsystems such as parents or

siblings-those who have direct, significant contact with the
person. The input of those people is modified by the cognitive and
biological state of the individual as well. These influence the
person's actions, which in turn influence systems operating on
them. The mesosystem includes larger organizational structures
such as school, the family, or religion. These institutions impact the
microsystems just described. For example, the religious teachings
and traditions of a family may create a climate that makes the
family feel stigmatized, and this indirectly impacts the child's view
of themself and others. The philosophy of the school system, daily
routine, assessment methods, and other characteristics can affect
the child's self-image, growth, sense of accomplishment, and
schedule, thereby impacting the child physically, cognitively, and
emotionally. These mesosystems both influence and are influenced
by the broader contexts of the community, referred to as
the exosystem. A community's values, history, and economy can
impact the organizational structures it houses. Furthermore, the
community is influenced by macrosystems, which are cultural
elements such as global economic conditions, war, technological
trends, values, philosophies, and society's responses to the global
community. In sum, a child's experiences are shaped by larger
forces such as family, school, religion, and culture. All of this occurs
within the relevant historical context and timeframe,
or chronosystem. The chronosystem is made up of the
environmental events and transitions that occur throughout a
child's life, including any socio-historical events. This system
consists of all the experiences that a person has had during their
lifetime.

178 | Educational Psychology
                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=50#oembed-2

Video 3.2.2. Bronfenbrenner's Ecological Theory explains the various
layers, the interactions between them, and the influence this has on
individual development.

Key Issues in Development

There are many different theoretical approaches to human
development. As we evaluate them in this course, recall that
development focuses on how people change, and the approaches
address the nature of change in different ways:

   Are changes an active or passive process?
   Is the change smooth or uneven (continuous versus

      discontinuous)?
   Is this pattern of change the same for everyone, or are

      there different patterns of change (one course of development
      versus many courses)?
   Are there prescribed periods in which change must occur
      (critical and sensitive periods)?
   How do genetics and environment interact to influence
      development (nature versus nurture)?

                                                                 Educational Psychology | 179
Is Development Active or Passive?

How much does one play a role in their developmental path? Are
we at the whim of our genetic inheritance or the environment that
surrounds us, or are we able to decide and steer our development?
Some theorists believe that humans play a much more active role
in their development. Piaget, for instance, believed that children
actively explore their world and construct new ways of thinking
to explain the things they experience. Humanist theorists forward
that people have self-determination. In contrast, many behaviorists
view humans as being more passive in the developmental process,
with outcomes being determined by their experiences. Evolutionary
psychologists emphasize the role of heredity in determining
development. As we explore various theories, ask yourself whether
each approach considers development to be an active or passive
process.

Is Development Continuous or Discontinuous?

Is human development best characterized as a slow, gradual
process, or as one of more abrupt change? The answer to that
question often depends on which developmental theorist you ask
and which topic is being studied. Continuous development theories
view development as a cumulative process, gradually improving
existing skills (Figure 3.2.3). With this type of development, there is
a gradual change. Consider, for example, a child's physical growth:
adding inches to their height year by year. In contrast, theorists who
view development as discontinuous believe that development takes
place in unique stages and that it occurs at specific times or ages.
With this type of development, the change is more sudden, such as
an infant's ability to demonstrate awareness of object permanence
(which is a cognitive skill that develops toward the end of

180 | Educational Psychology
infancy, according to Piaget's cognitive theory--more on that theory
in the next module).

      Figure 3.2.3. Visualizations of continuous and discontinuous
                                      development.

Is There One Course of Development or Many?

Is development essentially the same, or universal, for all children
(i.e., there is one course of development) or does development
follow a different course for each child, depending on the child's
specific genetics and environment (i.e., there are many courses of
development)? Do people across the world share more similarities
or more differences in their development? How much do culture
and genetics influence a child's behavior?

   Stage theories hold that the sequence of development is universal.
For example, in cross-cultural studies of language development,
children from around the world reach language milestones in a
similar sequence (Gleitman & Newport, 1995). Infants in all cultures
coo before they babble. They begin babbling at about the same
age and utter their first word around 12 months old. Yet we live
in diverse contexts that have a unique effect on each of us. For
example, researchers once believed that motor development
followed one course for all children regardless of culture. However,
childcare practices vary by culture, and different practices have
been found to accelerate or inhibit the achievement of

                                                                 Educational Psychology | 181
developmental milestones such as sitting, crawling, and walking
(Karasik, Adolph, Tamis-LeMonda, & Bornstein, 2010).

   For instance, let's look at the Ach society in Paraguay. They
spend a significant amount of time foraging in forests. While
foraging, Ach mothers carry their young children, rarely putting
them down to protect them from getting hurt in the forest.
Consequently, their children walk much later: They walk around
23-25 months old, in comparison to infants in Western cultures
who begin to walk around 12 months old. However, as Ach children
become older, they are allowed more freedom to move about, and
by about age 9, their motor skills surpass those of U.S. children of
the same age: Ach children can climb trees up to 25 feet tall and
use machetes to chop their way through the forest (Kaplan & Dove,
1987). As you can see, our development is influenced by multiple
contexts, so the timing of basic motor functions may vary across
cultures. However, the functions are present in all societies.

   Figure 3.2.4. All children across the world love to play. Whether
in (a) Florida or (b) South Africa, children enjoy exploring sand,
sunshine, and the sea.

   Are there Critical or sensitIve periods of development?
   Various developmental milestones are universal in timing. For
example, most children begin learning and expressing language
during their first year. However, what happens if a person misses
that window of typical experience? What if the child were not
exposed to language early in life, could they learn language in later
182 | Educational Psychology
years? Does the timing of experience influence development, and
can it be corrected later?

   Psychologists believe that there are time spans in which a person
is biologically ready for certain developments, but successful
progress is reliant on the person having essential experiences
during that time. If these experiences fail to occur or occur after the
time span ends, then the person will not develop normally or may
not fully recover, even with later intervention.

   Some aspects of development have critical periods; finite time
spans in which specific experiences must occur for successful
development. Once this period ends, later experiences would have
no impact on this aspect of development. Failure to have the
necessary experiences during the critical period will result in
permanent impairments. For instance, a person that does not
receive minimal nutrition during childhood would not reach their
full height potential by adulthood. Even with excellent nutrition
during adulthood, they would never grow taller because their
critical period of growth has ended.

   More often, developmental aspects are considered to have
sensitive periods. Like critical periods, a sensitive period requires
particular experiences during a specific time for development to
occur. However, with sensitive periods, experiences after the period
ends can support developmental gains later in life. It is not to say
that post-period interventions will always be simple or successful.
For example, someone that was not exposed to language in early
childhood, with intervention and great effort, may be able to make
some gains in late childhood, but may not fully recover all language-
related skills.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online

                                                                 Educational Psychology | 183
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=50#oembed-3

Video 3.2.3. Sensitive vs Critical Periods of Learning explains the
differences between the two

How Do Nature and Nurture Influence
Development?

Are we who we are because of genetics, or are we who we are
because of our environment? For instance, why do biological
children sometimes act like their parents--is it because of genetics
or because of early childhood environment and what the child has
learned from their parents? What about children who are
adopted--are they more like their biological families or more like
their adoptive families? And how can siblings from the same family
be so different?

   This longstanding question is known in psychology as the nature
versus nurture debate. For any particular aspect of development,
those on the side of nature would argue that heredity plays the
most important role in bringing about that feature. While those
on the side of nurture would say that one's environment is most
significant in shaping the way we develop. However, most scholars
agree that there is a constant interplay between the two forces. It is
difficult to isolate the root of any single outcome as a result solely
of nature or nurture.

   We are all born with specific genetic traits inherited from our
parents, such as eye color, height, and certain personality traits.
Beyond our basic genotype, however, there is a deep interaction
between our genes and our environment. Our unique experiences

184 | Educational Psychology
in our environment influence whether and how particular traits
are expressed, and at the same time, our genes influence how we
interact with our environment (Diamond, 2009; Lobo, 2008). There
is a reciprocal interaction between nature and nurture as they both
shape who we become, but the debate continues as to the relative
contributions of each.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=50#oembed-4

Video 3.2.4. Gene-Environment Interaction explains how nature and
nurture interact to influence development.
CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Adolescent Psychology. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      adolescent. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Specific attribution

   Gene Environment Interaction. Authored by: Ryan Scott
      Patton. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/sMyZO9YDlk8.
      License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

All rights reserved content

   Domains in Development. Authored by: Prof Newton.
      Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/pgaGa-B_5po. License: All
      Rights Reserved

                                                                 Educational Psychology | 185
   Bronfenbrenner's Ecological Theory. Authored by: Rachelle
      Tannenbaum. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/
      HV4E05BnoI8. License: All Rights Reserved

   Sensitive vs Critical Periods of Learning. Authored by: Andrew
      Scott. Retrieved from: https://www.youtube.com/
      watch?v=ytRC15vIA24&feature=youtu.be. License: All Rights
      Reserved

186 | Educational Psychology
Physical Development

                                                                   Physical Development | 187
Although it may be tempting to think that physical development
is the concern of physical education teachers only, it is actually a
foundation for many academic tasks. In first grade, for example, it
is important to know whether children can successfully manipulate
a pencil. In later grades, it is important to know how long students
can be expected to sit still without discomfort--a real physical
challenge. In all grades, it is important to have a sense of students'
health needs related to their age or maturity, if only to know who
may become ill, and with what illness, and to know what physical
activities are reasonable and needed.

Trends in Height and Weight

Typical height and weight for well-nourished, healthy students are
shown in Table 3.3.1. The table shows averages for several ages from
preschool through the end of high school. But the table does not
show the diversity among children. At age 6, for example, when
children begin school, the average boy or girl is about 115
centimeters tall, but some are 109 and others are 125 centimeters.
Average weight at age 6 is about 20 kilograms, but ranges between
about 16 and 24 kilograms--about 20% variation in either direction.

Table 3.3.1. Average height and weight of well-nourished children

Age  Height (cm)  Weight (kg)

2    85           7.0

6    115          20.0

10   135          31.0

14   162          52.0

18   169          60.5

There are other points to keep in mind about average height and
weight that are not evident from Table 3.1. The first is that boys

                                                                                                    | 189
and girls, on average, are quite similar in height and weight during
childhood, but diverge in the early teenage years, when they reach
puberty. For a time (approximately age 10-14), the average girl is
taller, but not much heavier, than the average boy. After that the
average boy becomes both taller and heavier than the average
girl--though there remain individual exceptions (Malina, et al.,
2004). The pre-teen difference can, therefore, be awkward for some
children and youth, at least among those who aspire to look like
older teenagers or young adults. For young teens less concerned
with "image," though, the fact that girls are taller may not be
especially important, or even noticed (Friedman, 2000).

   A second point is that as children get older, individual differences
in weight diverge more radically than differences in height. Among
18-year-olds, the heaviest youngsters weigh almost twice as much
as the lightest, but the tallest ones are only about 10 percent taller
than the shortest. Nonetheless, both height and weight can be
sensitive issues for some teenagers. Most modern societies (and
the teenagers in them) tend to favor relatively short women and
tall men, as well as a somewhat thin body build, especially for girls
and women. Yet neither "socially correct" height nor thinness is the
destiny for many individuals. Being overweight, in particular, has
become a common, serious problem in modern society (Tartamella,
et al., 2004) due to the prevalence of diets high in fat and lifestyles
low in activity. The educational system has unfortunately
contributed to the problem as well, by gradually restricting the
number of physical education courses and classes in the past two
decades.

   The third point to keep in mind is that the average height and
weight are related somewhat to racial and ethnic background. In
general, children of Asian background tend to be slightly shorter
than children of European and North American background. The
latter in turn tend to be shorter than children from African societies
(Eveleth & Tanner, 1990). Body shape differs slightly as well, though
the differences are not always visible until after puberty. Asian
youth tend to have arms and legs that are a bit short relative to

190 |
their torsos, and African youth tend to have relatively long arms and
legs. The differences are only averages; there are large individual
differences as well, and these tend to be more relevant for teachers
to know about than broad group differences.

Puberty and Its Effects on Students

A universal physical development in students is puberty, which is
the set of changes in early adolescence that bring about sexual
maturity. Along with internal changes in reproductive organs are
outward changes such as the growth of breasts in girls and the
penis in boys, as well as relatively sudden increases in height and
weight. By about age 10 or 11, most children experience increased
sexual attraction to others (usually heterosexual, though not always)
that affects social life both in school and out (McClintock & Herdt,
1996). By the end of high school, more than half of boys and girls
report having experienced sexual intercourse at least once--though
it is hard to be certain of the proportion because of the sensitivity
and privacy of the information. (Center for Disease Control, 2004b;
Rosenbaum, 2006).

   At about the same time that puberty accentuates gender, role
differences also accentuate for at least some teenagers. Some girls
who excelled at math or science in elementary school may curb
their enthusiasm and displays of success at these subjects for fear of
limiting their popularity or attractiveness as girls (Taylor & Gilligan,
1995; Sadker, 2004). Some boys who were not especially interested
in sports previously may begin dedicating themselves to athletics to
affirm their masculinity in the eyes of others. Some boys and girls
who once worked together successfully on class projects may no
longer feel comfortable doing so--or alternatively may now seek to
be working partners, but for social rather than academic reasons.
Such changes do not affect all youngsters equally, nor affect any one
youngster equally on all occasions. An individual student may act

                                                                                                    | 191
like a young adult on one day, but more like a child the next. When
teaching children who are experiencing puberty, , teachers need to
respond flexibly and supportively.

From Reflexes to Voluntary Motor Development

Every basic motor skill (any movement ability) develops over the
first two years of life. The sequence of motor skills first begins
with reflexes. Infants are equipped with several reflexes, or
involuntary movements in response to stimulation. Some of thee
reflexes are necessary for survival, such as breathing reflexes (this
includes hiccups, sneezing, and thrashing reflexes), reflexes to
obtain food (such as rooting and sucking). Other reflexes are not
necessary for survival, often called primitive reflexes, but signify
the state of brain and body functions. Some of these include the
Babinski reflex (toes fan upward when feet are stroked), the
stepping reflex (babies move their legs as if to walk when feet touch
a flat surface), the palmar grasp (the infant will tightly grasp any
object placed in its palm), and the Moro reflex (babies will fling arms
out and then bring to the chest if they hear a loud noise). These
movements occur automatically and are signals that the infant is
functioning well neurologically. Within the first several weeks of
life, these reflexes are replaced with voluntary movements or motor
skills.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=51#oembed-1

192 |
Video 3.3.1. Reflexes in Newborn Babies highlights some of the
reflexes present at birth. Most of these reflexes will disappear or be
replaced with voluntary motor skills within the first months of life.

   Motor development occurs in an orderly sequence as infants
move from reflexive reactions (e.g., sucking and rooting) to more
advanced motor functioning. This development proceeds in
a cephalocaudal (from head-down) and proximodistal (from
center-out) direction. For instance, babies first learn to hold their
heads up, then sit with assistance, then sit unassisted, followed later
by crawling, pulling up, cruising, and then walking. As motor skills
develop, there are certain developmental milestones that young
children should achieve. For each milestone, there is an average age,
as well as a range of ages in which the milestone should be reached.
An example of a developmental milestone is a baby holding up its
head. Babies on average are able to hold up their head at 6 weeks
old, and 90% of babies achieve this between 3 weeks and 4 months
old. If a baby is not holding up his head by 4 months old, he is
showing a delay. On average, most babies sit alone at 7 months old.
Sitting involves both coordination and muscle strength, and 90% of
babies achieve this milestone between 5 and 9 months old (CDC,
2018). If the child is displaying delays on several milestones, that is
a reason for concern, and the parent or caregiver should discuss
this with the child's pediatrician. Some developmental delays can be
identified and addressed through early intervention.

Gross Motor Skills

Gross motor skills are voluntary movements that involve the use of
large muscle groups and are typically large movements of the arms,
legs, head, and torso. These skills begin to develop first. Examples
include moving to bring the chin up when lying on the stomach,
moving the chest up, rocking back and forth on hands and
knees. But it also includes exploring an object with one's feet as

                                                                                                    | 193
many babies do, as early as 8 weeks of age, if seated in a carrier or
other device that frees the hips. This may be easier than reaching
for an object with the hands, which requires much more practice
(Berk, 2007). And sometimes an infant will try to move toward an
object while crawling and surprisingly move backward because of
the greater amount of strength in the arms than in the legs!

   During middle childhood, physical growth slows down. One result
of the slower rate of growth is an improvement in motor skills.
Children of this age tend to sharpen their abilities to perform both
gross motor skills such as riding a bike and fine motor skills such as
cutting their fingernails.

   Early childhood is a time when children are especially attracted
to motion and song. Days are filled with moving, jumping, running,
swinging, and clapping, and every place becomes a
playground. Even the booth at a restaurant affords the opportunity
to slide around in the seat or disappear underneath and imagine
being a sea creature in a cave! Of course, this can be frustrating to
a caregiver, but it's the business of early childhood. Children may
frequently ask their caregivers to "look at me" while they hop or
roll down a hill. Children's songs are often accompanied by arm and
leg movements or cues to turn around or move from left to right.
Running, jumping, dancing movements, etc. all afford children the
ability to improve their gross motor skills.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=51#oembed-2

Video 3.3.2. Early Childhood Gross Motor Development demonstrates
some of the motor skills expected of children during the preschool
years.

194 |
   Children's fundamental motor skills are already developing when
they begin kindergarten, but are not yet perfectly coordinated. Five-
year-olds generally can walk satisfactorily for most school-related
purposes (if they could not, schools would have to be organized very
differently!). For some fives, running still looks a bit like a hurried
walk, but usually, it becomes more coordinated within a year or two.
Similarly with jumping, throwing, and catching: most children can
do these things, though often clumsily, by the time they start school,
but improve their skills noticeably during the early elementary years
(Payne & Isaacs, 2005). It is important to notice if a child does not
keep more or less to the usual developmental timetable, and to
arrange for special assessment or support if appropriate. Common
procedures for arranging for help are described in the chapter on
"Special education."

   Even if physical skills are not a special focus of a classroom
teacher, they can be quite important to students themselves.
Whatever their grade level, students who are clumsy are aware of
that fact and how it could potentially negatively affect respect from
their peers. In the long term, self-consciousness and poor self-
esteem can develop in a child who is clumsy, especially if peers (or
teachers and parents) place a high value on success in athletics.
One research study found, for example, what teachers and coaches
sometimes suspect: that losers in athletic competitions tend to
become less sociable and are more apt to miss subsequent athletic
practices than winners (Petlichkoff, 1996).

Fine Motor Skills

Fine motor skills are more exact movements of the hands and
fingers and include the ability to reach and grasp an object.
These skills focus on the muscles in the fingers, toes, and eyes, and
enable coordination of small actions (e.g., grasping a toy, writing
with a pencil, and using a spoon). Newborns cannot grasp objects

                                                                                                    | 195
voluntarily but do wave their arms toward objects of interest. At
about 4 months of age, the infant is able to reach for an object, first
with both arms and within a few weeks, with only one arm. Grasping
an object involves the use of the fingers and palm, but no
thumbs. Stop reading for a moment and try to grasp an object using
the fingers and the palm. How does that feel? How much control
do you have over the object? If it is a pen or pencil, are you able
to write with it? Can you draw a picture? The answer is, probably
not. Use of the thumb comes at about 9 months of age when the
infant is able to grasp an object using the forefinger and thumb (the
pincer grasp). This ability greatly enhances the ability to control
and manipulate an object, and infants take great delight in this
newfound ability. They may spend hours picking up small objects
from the floor and placing them in containers. By 9 months, an
infant can also watch a moving object, reach for it as it approaches,
and grab it. This is quite a complicated set of actions if we
remember how difficult this would have been just a few months
earlier.

196 |
           Figure 3.3.1. This baby is working on his pincer grasp.
   Fine motor skills are also being refined in activities such as
pouring water into a container, drawing, coloring, and using
scissors. Some children's songs promote fine motor skills as well
(have you ever heard of the song "itsy, bitsy, spider"?). Mastering
the fine art of cutting one's own fingernails or tying their shoes will
take a lot of practice and maturation. Fine motor skills continue to
develop in middle childhood, but for preschoolers, the type of play
that deliberately involves these skills is emphasized.

                                                                                                    | 197
Table 3.3.2. Timeline of
Developmental Milestones.

~2 months                   Can hold head upright on own
                            Smiles at sound of familiar voices

                               and follows movement with eyes

~3 months                   Can raise head and chest from
                               prone position

                            Smiles at others
                            Grasps objects
                            Rolls from side to back

~4-5 months                 Babbles, laughs, and tries to
                               imitate sounds

                            Begins to roll from back to side

~6 months                   Moves objects from hand to hand

~7-8 months                 Can sit without support
                            May begin to crawl
                            Responds to own name
                            Finds partially hidden objects

~8-9 months                 Walks while holding on
                            Babbles "mama" and "dada"
                            Claps

~11-12 months               Stands alone
                            Begins to walk
                            Says at least one word
                            Can stack two blocks

198 |
~18 months   Walks independently
~2 years     Drinks from a cup
~3 years     Says at least 15 words
~4 years     Points to body parts
~5 years
             Runs and jumps
             Uses two-word sentences
             Follows simple instructions
             Begins make-believe play

             Speaks in multi-word sentences
             Sorts objects by shape and color

             Draws circles and squares
             Rides a tricycle
             Gets along with people outside of

                the family
             Gets dressed

             Can jump, hop, and skip
             Knows name and address
             Counts ten or more objects

 Developmental Milestones Checklists zero to Five
Years

  For more information on developmental
milestones, see the CDC's Developmental
Milestones.

            | 199
Sensory Development

As infants and children grow, their senses play a vital role in
encouraging and stimulating the mind and in helping them observe
their surroundings. Two terms are important to understand when
learning about the senses. The first is sensation, or the interaction
of information with the sensory receptors. The second
is perception, or the process of interpreting what is sensed. It is
possible for someone to sense something without perceiving it.
Gradually, infants become more adept at perceiving, making them
more aware of their environment and presenting more affordances
or opportunities to interact with objects. With improved sensory-
perceptual abilities also comes the ability to navigate their
environment. At the same time, movement through the
environment seems to scaffold the development of sensory-
perceptual abilities.

Vision

What can young infants see, hear, and smell? Newborn infants'
sensory abilities are significant, but their senses are not yet fully
developed. Many of a newborn's innate preferences facilitate
interaction with caregivers and other humans. The womb is a dark
environment void of visual stimulation. Consequently, vision is the
most poorly developed sense at birth. Newborns typically cannot
see further than 8 to 16 inches away from their faces, have difficulty
keeping a moving object within their gaze, and can detect contrast
more than color differences. If you have ever seen a newborn
struggle to see, you can appreciate the cognitive efforts being made
to take in visual stimulation and build those neural pathways
between the eye and the brain.

   Although vision is their least developed sense, newborns already

200 |
show a preference for faces. When you glance at a person, where
do you look? Chances are you look into their eyes. If so, why? It
is probably because there is more information there than in other
parts of the face. Newborns do not scan objects this way; rather,
they tend to look at the chin or another less detailed part of the
face. However, by 2 or 3 months, they will seek more detail when
visually exploring an object and begin showing preferences for
unusual images over familiar ones, for patterns over solids, faces
over patterns, and three-dimensional objects over flat
images. Newborns have difficulty distinguishing between colors, but
within a few months are able to discriminate between colors as well
as adults. Infants can also sense depth as binocular vision develops
at about 2 months of age. By 6 months, the infant can perceive depth
perception in pictures as well (Sen, Yonas, & Knill, 2001). Infants who
have experience crawling and exploring will pay greater attention
to visual cues of depth and modify their actions accordingly (Berk,
2007).

Visual Pathways

Have you ever examined the drawings of young children? If you
look closely, you can almost see the development of visual pathways
reflected in the way these images change as pathways become more
mature. Early scribbles and dots illustrate the use of simple motor
skills. No real connection is made between an image being visualized
and what is created on paper.

   At age 3, the child begins to draw wispy creatures with heads and
not much other detail. Gradually pictures begin to have more detail
and incorporate more parts of the body. Arm buds become arms
and faces take on noses, lips, and eventually eyelashes. Look for
drawings that you or your child has created to see this fascinating
trend. Here are some examples of pictures drawn by girls from ages
2 to 7 years.

                                                                                                    | 201
      Figure 3.3.3. These drawings demonstrate the progression in
  both drawing skill and visual processing during early childhood.
 The top left drawing is done by a 2-year old, and the bottom right

                         image is drawn by a 7-year old.

Hearing

The infant's sense of hearing is very keen at birth. If you remember
from an earlier module, this ability to hear is evidenced as soon

202 |
as the 5th month of prenatal development. In fact, an infant can
distinguish between very similar sounds as early as one month after
birth and can distinguish between a familiar and non-familiar voice
even earlier. Babies who are just a few days old prefer human voices,
they will listen to voices longer than sounds that do not involve
speech (Vouloumanos & Werker, 2004), and they seem to prefer
their mother's voice over a stranger's voice (Mills & Melhuish, 1974).
In an interesting experiment, 3-week-old babies were given
pacifiers that played a recording of the infant's mother's voice and of
a stranger's voice. When the infants heard their mother's voice, they
sucked more strongly at the pacifier (Mills & Melhuish, 1974). Some
of this ability will be lost by 7 or 8 months as a child becomes familiar
with the sounds of a particular language and less sensitive to sounds
that are part of an unfamiliar language.

Touch

Immediately after birth, a newborn is sensitive to touch and
temperature, and is also sensitive to pain, responding with crying
and cardiovascular responses. Newborns who are circumcised (the
surgical removal of the foreskin of the penis) without anesthesia
experience pain, as demonstrated by increased blood pressure,
increased heart rate, decreased oxygen in the blood, and a surge of
stress hormones (United States National Library of Medicine, 2016).
According to the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), there are
medical benefits and risks to circumcision. They do not recommend
routine circumcision, however, they stated that because of the
possible benefits (including prevention of urinary tract infections,
penile cancer, and some STDs) parents should have the option to
circumcise their sons if they want to (AAP, 2012).

   The sense of touch is acute in infants and is essential to a baby's
growth of physical abilities, language and cognitive skills, and socio-
emotional competency. Touch not only impacts short-term

                                                                                                   | 203
development during infancy and early childhood but also has long-
term effects, suggesting the power of positive gentle touch from
birth. Through touch, infants learn about their world, bond with
their caregivers, and communicate their needs and wants. Research
emphasizes the great benefits of touch for premature babies, but
the presence of such contact has been shown to benefit all children
(Stack, 2010). In an extreme example, some children in Romania
were reared in orphanages in which a single care worker may have
had as many as 10 infants to care for at one time. These infants
were not often helped or given toys with which to play. As a result,
many of them were developmentally delayed (Nelson, Fox, & Zeanah,
2014). When we discuss emotional and social development later in
this module, you will also see the important role that touch plays
in helping infants feel safe and protected, which builds trust and
secure attachments between the child and their caregiver.

Taste and Smell

Not only are infants sensitive to touch, but newborns can also
distinguish between sour, bitter, sweet, and salty flavors and show
a preference for sweet flavors. They can distinguish between their
mother's scent and that of others, and prefer the smell of their
mothers. A newborn placed on the mother's chest will inch up to the
mother's breast, as it is a potent source of the maternal odor. Even
on the first day of life, infants orient to their mother's odor and are
soothed, when crying, by their mother's odor (Sullivan et al., 2011).

Health and Illness

By world standards, children and youth in economically developed
societies tend, on average, to be remarkably healthy. Even so, much

204 |
depends on precisely how well-off families are and on how much
health care is available to them. Children from higher-income
families experience far fewer serious or life-threatening illnesses
than children from lower-income families. Whatever their income
level, parents and teachers often rightly note that children--
especially the youngest ones--get far more illnesses than do adults.
In 2004, for example, a government survey estimated that children
get an average of 6-10 colds per year, but adults get only about
2-4 per year (National Institute of Allergies and Infectious Diseases,
2004). The difference probably exists because children's immune
systems are not as fully formed as adults, and because children at
school are continually exposed to other children, many of whom
may be contagious themselves. An indirect result of children's
frequent illnesses is that teachers (along with airline flight
attendants, incidentally!) also report more frequent minor illnesses
than do adults in general--about five colds per year, for example,
instead of just 2-4 (Whelen, et al., 2005). The "simple" illnesses are
not life-threatening, but they are responsible for many lost days of
school, both for students and for teachers, as well as days when a
student may be present physically, but functions below par while
simultaneously infecting classmates. In these ways, learning and
teaching often suffer because health is suffering.

   The problem is not only the prevalence of illness as such (in
winter, even in the United States, approximately one person gets
infected with a minor illness every few seconds), but the fact that
illnesses are not distributed uniformly among students, schools,
or communities. Whether it is a simple cold or something more
serious, illness is particularly common where living conditions are
crowded, where health care is scarce or unaffordable, and where
individuals live with frequent stresses of any kind. Often, but not
always, these are the circumstances of poverty. Table 3.3
summarizes these effects for a variety of health problems, not just
for colds or flu.

                                                                                                   | 205
Table 3.3.3. Health effects of children's economic level

Health program                         Comparison: Poor vs.
                                       non-poor

Delayed immunizations                  3 times higher

Asthma                                 Somewhat higher

Lead poisoning                         3 times higher

Deaths in childhood from accidents     2-3 times higher

Deaths in childhood from disease       3-4 times higher

Having a condition that limits school  2-3 times higher
activity

Days sick in bed                       4o percent higher

Seriously impaired vision              2-3 times higher

Severe iron deficiency (anemia)        2 times higher

Source: Richardson, 2005; Spencer, 2000; Allender, 2005.

As students get older, illnesses become less frequent, but other
health risks emerge. The most widespread are the consumption of
alcohol and the smoking of cigarettes. As of 2004, about 75 percent
of teenagers reported drinking an alcoholic beverage at least
occasionally, and 22 percent reported smoking cigarettes (Center
for Disease Control, 2004a). The good news is that these
proportions show a small, but steady decline in the frequencies over
the past 10 years or so. The bad news is that teenagers also
show increases in the abuse of some prescription drugs, such as
inhalants, that act as stimulants (Johnston, et al., 2006). As with the
prevalence of illnesses, the prevalence of drug use is not uniform,
with a relatively small fraction of individuals accounting for a
disproportionate proportion of usage. One survey, for example,
found that a teenager was 3-5 times more likely to smoke or use
alcohol, smoke marijuana, or use drugs if he or she has a sibling who
has also indulged in these habits (Fagan & Najman, 2005). Siblings, it
seems, are more influential in this case than parents.
CC licensed content, Original

206 |
   Physical Development. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously
   Lifespan Development. Authored by: Martha Lally and Suzanne
      Valentine-French. Provided by: College of Lake County
      Foundation. Retrieved from: http://dept.clcillinois.edu/psy/
      LifespanDevelopment.pdf.. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike
   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. . Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      License: CC BY: Attribution
   Lifespan Development. Provided by: Lumen Learning.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      wmopen-lifespandevelopment/. License: CC BY: Attribution

All rights reserved content
   Reflexes in Newborn Babies. Provided by: mybirth.tv.
      Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/Sv5SsLH70mY. License: All
      Rights Reserved
   Early Childhood Gross Motor Development. Retrieved from:
      https://youtu.be/W0697717ZdU. License: All Rights Reserved

                                                                                                   | 207
Brain Development

The Brain in the First Two Years

Some of the most dramatic physical change that occurs during the
first two years of brain development. We are born with most of the
brain cells that we will ever have; that is, about 85 billion neurons
whose function is to store and transmit information (Huttenlocher
& Dabholkar, 1997). While most of the brain's neurons are present at
birth, they are not fully mature.

    Figure 3.4.1. Research shows that as early at 4-6 months, infants
 utilize similar areas of the brain as adults to process information.

                           Image from Deen et al., 2017.
   Communication within the central nervous system (CNS), which
consists of the brain and spinal cord, begins with nerve cells
called neurons. Neurons connect to other neurons via networks
of nerve fibers called axons and dendrites. Each neuron typically
has a single axon and numerous dendrites that are spread out like
branches of a tree (some will say it looks like a hand with fingers).
The axon of each neuron reaches toward the dendrites of other
208 | Brain Development
neurons at intersections called synapses, which are critical
communication links within the brain. Axons and dendrites do not
touch, instead, electrical impulses in the axons cause the release of
chemicals called neurotransmitters which carry information from
the axon of the sending neuron to the dendrites of the receiving
neuron.

                                  Figure 3.4.2. Neuron.

Synaptogenesis and Synaptic Pruning

While most of the brain's 100 to 200 billion neurons are present
at birth, they are not fully mature. Each neural pathway forms
thousands of new connections during infancy and
toddlerhood. Synaptogenesis, or the formation of connections
between neurons, continues from the prenatal period forming
thousands of new connections during infancy and

                                                                      Brain Development | 209
toddlerhood. During           the      next  several

years, dendrites, or connections between neurons,

will undergo a period of transient exuberance or

temporary dramatic growth (exuberant because

it is so rapid and transient because some of it

is temporary). There is such a proliferation of these

dendrites during these early years that by age 2 a

single neuron might have thousands of dendrites.

After this dramatic increase, the neural pathways

that are not used will be eliminated through a

process called synaptic pruning, where neural connections are

reduced, thereby making those that are used much stronger. It is

thought that pruning causes the brain to function

more efficiently, allowing for mastery of more

complex skills (Hutchinson, 2011). Experience will shape

which of these connections are maintained and which of these are

lost. Ultimately, about 40 percent of these connections will be lost

(Webb,  Monk,            and  Nelson,  2001). Transient

exuberance occurs during the first few years of

life, and pruning continues through childhood and

into adolescence in various areas of the brain. This

activity is occurring primarily in the cortex or the

thin outer covering of the brain involved in

voluntary activity and thinking.

           One or more interactive elements has been excluded
           from this version of the text. You can view them online
here:
https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=52#oembed-1

210 | Brain Development
Video 3.4.1. How Baby Brains Develop explains some of the brain
changes expected in the first few years of life.

Myelination

Another significant change occurring in the central nervous system
is the development of myelin, a coating of fatty tissues around the
axon of the neuron (Carlson, 2014). myelin helps insulate the nerve
cell and speed the rate of transmission of impulses from one cell
to another. This increase enhances the building of neural pathways
and improves coordination and control of movement and thought
processes. During infancy, myelination progresses rapidly, with
increasing numbers of axons acquiring myelin sheaths. This
corresponds with the development of cognitive and motor skills,
including language comprehension, speech acquisition, sensory
processing, crawling and walking. Myelination in the motor areas
of the brain during early to middle childhood leads to vast
improvements in fine and gross motor skills. Myelination continues
through adolescence and early adulthood and although largely
complete at this time, myelin sheaths can be added in grey
matter regions such as the cerebral cortex, throughout life.

Brain Structures

At birth, the brain is about 25 percent of its adult weight, and by age
two, it is at 75 percent of its adult weight. Most of the neural activity
is occurring in the cortex or the thin outer covering of the brain
involved in voluntary activity and thinking. The cortex is divided
into two hemispheres, and each hemisphere is divided into four
lobes, each separated by folds known as fissures. If we look at the
cortex starting at the front of the brain and moving over the top, we

                                                                        Brain Development | 211
see first the frontal lobe (behind the forehead), which is responsible
primarily for thinking, planning, memory, and judgment. Following
the frontal lobe is the parietal lobe, which extends from the middle to
the back of the skull and which is responsible primarily for processing
information about touch. Next is the occipital lobe, at the very back
of the skull, which processes visual information. Finally, in front of
the occipital lobe, between the ears, is the temporal lobe, which
is responsible for hearing and language.

                          Figure 3.4.3. Lobes of the brain.
   Although the brain grows rapidly during infancy, specific brain
regions do not mature at the same rate. Primary motor areas
develop earlier than primary sensory areas, and the prefrontal
cortex, which is located behind the forehead, is the least developed.
As the prefrontal cortex matures, the child is increasingly able to
regulate or control emotions, to plan activities, strategize, and have
better judgment. This maturation is not fully accomplished in
212 | Brain Development
infancy and toddlerhood but continues throughout childhood,
adolescence, and into adulthood.

Lateralization

Lateralization is the process in which different functions become
localized primarily on one side of the brain. For example, in most
adults, the left hemisphere is more active than the right during
language production, while the reverse pattern is observed during
tasks involving visuospatial abilities (Springer & Deutsch, 1993). This
process develops over time, however, structural asymmetries
between the hemispheres have been reported even in fetuses (Chi,
Dooling, & Gilles, 1997; Kasprian et al., 2011) and infants (Dubois et
al., 2009).

Neuroplasticity

Lastly, neuroplasticity refers to the brain's ability to change, both
physically and chemically, to enhance its adaptability to
environmental change and compensate for injury. Neuroplasticity
enables us to learn and remember new things and adjust to new
experiences. Both environmental experiences, such as stimulation,
and events within a person's body, such as hormones and genes,
affect the brain's plasticity. So too does age. Our brains are the
most "plastic" when we are young children, as it is during this
time that we learn the most about our environment. Adult brains
demonstrate neuroplasticity, but they are influenced more slowly
and less extensively than those of children (Kolb & Whishaw, 2011).

                                                                       Brain Development | 213
                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=52#oembed-2

Video 3.4.2. Long-term Potentiation and Synaptic Plasticity explains
how learning occurs through synaptic connections and plasticity.

   The control of some specific bodily functions, such as movement,
vision, and hearing, is performed in specified areas of the cortex.
If these areas are damaged, the individual will likely lose the ability
to perform the corresponding function. For instance, if an infant
suffers damage to facial recognition areas in the temporal lobe,
likely, he or she will never be able to recognize faces (Farah,
Rabinowitz, Quinn, & Liu, 2000). On the other hand, the brain is
not divided up in an entirely rigid way. The brain's neurons have a
remarkable capacity to reorganize and extend themselves to carry
out particular functions in response to the needs of the organism,
and to repair the damage. As a result, the brain constantly creates
new neural communication routes and rewires existing ones.

     The Amazing Power of Neuroplasticity

                          One or more interactive elements has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You can

214 | Brain Development
              view them online here:
              https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=52#oe
              mbed-3

        Video 3.4.3. The Story of Jody is a case study about a
     young girl that had the right hemisphere of her brain
     removed as a treatment for severe seizures. Due to
     neuroplasticity, Jody was able to recover from the damage
     caused by the removal of so much of her cerebrum.

Brain Maturation During Childhood

The brain is about 75 percent of its adult weight by three years of
age. By age 6, it is at 95 percent of its adult weight (Lenroot & Giedd,
2006). Myelination and the development of dendrites continue to
occur in the cortex, and as it does, we see a corresponding change
in what the child is capable of doing. Greater development in the
prefrontal cortex, the area of the brain behind the forehead that
helps us to think, strategize, and control attention and emotion,
makes it increasingly possible to inhibit emotional outbursts and
understand how to play games.

                                                                       Brain Development | 215
                           Figure 3.4.4. Corpus Callosum.

Growth in the Hemispheres and Corpus
Callosum

Between ages 3 and 6, the left hemisphere of the brain grows
dramatically. This side of the brain or hemisphere is typically
involved in language skills. The right hemisphere continues to grow
throughout early childhood and is involved in tasks that require
spatial skills, such as recognizing shapes and patterns. The Corpus
Callosum, a dense band of fibers that connects the two hemispheres
of the brain, contains approximately 200 million nerve fibers that
connect the hemispheres (Kolb & Whishaw, 2011).

   The corpus callosum is located a couple of inches below the
longitudinal fissure, which runs the length of the brain and

216 | Brain Development
separates the two cerebral hemispheres (Garrett, 2015). Because the
two hemispheres carry out different functions, they communicate
with each other and integrate their activities through the corpus
callosum. Additionally, because incoming information is directed
toward one hemisphere, such as visual information from the left eye
being directed to the right hemisphere, the corpus callosum shares
this information with the other hemisphere.

   The corpus callosum undergoes a growth spurt between ages
3 and 6, and this results in improved coordination between right
and left hemisphere tasks. For example, in comparison to other
individuals, children younger than 6 demonstrate difficulty
coordinating an Etch A Sketch toy because their corpus callosum is
not developed enough to integrate the movements of both hands
(Kalat, 2016).

Adolescent Brain Development

The human brain is not fully developed by the time a person reaches
puberty. Between the ages of 10 and 25, the brain undergoes
changes that have important implications for behavior. The brain
reaches 90% of its adult size by the time a person is six or seven
years of age. Thus, the brain does not grow in size much during
adolescence. However, the creases in the brain continue to become
more complex until the late teens. The most significant changes in
the folds of the brain during this time occur in the parts of the
cortex that process cognitive and emotional information. Changes
to the brain directly influence changes to behavior and mental
process. We will discuss some of these issues.

                                                                        Brain Development | 217
     Figure 3.4.5. The brain reaches its largest size in the early teen
             years but continues to mature well into the 20s.

Brain Changes

Up until puberty, brain cells continue to bloom in the frontal region.
Some of the most developmentally significant changes in the brain
occur in the prefrontal cortex, which is involved in decision
making and cognitive control, as well as other higher cognitive
functions. During adolescence, myelination and synaptic pruning
in the prefrontal cortex increases, improving the efficiency of
information processing, and neural connections between the
prefrontal cortex and other regions of the brain are
strengthened. However, this growth takes time, and the growth is
uneven.

218 | Brain Development
The Limbic System

The limbic system develops years ahead of the prefrontal cortex.
Development in the limbic system plays an essential role in
determining rewards and punishments and processing emotional
experience and social information. Pubertal hormones target the
amygdala directly, and powerful sensations become compelling
(Romeo, 2013). Brain scans confirm that cognitive control, revealed
by fMRI studies, is not fully developed until adulthood because the
prefrontal cortex is limited in connections and engagement (Hartley
& Somerville, 2015). Recall that this area is responsible for judgment,
impulse control, and planning, and it is still maturing into early
adulthood (Casey, Tottenham, Liston, & Durston, 2005).

                          Figure 3.4.6. The limbic system.
   Additionally, changes in both the levels of the
neurotransmitters dopamine and serotonin in the limbic system
make adolescents more emotional and more responsive to rewards

                                                                       Brain Development | 219
and stress. Dopamine is a neurotransmitter in the brain associated
with pleasure and attuning to the environment during decision-
making. During adolescence, dopamine levels in the limbic
system increase, and the input of dopamine to the prefrontal cortex
increases. The increased dopamine activity in adolescence may
have implications for adolescent risk-taking and vulnerability to
boredom. Serotonin is involved in the regulation of mood and
behavior. It affects the brain differently. Known as the "calming
chemical," serotonin eases tension and stress. Serotonin also puts
a brake on the excitement and sometimes recklessness that
dopamine can produce. If there is a defect in the serotonin
processing in the brain, impulsive or violent behavior can result.

The Prefrontal Cortex

The prefrontal cortex, the part of the frontal lobes lying just behind
the forehead, is often referred to as the "CEO of the brain," the
cognitive control center. This brain region is responsible for
cognitive analysis, abstract thought, the moderation of "correct"
behavior in social situations, the capacity to exercise good
judgment, self-regulation, and future orientation. The prefrontal
cortex takes in information from all of the senses and orchestrates
thoughts and actions to achieve specific goals (Casey, Jones, & Hare,
2008; Walsh, 2004). Around 11 years of age, this region of the brain
begins an extended process of pruning and myelination and is not
complete until near the age of 25. This region of the brain is one of
the last to reach maturity. This delay may help to explain why some
adolescents act the way they do. The so-called "executive functions"
of the human prefrontal cortex include:

   Focusing attention
   Organizing thoughts and problem-solving
   Foreseeing and weighing possible consequences of behavior
   Considering the future and making predictions

220 | Brain Development
   Forming strategies and planning
   Ability to balance short-term rewards with long term goals
   Shifting/adjusting behavior when situations change
   Impulse control and delaying gratification
   Modulation of intense emotions
   Inhibiting inappropriate behavior and initiating appropriate

      behavior
   Simultaneously considering multiple streams of information

      when faced with complex and challenging information

   Figure 3.4.7. Brain development continues into the early 20s. The
 development of the frontal lobe, in particular, is important during

                                        this stage.
   The difference in timing of the development of the limbic system
and prefrontal cortex contributes to more risk-taking during
adolescence. Because adolescents are motivated to seek thrills that
sometimes come from risky behavior, they are more likely to engage

                                                                       Brain Development | 221
in reckless driving, smoking, or drinking, and have not yet developed
the cognitive control to resist impulses or focus equally on the
potential risks (Steinberg, 2008). One of the world's leading experts
on adolescent development, Laurence Steinberg, likens this to
engaging a powerful engine before the braking system is in place.
The result is that adolescents are more prone to risky behaviors
than are children or adults.

Brain Region Integration

MRI studies of the brain show that developmental processes tend
to occur in the brain in a back-to-front pattern, explaining why the
prefrontal cortex develops last. These studies have also found that
teens have less white matter (myelin) in the frontal lobes of their
brains when compared to adults, but this amount increases as the
teen ages. With more myelin comes the growth of important brain
connections, allowing for a better flow of information between brain
regions. MRI research has also revealed that during adolescence,
white matter increases in the corpus callosum, the bundle of nerve
fibers connecting the right and left hemispheres of the brain. This
development allows for enhanced communication between the
hemispheres, which enables a full array of analytic and creative
strategies to be brought to bear in responding to the complex
dilemmas that may arise in a young person's life (Giedd, 2004).

   In sum, the adolescent years are a time of profound brain changes.
Interestingly, two of the primary brain functions develop at
different rates. Brain research indicates that the part of the brain
that perceives rewards from risk, the limbic system, kicks into high
gear in early adolescence. The part of the brain that controls
impulses and engages in longer-term perspective, the frontal lobes,
mature later. This delay may explain why teens in mid-adolescence
take more risks than older teens.

   As the frontal lobes become more developed, two things happen.

222 | Brain Development
First, self-control develops as teens are better able to assess cause
and effect. Second, more areas of the brain become involved in
processing emotions, and teens become better at accurately
interpreting others' emotions.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=52#oembed-4

Video 3.4.4. Brain Changes in Adolescence describes some of the
physical changes that occur during adolescence.

      The Teen Brain: 6 Things to Know from the
   National Institute of Mental Health

     Your brain does not keep getting bigger as you get
   older

        For girls, the brain reaches its largest physical size
     around 11 years old, and for boys, the brain reaches its
     largest physical size around age 14. Of course, this
     difference in age does not mean either boys or girls are
     smarter than one another!

                                                                       Brain Development | 223
     But that doesn't mean your brain is done maturing

        For both boys and girls, although your brain may be as
     large as it will ever be, your brain doesn't finish developing
     and maturing until your mid- to late-20s. The front part of
     the brain, called the prefrontal cortex, is one of the last
     brain regions to mature. It is the area responsible for
     planning, prioritizing, and controlling impulses.

     The teen brain is ready to learn and adapt

        In a digital world that is constantly changing, the
     adolescent brain is well prepared to adapt to new
     technology--and is shaped in return by experience.

     Many mental disorders appear during adolescence

        All the big changes the brain is experiencing may explain
     why adolescence is the time when many mental
     disorders--such as schizophrenia, anxiety, depression,
     bipolar disorder, and eating disorders--emerge.

     The teen brain is resilient

        Although adolescence is a vulnerable time for the brain
     and for teenagers in general, most teens go on to become

224 | Brain Development
healthy adults. Some changes in the brain during this
important phase of development actually may help protect
against long-term mental disorders.

  Teens need more sleep than children and adults

   Although it may seem like teens are lazy, science shows
that melatonin levels (or the "sleep hormone" levels) in the
blood naturally rise later at night and fall later in the
morning than in most children and adults. This may explain
why many teens stay up late and struggle with getting up in
the morning. Teens should get about 9-10 hours of sleep a
night, but most teens don't get enough sleep. A lack of sleep
makes paying attention hard, increases impulsivity, and
may also increase irritability and depression.

Educational Neuroscience

Educational  neuroscience (or neuroeducation)  is              an

emerging scientific field that brings together researchers

in neuroscience, psychology, education, and even technology, to

explore the interactions between biological processes and

education. Researchers in educational neuroscience investigate

the neural mechanisms for processes such as learning, memory,

attention, intelligence, and motivation. Their research also attends

to difficulties, including dyslexia, dyscalculia, and ADHD, as they

relate to education. Researchers in this area may link basic findings

in cognitive neuroscience with educational technology to help

in curriculum implementation for specific academic areas, like

                          Brain Development | 225
mathematics and reading education. Educational neuroscience aims
to generate basic and applied research that will provide a new
transdisciplinary account of learning and teaching, which is capable
of informing education.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=52#oembed-5

Video 3.4.5. Introduction to Educational Neuroscience discusses how
neuroscience can inform education and dispels several common
myths about brain functioning held by teachers and students.

     A Neuroeducational Case Study: Language and
   Literacy

        Human language is a unique faculty of the mind, and the
     ability to understand and produce oral and written
     language is fundamental to academic achievement and
     attainments. Children who experience difficulties with oral
     language raise significant challenges for educational policy
     and practice. The difficulties are likely to persist during the
     primary school years where, in addition to core deficits
     with oral language, children experience problems with
     literacy, numeracy, and behavior and peer relations. Early
     identification and intervention to address these difficulties,

226 | Brain Development
as well as identification of how learning environments can
support atypical language development, are essential.

   Over the last decade, there has been a significant
increase in neuroscience research examining young
children's processing of language at the phonetic, word, and
sentence levels. There are clear indications that neural
substrates for all levels of language can be identified at
early points in development. At the same time, intervention
studies have demonstrated how the brain retains its
plasticity for language processing. Intense remediation with
an auditory language processing program has been
accompanied by functional changes in the left
temporoparietal cortex and inferior frontal gyrus. However,
the extent to which these results generalize to spoken and
written language is debated.

   The relationships between meeting the educational
needs of children with language difficulties and the findings
of neuroscience studies are not yet established. One
concrete avenue for progress is to use neuroscientific
methods to address questions that are significant to
practice in learning environments. For example, the extent
to which language skills are attributable to a single
common trait, and the consistency of such a trait over
development, are matters of debate. However, direct
assessments of brain activity can inform these debates. A
detailed understanding of the sub-components of the
language system, and the ways these change over time may
inevitably yield implications for educational practice.

CC licensed content, Original

                               Brain Development | 227
   Brain Development. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van Hoose.
      Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College. Retrieved
      from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/chapter/
      brain-development/. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Educational Neuroscience. Provided by: Wikipedia. Retrieved
      from: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
      Educational_neuroscience. License: Public Domain: No Known
      Copyright

   Psychology 2e. Authored by: Rose M. Spielman, William J.
      Jenkins, Marilyn D. Lovett. Provided by: Open Stax. Retrieved
      from: https://openstax.org/books/psychology-2e/pages/
      3-2-cells-of-the-nervous-system. License: CC BY: Attribution

   Lifespan Development. Provided by: Lumen Learning.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/wm-
      lifespandevelopment/. License: CC BY: Attribution

CC licensed content, Specific attribution

   Brain Changes in Adolesence. Provided by: Khan Academy .
      Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/5Fa8U6BkhNo. License: CC
      BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

   Long Term Potentiation and Synaptic Plasticity. Authored by:
      Carole Yue. Provided by: Khan Academy. Retrieved from:
      https://youtu.be/uVQXZudZd5s. License: Public Domain: No
      Known Copyright

All rights reserved content

   How Baby Brains Develop. Provided by: CNN. Retrieved from:
      https://youtu.be/R0fiu2S0_3M. License: All Rights Reserved

   The Story of Jody. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/
      VaDlLD97CLM. License: All Rights Reserved

228 | Brain Development
 Introduction to Educational Neuroscience. Provided by:
   Neuroscience for Teachers. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/
   VQ juDqc7YdQ. License: All Rights Reserved

                                                                    Brain Development | 229
Cognitive Development

Cognition refers to thinking and memory processes, and cognitive
development refers to long-term changes in these processes.
Biological changes in brain structure and connectivity in the brain
interact with increased experience, knowledge, and changing social
demands to produce rapid cognitive growth. Development of
executive functions, or cognitive skills that enable the control and
coordination of thoughts and behavior, are generally associated
with the prefrontal cortex area of the brain. The thoughts, ideas,
and concepts developed during this period of life greatly influence
one's future life and play a significant role in character and
personality formation.

   There are two primary perspectives on cognitive development:
constructivist and information-processing. The constructivist
perspective, based on the work of psychologists like Piaget and
Vygotsky. The information-processing perspective explains
cognitive development in terms of the growth of specific
components of the overall process of thinking, such as attention,
memory, processing speed, and metacognition.

Constructivist Theories

Constructivism is a perspective on learning focused on how people
actively create (or "construct") knowledge out of experiences.
Constructivist models of learning differ about how much a learner
constructs knowledge independently, compared to how much he or
she takes cues from people who may be more of an expert and who
help the learner's efforts (Fosnot, 2005; Rockmore, 2005). These
two perspectives are referred to as psychological constructivism
(changes in thinking resulting from individual experiences) and
social constructivism (changes in thinking due to assistance from

230 | Cognitive Development
others); however, both versions are, in a sense, explanations about
thinking within individuals.

   The Piagetian version of psychological constructivist learning is
rather "individualistic," in the sense that it does not say much about
how other people involved might assist with learning. Parents and
teachers are left lingering on the sidelines with few significant
responsibilities for helping learners to construct knowledge. Piaget
did recognize the importance of helpful others in his theory, calling
the process of support or assistance social transmission; however,
he did not emphasize this aspect of constructivism. Piaget was more
interested in what learners could figure out on their own (Salkind,
2004). Partly for this reason, his theory is often considered less
about learning and more about development, which is a long-term
change in a person resulting from multiple experiences. For the
same reason, educators have often found Piaget's ideas especially
helpful for thinking about students' readiness to learn.

   Unlike Piaget's rather individually oriented version of
constructivism, some psychologists have focused on the
interactions between a learner and more knowledgeable individuals.
One early expression of this viewpoint came from the American
psychologist Jerome Bruner (1960, 1966, 1996), who became
convinced that students could usually learn more than had been
traditionally expected as long as they were given appropriate
guidance and resources. He called such support instructional
scaffolding-- literally meaning a temporary framework, like one
used in constructing a building, that allows a much stronger
structure to be built within it. The reason for such a bold assertion
was Bruner's belief in scaffolding--his belief in the importance of
providing guidance in the right way and at the right time. When
scaffolding is provided, students seem more competent and
"intelligent," and they learn more.

   Similar ideas were proposed by Lev Vygotsky (1978), whose writing
focused on how a learner's thinking is influenced by relationships
with others who are more capable, knowledgeable, or expert than
the learner. Vygotsky proposed that when a person is learning a

                                                                 Cognitive Development | 231
new skill or solving a new problem, he or she can perform better
if accompanied and helped by an expert than if performing
alone--though still not as well as the expert.

   The social version of constructivism, however, highlights the
responsibility of the expert for making learning possible. He or
she must not only have knowledge and skill but also know how to
arrange experiences that make it easy and safe for learners to gain
knowledge and skill themselves. In addition to knowing what is to
be learned, the expert (i.e., the teacher) needs to break the content
into manageable parts, offer the parts in a sensible sequence,
provide for a suitable and successful practice, bring the parts back
together again at the end, and somehow relate the entire
experience to knowledge and skills already meaningful to the
learner.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=53#oembed-1

Video 3.5.1 Constructivist Learning explains the basics of
constructivism.

Information Processing Theories

Information Processing is not the work of a single theorist, but
based on the ideas and research of several cognitive scientists
studying how individuals perceive, analyze, manipulate, use, and
remember information. This approach assumes that humans
gradually improve in their processing skills; that is, development is

232 | Cognitive Development
continuous rather than stage-like. The more complex mental skills
of adults are built from the primitive abilities of children. We are
born with the ability to notice stimuli, store, and retrieve
information. Brain maturation enables advancements in our
information processing system. At the same time, interactions with
the environment also aid in our development of more effective
strategies for processing information.
CC licensed content, Original

   Cognitive Development. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/
      chapter/cognitive-development/. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Adolescent Psychology. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      adolescent/chapter. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. . Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      License: CC BY: Attribution

All rights reserved content

   Constructivist Learning. Authored by: Sophia Trigg. Retrieved
      from: https://youtu.be/PK2NILj3BrU. License: All Rights
      Reserved

                                                                 Cognitive Development | 233
Psychological Constructivism:
Piaget's Theories

Piaget believed that when we are faced with new information that
we experience a cognitive disequilibrium. In response, we are
continuously trying to regain cognitive homeostasis through
adaptation. Piaget also proposed that, through maturation, we
progress through four stages of cognitive development.

Adaptation

When it comes to maintaining cognitive equilibrium, novices have
much more of a challenge because they are continually being
confronted with new situations. All of this new information needs to
be organized. The framework for organizing information is referred
to as a schema. We develop schemata through the processes of
adaptation. Adaptation can occur through assimilation and
accommodation.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=54#oembed-2

Video 3.6.1 Semantic Networks and Spreading Activation explains the
creation and use of schemas.

   Sometimes when we are faced with new information, we can
simply fit it into our current schema; this is called assimilation. For
234 | Educational Psychology
example, a student is given a new math problem in class. They use
previously learned strategies to try to solve the problem. While the
problem is new, the process of solving the problem is something
familiar to the student. The new problem fits into their current
understanding of the math concept.

   Not all new situations fit into our current framework and
understanding of the world. In these cases, we may need
accommodation, which is expanding the framework of knowledge
to accommodate the new situation. If the student solving the math
problem could not solve it because they were missing the strategies
necessary to find the answer, they would first need to learn these
strategies, and then they could solve the problem.

               Figure 3.6.1 Model of Piaget's adaptation theory.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=54#oembed-1

Video 3.6.2. Schemas, Assimilation, and Accommodation explains
Piaget's theory of constructing schemas through adaptation.

                                                                Educational Psychology | 235
Piaget's Stages of Cognitive Development

After observing children closely, Piaget proposed that cognition
developed through distinct stages from birth through the end of
adolescence. By stages he meant a sequence of thinking patterns
with four key features:

 1. They always happen in the same order.
2. No stage is ever skipped.
3. Each stage is a significant transformation of the stage before it.
4. Each later stage incorporated the earlier stages into itself.
Piaget proposed four major stages of cognitive development: (1)
sensorimotor intelligence, (2) preoperational thinking, (3) concrete
operational thinking, and (4) formal operational thinking. Each stage
is correlated with an age period of childhood, but only
approximately.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=54#oembed-3

Video 3.6.3. Piaget's Stages of Cognitive Development explains the
structure of the four stages and major cognitive developments
associated with each stage.

236 | Educational Psychology
The Sensorimotor Stage (0-2 years)

                                              In Piaget's theory, the
                                              sensorimotor stage is first, and is
                                              defined as the period when
                                              infants' think' by means of their
                                              senses and motor actions. As
                                              every new parent will attest,
                                              infants continually touch,
manipulate, look, listen to, and even bite and chew objects.
According to Piaget, these actions allow them to learn about the
world and are crucial to their early cognitive development.
   At birth, the beginning of the sensorimotor stage, children have
only a few simple reflexes (sucking, grasping, looking) to help them
satisfy biological needs, such as hunger. By the end of this stage,
children can move about on their own, solve simple problems in
their heads, search for and find objects that are hidden from view,
and even communicate some of their thoughts. Between 4 and 8
months of age, infants learn that they can make things move by
banging and shaking them, which is why babies of this age love to
play with rattles. Sometime between the eighth and twelfth months,
they figure out how to get one thing (like a bottle) by using another
(for instance, by knocking a pillow away). Between 12 and 18 months,
children can represent hidden objects in their minds. They search
for what they want, even when they cannot see it. At the end of this
period, children are beginning to use images to stand for objects.
For example, a 2-year-old places her doll inside a dollhouse and
imaginatively reconstructs her doll's view of the miniature rooms
and furniture. This ability, called mediation, is a significant
achievement because it frees the child from the need to think about
only those objects she can see around her. A child who can mediate
can think about the whole world.
   Let us examine the transition that infants make from responding
to the external world reflexively as newborns, to solving problems

                                                                 Educational Psychology | 237
using mental strategies as two-year-olds by examining the various
substages that children move through from birth to their second
birthday.

Table 3.6.1. Sensorimotor substages.          Age
Stage
Stage 1 - Reflexes                            Birth to 6 weeks
Stage 2 - Primary Circular Reactions
                                              6 weeks to 4
Stage 3 - Secondary Circular Reactions        months
Stage 4 - Coordination of Secondary Circular
Reactions                                     4 months to 8
Stage 5 - Tertiary Circular Reactions         months

Stage 6 - Mental Representation               8 months to 12
                                              months

                                              12 months to 18
                                              months

                                              18 months to 24
                                              months

Substages of Sensorimotor Intelligence

For an overview of the substages of sensorimotor thought, it helps
to group the six substages into pairs. The first two substages involve
the infant's responses to its own body, call primary circular
reactions. During the first month first (substage one), the infant's
senses, as well as motor reflexes, are the foundation of thought.

Substage One: Reflexive Action (0-1month)

This active learning begins with automatic movements or reflexes
(sucking, grasping, staring, listening). A ball comes into contact with
an infant's cheek and is automatically sucked on and licked. This
reflexive response is also what happens with a sour lemon, much
to the infant's surprise! The baby's first challenge is to learn to

238 | Educational Psychology
adapt the sucking reflex to bottles or breasts, pacifiers or fingers,
each acquiring specific types of tongue movements to latch, suck,
breath, and repeat. This adaptation demonstrates that infants have
begun to make sense of sensations. Eventually, the use of these
reflexes becomes more deliberate and purposeful as they move onto
substage two.

Substage Two: First Adaptations to the Environment
(1-4 months)

Fortunately, within a few days or weeks, the infant begins to
discriminate between objects and adjust responses accordingly as
reflexes are replaced with voluntary movements. An infant may
accidentally engage in a behavior and find it interesting, such as
making a vocalization. This interest motivates trying to do it again
and helps the infant learn a new behavior that initially occurred by
chance. The behavior is identified as circular and primary because
it centers on the infant's own body. At first, most actions have to
do with the body, but in months to come, it will be directed more
toward objects. For example, the infant may have different sucking
motions for hunger and others for comfort (i.e., sucking a pacifier
differently from a nipple or attempting to hold a bottle to suck it).

   The next two substages (3 and 4), involve the infant's responses to
objects and people, called secondary circular reactions. Reactions
are no longer confined to the infant's body and are now interactions
between the baby and something else.

Substage Three: Repetition (4-8 months)

During the next few months, the infant becomes more and more
actively engaged in the outside world and takes delight in being able
to make things happen by responding to people and objects. Babies
try to continue any pleasing event. Repeated motion brings

                                                                Educational Psychology | 239
particular interest as the infant can bang two lids together or shake
a rattle and laugh. Another example might be to clap their hands
when a caregiver says, "patty-cake." Any sight of something
delightful will trigger efforts for interaction.

Substage Four: New Adaptations and Goal-Directed Behavior
(8-12 months)

Now the infant becomes more deliberate and purposeful in
responding to people and objects and can engage in behaviors that
others perform and anticipate upcoming events. Babies may ask for
help by fussing, pointing, or reaching up to accomplish tasks, and
work hard to get what they want. Perhaps because of continued
maturation of the prefrontal cortex, the infant becomes capable of
having a thought and carrying out a planned, goal-directed activity
such as seeking a toy that has rolled under the couch or indicating
that they are hungry. The infant is coordinating both internal and
external activities to achieve a planned goal and begins to get a
sense of social understanding. Piaget believed that at about 8
months (during substage 4), babies first understood the concept
of object permanence, which is the realization that objects or
people continue to exist when they are no longer in sight.

   The last two stages (5 and 6), called tertiary circular reactions,
consist of actions (stage 5) and ideas (stage 6) where infants become
more creative in their thinking.

Substage Five: Active Experimentation of "Little Scientists"
(12-18 months)

The toddler is considered a "little scientist" and begins exploring the
world in a trial-and-error manner, using motor skills and planning
abilities. For example, the child might throw their ball down the
stairs to see what happens, or delight in squeezing all of the

240 | Educational Psychology
toothpaste out of the tube. The toddler's active engagement in
experimentation helps them learn about their world. Gravity is
learned by pouring water from a cup or pushing bowls from high
chairs. The caregiver tries to help the child by picking it up again
and placing it on the tray. And what happens? Another
experiment! The child pushes it off the tray again, causing it to fall
and the caregiver to pick it up again! A closer examination of this
stage causes us to appreciate how much learning is going on at
this time and how many things we come to take for granted must
actually be learned. This time is a wonderful and messy time of
experimentation, and most learning occurs by trial and error.

Substage Six: Mental Representations (18-24 months)

The child is now able to solve problems using mental strategies, to
remember something heard days before and repeat it, to engage
in pretend play, and to find objects that have been moved even
when out of sight. Take, for instance, the child who is upstairs in a
room with the door closed, supposedly taking a nap. The doorknob
has a safety device on it that makes it impossible for the child to
turn the knob. After trying several times to push the door or turn
the doorknob, the child carries out a mental strategy to get the
door opened - he knocks on the door! Obviously, this is a technique
learned from the past experience of hearing a knock on the door
and observing someone opening the door. The child is now better
equipped with mental strategies for problem-solving. Part of this
stage also involves learning to use language. This initial movement
from the "hands-on" approach to knowing about the world to the
more mental world of stage six marked the transition to
preoperational thinking.

                                                                 Educational Psychology | 241
Current Research

Piaget lacked today's sophisticated research techniques and
scientific equipment for studying early cognition. Today researchers
can study the preferences of infants by tracking their eye
movements. They can also use sophisticated techniques to teach
infants how to manipulate their environments (for example, suck
on a bottle more vigorously to see or hear more interesting sights
and sounds). This research has shown that infants gain a sense of
the stability of objects (called object permanence) much earlier than
Piaget estimated--at about 4 months (Baillargeon, 1987). Meltzoff
(1988) showed 9- month-old infants a video of an adult playing with
toys unfamiliar to the infants. A day later, the infants imitated the
adult's actions they had seen. This behavior suggests that deferred
imitation (a form of mediation) is present almost a year earlier than
Piaget expected it to occur. Although Piaget appears to have
underestimated the ability of infants to take in information, store,
organize, remember, and imitate it, he appears to have described
correctly the sequences by which these skills develop. Furthermore,
his view of the infant as a "mini-scientist" who acts on the world
and builds theories about it is very much consistent with current
research findings.

The Preoperational Stage (2 to 7 years)

                                             The preoperational stage builds
                                             on the accomplishments of the
                                             sensorimotor stage. Piaget
                                             postulated that a radical or
                                             qualitative change occurs at this
                                             time: the emergence of symbolic
                                             thought. In the preoperational
stage, children use their new ability to represent objects in a wide

242 | Educational Psychology
variety of activities; however, they do not yet do it in ways that are
organized or entirely logical.

Pretend Play

One of the most obvious examples of this kind of cognition
is pretend play, the improvised make-believe of preschool children.
For example, during the preoperational period, children can make a
horse out of a broom, a daddy out of a doll, or a truck or train out
of a block of wood. Later (between 3 and 4 years), they play parts
or roles: doctor and patient, mommy and daddy, good guys and
bad guys, bus driver and passengers. In a way, children immersed
in make-believe seem not to think realistically. However, at some
level, these children know that it is just pretend and that they are
merely representing objects. They are thinking on two levels at
once--one imaginative and the other realistic. This dual processing
of experience makes dramatic play an early example
of metacognition, or reflecting on and monitoring of thinking itself.
Metacognition is a highly desirable skill for success in school, one
that teachers often encourage (Bredekamp & Copple, 1997; Paley,
2005). Partly for this reason, teachers of young children (preschool,
kindergarten, and even first or second grade) often make time and
space in their classrooms for dramatic play, and sometimes even
participate in it themselves to help develop the play further.

   Piaget believed that children's pretend play and experimentation
helped them solidify the new schemas they were developing
cognitively. This process involves both assimilation and
accommodation, which results in changes in their conceptions or
thoughts. As children progress through the preoperational stage,
they are developing the knowledge they will need to begin to use
logical operations in the next stage.

                                                                Educational Psychology | 243
Egocentrism

Egocentrism in early childhood refers to the tendency of young
children to think that everyone sees things in the same way as the
child. Piaget's classic experiment on egocentrism involved showing
children a three-dimensional model of a mountain and asking them
to describe what a doll that is looking at the mountain from a
different angle might see. Children tend to choose a picture that
represents their own, rather than the doll's view. However, when
children are speaking to others, they tend to use different sentence
structures and vocabulary when addressing a younger child or an
older adult. Consider why this difference might be observed. Do you
think this indicates some awareness of the views of others? Or do
you think they are merely modeling adult speech patterns?

     Egocentrism

                          One or more interactive elements has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You can
              view them online here:
              https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=54#oe
              mbed-4

        Video 3.6.4. Egocentrism is a demonstration of a Piagetian
     task assessing a child's ability to take another's perspective.
     The first child in the video is a preschool-aged child.
     Despite just being in the same position as the adult, the
     child cannot imagine what the adult sees from their

244 | Educational Psychology
     perspective and assumes that the adult sees what he sees.
     The second child, a school-aged child, after already being in
     the adult's seat, can take her perspective and name the
     items that she likely sees from where she is sitting. Why is
     it that the first child cannot take the adult's perspective and
     the second child can?

Precausal Thinking

Similar to preoperational children's egocentric thinking is their
structuring of cause-and-effect relationships based on their limited
view of the world. Piaget coined the term `precausal thinking' to
describe how preoperational children use their existing ideas or
views, like in egocentrism, to explain cause-and-effect
relationships. Three main concepts of causality, as displayed by
children in the preoperational stage, include animism, artificialism,
and transductive reasoning.

   Animism is the belief that inanimate objects are capable of
actions and have lifelike qualities. An example could be a child
believing that the sidewalk was mad and made them fall down, or
that the stars twinkle in the sky because they are happy. To an
imaginative child, the cup may be alive, the chair that falls down
and hits the child's ankle is mean, and the toys need to stay home
because they are tired. Young children do seem to think that objects
that move may be alive, but after age three, they seldom refer
to objects as being alive (Berk, 2007). Many children's stories and
movies capitalize on animistic thinking. Do you remember some of
the classic stories that make use of the idea of objects being alive
and engaging in lifelike actions?

   Artificialism refers to the belief that environmental
characteristics can be attributed to human actions or interventions.

                                                                Educational Psychology | 245
For example, a child might say that it is windy outside because
someone is blowing very hard, or the clouds are white because
someone painted them that color.

   Finally, precausal thinking is categorized by transductive
reasoning. Transductive reasoning is when a child fails to
understand the true relationships between cause and effect. Unlike
deductive or inductive reasoning (general to specific, or specific to
general), transductive reasoning refers to when a child reasons from
specific to specific, drawing a relationship between two separate
events that are otherwise unrelated. For example, if a child hears
a dog bark and then a balloon pop, the child would conclude that
because the dog barked, the balloon popped. Related to this
is syncretism, which refers to a tendency to think that if two events
occur simultaneously, one caused the other. An example of this
might be a child asking the question, "if I put on my bathing suit, will
it turn to summer?"

Cognition Errors

Between about the ages of four and seven, children tend to become
very curious and ask many questions, beginning the use of primitive
reasoning. There is an increase in curiosity in the interest of
reasoning and wanting to know why things are the way they are.
Piaget called it the "intuitive substage" because children realize they
have a vast amount of knowledge, but they are unaware of how they
acquired it.

   Centration and conservation are characteristic of preoperative
thought. Centration is the act of focusing all attention on one
characteristic or dimension of a situation while disregarding all
others. An example of centration is a child focusing on
the number of pieces of cake that each person has, regardless of
the size of the pieces. Centration is one of the reasons that young
children have difficulty understanding the concept of
conservation. Conservation is the awareness that altering a

246 | Educational Psychology
substance's appearance does not change its basic properties.
Children at this stage are unaware of conservation and exhibit
centration. Imagine a 2-year-old and 4-year-old eating lunch. The
4-year-old has a whole peanut butter and jelly sandwich. He notices,
however, that his younger sister's sandwich is cut in half and
protests, "She has more!" He is exhibiting centration by focusing on
the number of pieces, which results in a conservation error.

   In Piaget's famous conservation task, a child is presented with
two identical beakers containing the same amount of liquid. The
child usually notes that the beakers do contain the same amount of
liquid. When one of the beakers is poured into a taller and thinner
container, children who are younger than seven or eight years old
typically say that the two beakers no longer contain the same
amount of liquid. They believe that the taller container holds the
greater quantity (centration), without taking into consideration the
fact that both beakers were previously noted to contain the same
amount of liquid.

Figure 3.6.2. A demonstration of the conservation of liquid.

Irreversibility is also demonstrated during this stage and is closely

related  to  the  ideas  of  centration  and

conservation. Irreversibility refers to the young child's difficulty

mentally reversing a sequence of events. In the same beaker

situation, the child does not realize that, if the sequence of events

was reversed and the water from the tall beaker was poured back

into its original beaker, then the same amount of water would exist.

                         Educational Psychology | 247
   Centration, conservation errors, and irreversibility are indications
that young children are reliant on visual representations. Another
example of children's reliance on visual representations is their
misunderstanding of `less than' or `more than.' When two rows
containing equal amounts of blocks are placed in front of a child
with one row spread farther apart than the other, the child will think
that the row spread farther contains more blocks.

     Conservation

                          One or more interactive elements has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You can
              view them online here:
              https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=54#oe
              mbed-5

        Video 3.6.5. Conservation Task is a demonstration of a few
     Piagetian tasks to assess children's ability to understand
     various types of conservation. The first child is a
     preschooler and is not able to understand conservation.
     The second child is in elementary school. She does the
     same task and clearly understands conservation, although
     she does have some difficulty explicitly articulating her
     reasoning. A few additional conservation tasks are
     demonstrated by preschool children.

Class inclusion refers to a kind of conceptual thinking that children
in the preoperational stage cannot yet grasp. Children's inability

248 | Educational Psychology
to focus on two aspects of a situation at once (centration) inhibits
them from understanding the principle that one category or class
can contain several different subcategories or classes.
Preoperational children also have difficulty understanding that an
object can be classified in more than one way. For example, a four-
year-old girl may be shown a picture of eight dogs and three cats.
The girl knows what cats and dogs are, and she is aware that they
are both animals. However, when asked, "Are there more dogs or
more animals?" she is likely to answer "more dogs." This error is
due to her difficulty focusing on the two subclasses and the larger
class all at the same time. She may have been able to view the dogs
as dogs or animals, but struggled when trying to classify them as
both, simultaneously. Similar to this is a concept relating to intuitive
thought, known as "transitive inference."

   Transitive inference is using previous knowledge to determine
the missing piece, using basic logic. Children in the preoperational
stage lack this logic. An example of transitive inference would be
when a child is presented with the information `A' is greater than
`B' and `B' is greater than `C.' The young child may have difficulty
understanding that `A' is also greater than "C."

Theory of Mind

How do we come to understand how our mind works? The theory
of mind is the understanding that the mind holds people's beliefs,
desires, emotions, and intentions. One component of this is
understanding that the mind can be tricked or that the mind is not
always accurate.

   A two-year-old child does not understand very much about how
their mind works. They can learn by imitating others, they are
starting to understand that people do not always agree on things
they like, and they have a rudimentary understanding of cause and
effect (although they often fall prey to transitive reasoning). By
the time a child is four, their theory of the mind allows them to

                                                                Educational Psychology | 249
understand that people think differently, have different preferences,
and even mask their true feelings by putting on a different face that
differs from how they truly feel inside.

   To think about what this might look like in the real world, imagine
showing a three-year-old child a bandaid box and asking the child
what is in the box. Chances are, the child will reply, "bandaids." Now
imagine that you open the box and pour out crayons. If you now ask
the child what they thought was in the box before it was opened,
they may respond, "crayons." If you ask what a friend would have
thought was in the box, the response would still be "crayons." Why?

   Before about four years of age, a child does not recognize that the
mind can hold ideas that are not accurate, so this three-year-old
changes their response once shown that the box contains crayons.
The child's response can also be explained in terms of egocentrism
and irreversibility. The child's response is based on their current
view rather than seeing the situation from another person's
perspective (egocentrism) or thinking about how they arrived at
their conclusion (irreversibility). At around age four, the child would
likely reply, "bandaids" when asked after seeing the crayons because
by this age a child is beginning to understand that thoughts and
realities do not always match.

     Theory of Mind

                          One or more interactive elements has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You can
              view them online here:

250 | Educational Psychology
              https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=54#oe
              mbed-6

        Video 3.6.6. The Theory of Mind Test demonstrates
     various false belief tests to assess the theory of mind in
     young children.

Theory of Mind and Social Intelligence

This awareness of the existence of mind is part of social intelligence
and the ability to recognize that others can think differently about
situations. It helps us to be self-conscious or aware that others
can think of us in different ways, and it helps us to be able to be
understanding or empathic toward others. This developing social
intelligence helps us to anticipate and predict the actions of others
(even though these predictions are sometimes inaccurate). The
awareness of the mental states of others is important for
communication and social skills. A child who demonstrates this skill
is able to anticipate the needs of others.

Impaired Theory of Mind in Individuals with Autism

People with autism or an autism spectrum disorder (ASD) typically
show an impaired ability to recognize other people's minds. Under
the DSM-5, autism is characterized by persistent deficits in social
communication and interaction across multiple contexts, as well as
restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities.

                                                                 Educational Psychology | 251
These deficits are present in early childhood, typically before age
three, and lead to clinically significant functional impairment.
Symptoms may include lack of social or emotional reciprocity,
stereotyped and repetitive use of language or idiosyncratic
language, and persistent preoccupation with unusual objects.

   About half of parents of children with ASD notice their child's
unusual behaviors by age 18 months, and about four-fifths notice
by age 24 months, but often a diagnosis comes later, and individual
cases vary significantly. Typical early signs of autism include:

   No babbling by 12 months.
   No gesturing (pointing, waving, etc.) by 12 months.
   No single words by 16 months.
   No two-word (spontaneous, not just echolalic) phrases by 24

      months.
   Loss of any language or social skills, at any age.

Children with ASD experience difficulties with explaining and
predicting other people's behavior, which leads to problems in social
communication and interaction. Children who are diagnosed with
an autistic spectrum disorder usually develop the theory of mind
more slowly than other children and continue to have difficulties
with it throughout their lives.

   For testing whether someone lacks the theory of mind, the Sally-
Anne test is performed. The child sees the following story: Sally and
Anne are playing. Sally puts her ball into a basket and leaves the
room. While Sally is gone, Anne moves the ball from the basket to
the box. Now Sally returns. The question is: where will Sally look for
her ball? The test is passed if the child correctly assumes that Sally
will look in the basket. The test is failed if the child thinks that Sally
will look in the box. Children younger than four and older children
with autism will generally say that Sally will look in the box.

252 | Educational Psychology
     Ally-Anne Test

                          One or more interactive elements has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You can
              view them online here:
              https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=54#oe
              mbed-7

        Video 3.6.7. Sally-Anne test demonstration with a young
     child.

Current Research

As with the sensorimotor stage, researchers are discovering that
preoperational children are more cognitively capable than Piaget
proposed. Donaldson (1978), Bower and Wishart (1972), Chandler,
Fritz, and Hala (1989), and Gelman and Ebeling (1989) all concluded
that children around the ages of 3 and 4 are not as egocentric
as Piaget suggested. Researchers have shown that the difficulties
children have with some of Piaget's classic experiments largely
result from a lack of understanding of the researcher's questions.
When researchers take pains to ensure that children understand
these tasks, preoperational learners show that they can take the
perspective of another; that is, they can begin to imagine another's
viewpoint. Researchers such as Gelman (1972) and Bijstra, van Geert,
and Jackson (1989) have shown that operations such as conservation

                                                                Educational Psychology | 253
of liquids can be performed by preoperational children. Waxman
and Gelman (1986) report that children as young as 4 can
understand class inclusion.

   Current research on children's cognitive abilities during the
preoperational period suggests two conclusions: (1) Piaget may have
underestimated what some children can do during the
preoperational stage; and (2) in order to exhibit more and varied
abilities at this stage, researchers must first eliminate distractions,
give clues, and ensure that children understand their directions.
While children's thinking is still largely dominated by what they see
at this time, they can be taught to be less egocentric (Bee, 1995).

The Concrete Operational Stage (7-11 years)

                                       Those who intend to teach at the
                                       kindergarten or first-grade level will
                                       work with learners just as they enter
                                       the concrete operational stage.
                                       According to Piaget, this is the time
                                       when children become less dominated
                                       by appearances and acquire the
                                       schemata to understand arithmetic,
think in symbols, classify objects (like animal, vegetable, or mineral,
or by color and shape), and understand the relationships between
uppercase and lower- case letters. It is no wonder that formal
education begins in so many societies around the world at this age.
The critical accomplishments at this stage involve the learner's
ability to perform operations or rules that involve the mediation of
words and images and to modify these mediators to reach a logical
conclusion.
   As children continue through elementary school, they become
able to represent ideas and events more flexibly and logically. Their
rules of thinking still seem very basic by adult standards, and usually

254 | Educational Psychology
operate unconsciously. However, these rules allow children to solve
problems more systematically than before, and therefore, to be
successful with many academic tasks. In the concrete operational
stage, for example, a child may unconsciously follow the rule: "If
nothing is added or taken away, then the amount of something stays
the same," but may struggle to make these processes explicit.

   This simple principle helps children to understand some
arithmetic tasks, such as in adding or subtracting zero from a
number, as well as to do certain classroom science experiments,
such as ones involving judgments of the amounts of liquids when
mixed. Piaget called this period the concrete operational
stage because children mentally "operate" on concrete objects and
events. They are not yet able, however, to operate (or think)
systematically about representations of objects or events.
Manipulating representations is a more abstract skill that develops
later, during adolescence.

Reversibility

Concrete operational thinking differs from preoperational thinking
in two ways, each of which renders children more skilled as
students. One difference is reversibility, or the ability to think
about the steps of a process in any order. Imagine a simple science
experiment, for example, such as one that explores why objects sink
or float by having a child place an assortment of objects in a basin
of water. Both the preoperational and concrete operational child
can recall and describe the steps in this experiment, but only the
concrete operational child can recall them in any order. This skill is
beneficial on any task involving multiple steps--a common feature
of tasks in the classroom. In teaching new vocabulary from a story,
for another example, a teacher might tell students: "First make a
list of words in the story that you do not know, then find and
write down their definitions, and finally get a friend to test you
on your list." These directions involve repeatedly remembering to

                                                                Educational Psychology | 255
move back and forth between a second step and a first--a task that
concrete operational students--and most adults--find easy, but that
preoperational children often forget to do or find confusing. If the
younger children are to do this task reliably, they may need external
prompts, such as having the teacher remind them periodically to go
back to the story to look for more unknown words.

Decenter

The other new feature of thinking during the concrete operational
stage is the child's ability to decenter or focus on more than one
feature of a problem at a time. There are hints of decentration
in preschool children's dramatic play, which requires being aware
on two levels at once--for example, knowing that a banana can be
both a banana and a `telephone.' However, the decentration of the
concrete operational stage is more deliberate and conscious than
preschoolers' make-believe. Now the child can attend to two things
at once quite purposely. Suppose you give students a sheet with an
assortment of subtraction problems on it, and ask them to do this:
"Find all of the problems that involve two-digit subtraction and that
involve borrowing from the next column. Circle and solve only those
problems." Following these instructions is quite possible for a
concrete operational student (as long as they have been listening!)
because the student can attend to the two subtasks
simultaneously--finding the two-digit problems and identifying
which actually involve borrowing. (Whether the student knows how
to "borrow" however, is a separate question.)

Implications for Teachers

Elementary school learners are far better problem solvers than
preschoolers. They can arrange objects in order; sequence numbers

256 | Educational Psychology
properly; classify objects by color, size, or shape; understand rules
for both mathematics and classroom behavior; think about both
the past and the future. Nevertheless, concrete operational learners
cannot perform these operations with things they cannot see or
touch. In other words, their logic works only in concrete situations.
Their mental operations are not yet ready for the realm of abstract
ideas. One way to illustrate this is to show an 8-year-old three dolls
of ascending height whose names are Elleni, Carlos, and Aster. Show
the child that Aster is taller than Carlos, and that Carlos is taller than
Elleni, and the child will easily figure out that Aster is taller than
Elleni. However, present only a verbal description of the three dolls,
and the child will have great difficulty determining the height of the
first doll relative to the third doll. Thus K through 4 teachers should
teach using concrete, hands-on activities that provide examples of
more general rules and concepts. The accompanying box, Teaching
Concrete Operational Learners, gives some specific examples.

   In real classroom tasks, reversibility and decentration often
happen together. A well-known example of joint presence is Piaget's
experiments with conservation, the belief that an amount or
quantity stays the same even if it changes apparent size or shape
(Piaget, 2001; Matthews, 1998). Imagine two identical balls made of
clay. Any child, whether preoperational or concrete operational, will
agree that the two indeed have the same amount of clay in them
simply because they look the same. However, if you squish one ball
into a long, thin `hot dog,' the preoperational child is likely to say that
the amount of that ball has changed--either because it is longer or
because it is thinner, but at any rate, because it now looks different.
The concrete operational child will not make this mistake, thanks
to new cognitive skills of reversibility and decentration. For them,
the amount is the same because "you could squish it back into a
ball again" (reversibility) and because "it may be longer, but it is also
thinner" (decentration). Piaget would say the concrete operational
child "has conservation of quantity."

   The classroom examples described above also involve reversibility
and decentration. As already mentioned, the vocabulary activity

                                                                 Educational Psychology | 257
described earlier requires reversibility (going back and forth
between identifying words and looking up their meanings), but it
can also be construed as an example of decentration (keeping in
mind two tasks at once--word identification and dictionary search).
Moreover, as mentioned, the arithmetic activity requires
decentration (looking for problems that meet two criteria and also
solving them), but it can also be construed as an example of
reversibility (going back and forth between subtasks, as with the
vocabulary activity). Either way, the development of concrete
operational skills supports students in doing many basic academic
tasks; in a sense, they make ordinary schoolwork possible

Current Research

Researchers have confirmed Piaget's conclusions about the
sequence and timing at which children acquire the various concrete
operations and have shown that children between the ages of 7 and
11 rarely exhibit deductive logic but are adept at inductive reasoning
(Tomlinson-Keasey, Eisert, Kalle, Hardy-Brown, & Keasey, 1978).
However, there is much debate about what causes these changes.
Piaget emphasized that children, particularly at this stage, act as
amateur scientists and discover the rules of operations largely on
their own, using the functions of organization and adaptation. He
said little about the contributions of social influences, such as peers
and culture, to cognitive development. We will explore this
perspective shortly when we present the social nature of learning
as formulated by Lev Vygotsky, an influential Russian
developmentalist.

258 | Educational Psychology
The Formal Operational Stage (11+ years)

                                             In the fourth (and last) of the
                                             Piagetian stages, an adolescent
                                             becomes able to reason not only
                                             about tangible objects and events,
                                             as younger children do, but also
                                             about hypothetical or abstract
                                             ones. Hence this stage is named the
formal operational stage--the period when the individual can
"operate" on "forms" or representations.
   During the formal operational stage, adolescents can understand
abstract principles which have no physical reference. They can now
contemplate such abstract constructs as beauty, love, freedom, and
morality. The adolescent is no longer limited by what can be directly
seen or heard. Additionally, while younger children solve problems
through trial and error, adolescents demonstrate hypothetical-
deductive reasoning, which is developing hypotheses based on what
might logically occur. They can think about all the possibilities in
a situation beforehand, and then test them systematically (Crain,
2005). Now they can engage in true scientific thinking. Formal
operational thinking also involves accepting hypothetical situations.
Adolescents understand the concept of transitivity, which means
that a relationship between two elements is carried over to other
elements logically related to the first two, such as if A<B and B<C, then
A<C (Thomas, 1979). For example, when asked: If Maria is shorter
than Alicia and Alicia is shorter than Caitlyn, who is the shortest?
Adolescents can answer the question correctly as they understand
the transitivity involved.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded

                                                                Educational Psychology | 259
        from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=54#oembed-8

Video 3.6.8. Formal Operational Stage explains some of the cognitive
development consistent with formal operational thought.

Abstract and Hypothetical thinking

One of the major premises of formal operational thought is the
capacity to think of possibility, not just reality. Adolescents' thinking
is less bound to concrete events than that of children; they can
contemplate possibilities outside the realm of what currently exists.
One manifestation of the adolescent's increased facility with
thinking about possibilities is the improvement of skill in deductive
reasoning (also called top-down reasoning), which leads to the
development of hypothetical thinking. This development provides
the ability to plan ahead, see the future consequences of an action,
and provide alternative explanations of events. It also makes
adolescents more skilled debaters, as they can reason against a
friend's or parent's assumptions. Adolescents also develop a more
sophisticated understanding of probability.

   This appearance of more systematic, abstract thinking allows
adolescents to comprehend the sorts of higher-order abstract logic
inherent in puns, proverbs, metaphors, and analogies. Their
increased facility permits them to appreciate how language can
be used to convey multiple messages, such as satire, metaphor,
and sarcasm (children younger than age nine often cannot
comprehend sarcasm at all). This change also permits the
application of advanced reasoning and logical processes to social
and ideological matters such as interpersonal relationships, politics,

260 | Educational Psychology
philosophy, religion, morality, friendship, faith, fairness, and
honesty.

     Deductive Reasoning

                          One or more interactive elements has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You can
              view them online here:
              https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=54#oe
              mbed-9

        Video 3.6.9. Deductive Reasoning demonstrates a
     Piagetian task that presents the child with a hypothetical
     situation and asks that they deduce what happens given
     this scenario. The first child is an elementary school-aged
     child. The second is an adolescent. You can see how these
     two are able to use hypothetical information differently to
     make predictions about what will happen next.

Intuitive and Analytic Thinking

Piaget emphasized the sequence of thought throughout four stages.
Others suggest that thinking does not develop in sequence, but
instead, that advanced logic in adolescence may be influenced by
intuition. Cognitive psychologists often refer to intuitive and
analytic thought as the dual-process model, the notion that humans
have two distinct networks for processing information (Kuhn,

                                                                 Educational Psychology | 261
2013.) Intuitive thought is automatic, unconscious, and fast, and it
is more experiential and emotional.

   In contrast, analytic thought is deliberate, conscious, and
rational (logical). While these systems interact, they are distinct
(Kuhn, 2013). Intuitive thought is easier, quicker, and more
commonly used in everyday life. As discussed in the adolescent
brain development section, the discrepancy between the
maturation of the limbic system and the prefrontal cortex may make
teens more prone to emotional, intuitive thinking than adults. As
adolescents develop, they gain in logic/analytic thinking ability and
sometimes regress, with social context, education, and experiences
becoming significant influences. Simply put, being `smarter' as
measured by an intelligence test does not advance cognition as
much as having more experience, in school and life (Klaczynski &
Felmban, 2014).

Relativistic Thinking

Adolescents are more likely to engage in relativistic thinking--in
other words, they are more likely to question others' assertions
and less likely to accept information as absolute truth. Through
experience outside the family circle, they learn that rules they were
taught as absolute are actually relativistic. They begin to
differentiate between rules crafted from common sense (don't
touch a hot stove) and those that are based on culturally relative
standards (codes of etiquette). This understanding can lead to a
period of questioning authority in all domains.

Risk-taking

Because most injuries sustained by adolescents are related to risky
behavior (alcohol consumption and drug use, reckless or distracted

262 | Educational Psychology
driving, and unprotected sex), a great deal of research has been
done on the cognitive and emotional processes underlying
adolescent risk-taking. In addressing this question, it is important to
distinguish whether adolescents are more likely to engage in risky
behaviors (prevalence), whether they make risk-related decisions
similarly or differently than adults (cognitive processing
perspective), or whether they use the same processes but value
different things and thus arrive at different conclusions.
The behavioral decision-making theory proposes that adolescents
and adults both weigh the potential rewards and consequences of
an action. However, research has shown that adolescents seem to
give more weight to rewards, particularly social rewards, than do
adults. Adolescents value social warmth and friendship, and their
hormones and brains are more attuned to those values than to long-
term consequences (Crone & Dahl, 2012).

   Some have argued that there may be evolutionary benefits to an
increased propensity for risk-taking in adolescence. For example,
without a willingness to take risks, teenagers would not have the
motivation or confidence necessary to leave their family of origin.
In addition, from a population perspective, there is an advantage to
having a group of individuals willing to take more risks and try new
methods, counterbalancing the more conservative elements more
typical of the received knowledge held by older adults.

Implications for Teachers

School is the main contributor to guiding students towards formal
operational thought. With students at this level, the teacher can
pose hypothetical (or contrary-to-fact) problems: "What if the
world had never discovered oil?" or "What if the first European
explorers had settled first in California instead of on the East Coast
of the United States?" To answer such questions, students must use
hypothetical reasoning, meaning that they must manipulate ideas
that vary in several ways at once and do so entirely in their minds.

                                                                Educational Psychology | 263
   The hypothetical reasoning that concerned Piaget primarily
involved scientific problems. His studies of formal operational
thinking, therefore, often look like problems that middle or high
school teachers pose in science classes. In one problem, for
example, a young person is presented with a simple pendulum, to
which different amounts of weight can be hung (Inhelder & Piaget,
1958). The experimenter asks: "What determines how fast the
pendulum swings: the length of the string holding it, the weight
attached to it, or the distance that it is pulled to the side?" The
young person is not allowed to solve this problem by trial-and-error
with the materials themselves but must reason a way to the solution
mentally. To do so systematically, he or she must imagine varying
each factor separately, while also imagining the other factors that
are held constant. This kind of thinking requires the facility to
manipulate mental representations of the relevant objects and
actions--precisely the skill that defines formal operations.

   As you might suspect, students with an ability to think
hypothetically have an advantage in many kinds of schoolwork: by
definition, they require relatively few "props" to solve problems.
In this sense, they can, in principle, be more self-directed than
students who rely only on concrete operations--certainly a
desirable quality in the opinion of most teachers. Note, though, that
formal operational thinking is desirable but not sufficient for school
success, and that it is far from being the only way that students
achieve educational success. Formal thinking skills do not ensure
that a student is motivated or well-behaved, for example, nor does it
guarantee other desirable skills. The fourth stage in Piaget's theory
is really about a particular kind of formal thinking, the kind needed
to solve scientific problems and devise scientific experiments. Since
many people do not usually deal with such problems in the ordinary
course of their lives, it should be no surprise that research finds
that many people never achieve or use formal thinking fully or
consistently, or that they use it only in selected areas with which
they are very familiar (Case & Okomato, 1996). For teachers, the
limitations of Piaget's ideas suggest a need for additional theories

264 | Educational Psychology
about development--ones that focus more directly on the social and
interpersonal issues of childhood and adolescence.

Current Research

Most current research in formal operations focuses on three
questions: (1) Do all children reach formal operations? (2) Are young
children capable of abstract reasoning? and (3) Are there any higher
stages of intellectual development? (Bee, 1995; Berk, 1993; Shaffer,
1993). Do all children reach formal operations?

   Try giving the following test to some of your friends:
   Premise 1: If there is a knife, then there is a fork.
   Premise 2: There is not a knife. Question: Is there a fork?
   The correct answer to this question is "maybe." The wrong answer
is "no." However, 40 to 60 percent of college students fail formal
operational problems, such as this one (Keating, 1979). Why? It
appears that much of formal operational thought is situation-
specific. In other words, although college students and adults are
capable of hypothetico-deductive reasoning, they tend to be better
at it in the fields with which they are familiar. Thus physics majors
are better able to demonstrate formal operations when dealing with
physics problems than are psychology majors, who, in turn, are
better at abstract reasoning in their discipline than are English
majors, and so on (DeLisi & Staudt, 1980). Are young children
capable of abstract reasoning? Research indicates that concrete
operational children can be taught abstract reasoning. For example,
they can be taught how to solve propositions, such as the knife-
and-fork task. Furthermore, training improves such performance
(Hawkins, Pea, Glick, & Scribner, 1984). These training effects,
however, are transitory. Specific training in propositional thinking
lasts longer and generalizes more readily to new tasks when the
trainees are in the formal operational stage (Greenbowe et al., 1981).
Are there higher stages of intellectual development?

                                                                Educational Psychology | 265
Beyond Formal Operational Thought: Postformal
Thought

Although Piaget asserts that the formal operations stage represents
the apex of cognitive thought, Patricia Arlin (1975, 1977) disagrees.
She believes that great thinkers like Einstein, Freud, and Piaget
operate in a higher cognitive dimension in which they
reconceptualize existing knowledge and reformulate it to come up
with unique ways of thinking about the world. She calls this the
problem-finding stage of cognitive development.

   The hallmark of this type of thinking is the ability to think
abstractly or to consider possibilities and ideas about
circumstances never directly experienced. Thinking abstractly is
only one characteristic of adult thought, however, if you compare
a 15-year-old with someone in their late 30s, you would probably
find that the latter considers not only what is possible but also
what is likely. Why the change? The adult has gained experience
and understands why possibilities do not always become realities.
They learn to base decisions on what is realistic and practical, not
idealistic, and can make adaptive choices. Adults are also not as
influenced by what others think. This advanced type of thinking is
referred to as postformal thought (Sinnott, 1998).

   In addition to moving toward more practical considerations,
thinking in early adulthood may also become more flexible and
balanced. Abstract ideas that the adolescent believes in firmly may
become standards by which the adult evaluates reality. Adolescents
tend to think in dichotomies; ideas are true or false; good or bad;
there is no middle ground. However, with experience, the adult
comes to recognize that there are some right and some wrong in
each position, some good or some bad in a policy or approach,
some truth and some falsity in a particular idea. This ability to
bring together salient aspects of two opposing viewpoints or positions
is referred to as dialectical thought and is considered one of the
most advanced aspects of postformal thinking (Basseches, 1984).

266 | Educational Psychology
Such thinking is more realistic because very few positions, ideas,
situations, or people are entirely right or wrong. So, for example,
parents who were considered angels or devils by the adolescent
eventually become just people with strengths and weaknesses,
endearing qualities, and faults to the adult.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=54#oembed-10

Video 3.6.10. Perry's Stages of Intellectual Development explains
post-formal stages of cognitive development in adulthood.

Does Everyone Reach Formal Operational or
Postformal Thought?

Formal operational thought is influenced by experience and
education. Most people attain some degree of formal operational
thinking but use formal operations primarily in the areas of their
strongest interest (Crain, 2005). Even those that can use formal
or postformal thought, do not regularly demonstrate it. Moreover,
in small villages and tribal communities, it is barely used at all. A
possible explanation is that an individual's thinking has not been
sufficiently challenged to demonstrate formal operational thought
in all areas.

   Some adults lead lives in which they are not challenged to think
abstractly about their world. Many adults do not receive any formal
education and are not taught to think abstractly about situations
they have never experienced. Further, they are also not exposed to

                                                                 Educational Psychology | 267
conceptual tools used to analyze hypothetical situations formally.
Those who do think abstractly, in fact, may be able to do so more
easily in some subjects than others. For example, psychology majors
may be able to think abstractly about psychology, but be unable to
use abstract reasoning in physics or chemistry. Abstract reasoning
in a particular field requires a knowledge base that we might not
have in all areas. Consequently, our ability to think abstractly
depends to a large extent on our experiences.
CC licensed content, Original

   Psychological Constructivism . Authored by: Nicole Arduini-
      Van Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Adolescent Psychology. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      adolescent. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Borich. License: CC BY:
      Attribution

   Lifespan Development. Provided by: Lumen Learning.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/wm-
      lifespandevelopment. License: CC BY: Attribution

   Semantic Networks and Spreading Activation. Authored by:
      Carole Yue. Provided by: Khan Academy. Retrieved from:
      https://youtu.be/ig-SVifJUKw. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

268 | Educational Psychology
CC licensed content, Specific attribution

   Schemas, Assimilation, and Accommodation. Authored by:
      Carole Yue. Provided by: Khan Academy. Retrieved from:
      https://youtu.be/xoAUMmZ0pzc. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

   Piaget's Stages of Cognitive Development. Authored by: Carole
      Yue. Provided by: Khan Academy . Retrieved from:
      https://youtu.be/Jt3-PIC2nCs. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

All rights reserved content

   Formal Operational Stage . Provided by: Udacity. Retrieved
      from: https://youtu.be/hvq7tq2fx1Y. License: Public Domain:
      No Known Copyright

   Perry's Stages of Intellectual Development. Provided by:
      Student Success Space. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/
      MbsqNn8O79o. License: All Rights Reserved

   Egocentrism. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/OinqFgsIbh0.
      License: All Rights Reserved

   Conservation Task. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/
      YtLEWVu815o. License: All Rights Reserved

   Deductive Reasoning. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/
      YJyuy4B2aKU. License: All Rights Reserved

   Sally-Anne Test. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/
      Q jkTQtggLH4. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright

   The Theory of Mind Test. Provided by: The Globe and Mail.
      Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/YGSj2zY2OEM. License: All
      Rights Reserved

                                                                Educational Psychology | 269
Social Constructivism:
Vygotsky's Theory

                              Lev Vygotsky (1896-1934) was a

                              Russian psychologist whose

                              sociocultural  theory

                              emphasizes the importance of

                              culture and interaction in the

                              development of cognitive

                              abilities. Vygotsky differed with

                              Piaget in that he believed that a

                              person has not only a set of

                              abilities but also a set of

                              potential abilities that can be

                              realized if given the proper

                              guidance from others. Vygotsky

                              developed theories on teaching

                              that have been adopted by

educators today.

Like Piaget, Vygotsky acknowledged intrinsic development, but

he argued that it is the language, writings, and concepts arising

from the culture that elicit the highest level of cognitive thinking

(Crain, 2005). He believed that social interactions with teachers and

more learned peers could facilitate a learner's potential for learning.

Without this interpersonal instruction, he believed learner's minds

would not advance very far as their knowledge would be based only

on their own discoveries.

Figure 3.7.1. Lev Vygotsky.

270 | Social Constructivism:
Vygotsky's Theory
Zone of Proximal Development and Scaffolding

Vygotsky's best-known concept is the Zone of Proximal
Development (ZPD). The ZPD has been defined as "the distance
between the actual developmental level as determined by
independent problem solving and the level of potential development
as determined through problem-solving under adult guidance, or
in collaboration with more capable peers" (Vygotsky, 1978, p. 86).
Vygotsky stated that learners should be taught in the ZPD. A good
teacher or more-knowledgable-other (MKO) identifies a learner's
ZPD and helps them stretch beyond it. Then the MKO gradually
withdraws support until the learner can perform the task unaided.
Other psychologists have applied the metaphor of scaffolds (the
temporary platforms on which construction workers stand) to
Vygotsky's theory. Scaffolding is the temporary support that a MKO
gives a learner to do a task.

                                         Social Constructivism: Vygotsky's Theory | 271
    Figure 3.7.2. Model of Vygotsky's zone of proximal development.

Thought and Speech

Do you ever talk to yourself? Why? Chances are, this occurs when
you are struggling with a problem, trying to remember something,
or feel very emotional about a situation. Children talk to themselves
too. Piaget interpreted this as egocentric speech or a practice
engaged in because of a child's inability to see things from another's
point of view. Vygotsky, however, believed that children talk to
themselves in order to solve problems or clarify thoughts. As
children learn to think in words, they do so aloud, referred to as
private speech, speech meant only for one's self. Eventually,
thinking out loud becomes thought accompanied by internal
speech, and talking to oneself becomes a practice only engaged in
when we are trying to learn something or remember something.
This inner speech is not as elaborate as the speech we use when
communicating with others (Vygotsky, 1962).

Implications for Education

Vygotsky's theories have been extremely influential for education.
Although Vygotsky himself never mentioned the term scaffolding,
it is often credited to him as a continuation of his ideas pertaining
to the way adults or other children can use guidance in order for
a child to work within their ZPD. (The term scaffolding was first
developed by Jerome Bruner, David Wood, and Gail Ross while
applying Vygotsky's concept of ZPD to various educational
contexts.)

   Educators often apply these concepts by assigning tasks that
students cannot do on their own, but which they can do with

272 | Social Constructivism: Vygotsky's Theory
assistance; they should provide just enough assistance so that
students learn to complete the tasks independently and then
provide an environment that enables students to do harder tasks
than would otherwise be possible. Teachers can also allow students
with more knowledge to assist students who need more guidance.
Especially in the context of collaborative learning, group members
who have higher levels of understanding can help the less advanced
members learn within their zone of proximal development.

     Vygotsky's Influence on Education

                          One or more interactive elements has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You can
              view them online here:
              https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=55#oe
              mbed-1

        Video 3.7.1. Vygotsky's Developmental Theory introduces
     the applications of the theory in the classroom.

Contrasting Piaget and Vygotsky

Piaget was highly critical of teacher-directed instruction believing
that teachers who take control of the child's learning place the
child into a passive role (Crain, 2005). Further, teachers may present
abstract ideas without the child's true understanding, and instead,

                                        Social Constructivism: Vygotsky's Theory | 273
they just repeat back what they heard. Piaget believed children
must be given opportunities to discover concepts on their own.
As previously stated, Vygotsky did not believe children could reach
a higher cognitive level without instruction from more learned
individuals. Who is correct? Both theories certainly contribute to
our understanding of how children learn.
CC licensed content, Original

   Social Constructivism . Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/
      chapter/social-constructivism-vygotskys-theory/. License:
      CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Adolescent Psychology. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      adolescent. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike

All rights reserved content

   Vygotsky's Developmental Theory. Provided by: Davidson
      Films. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/InzmZtHuZPY.
      License: All Rights Reserved

274 | Social Constructivism: Vygotsky's Theory
Information Processing
Theories

Information Processing is how individuals perceive, analyze,
manipulate, use, and remember information. Unlike Piaget's theory,
this approach proposes that cognitive development is ongoing and
gradual, not organized into distinct stages. The areas of basic
cognitive changes generally occur in five areas:

   Attention. Improvements are seen in selective attention(the
      process by which one focuses on one stimulus while tuning out
      another), as well as divided attention (the ability to pay
      attention to two or more stimuli at the same time).

   Memory. Improvements are seen in working memory and long-
      term memory.

   Processing Speed. With maturation, children think more
      quickly. Processing speed improves sharply between age five
      and middle adolescence, levels off around age 15, and does not
      appear to change between late adolescence and adulthood.

   Organization of Thinking. As children mature, they are more
      planful, they approach problems with strategy, and are flexible
      in using different strategies in different situations.

   Metacognition. Older children can think about thinking itself.
      This often involves monitoring one's own cognitive activity
      during the thinking process. Metacognitionprovides the ability
      to plan ahead, see the future consequences of an action, and
      provide alternative explanations of events.

                                                                          Information Processing
                                                                                      Theories | 275
Attention

Changes in attention have been described by many as the key to
changes in human memory (Nelson & Fivush, 2004; Posner &
Rothbart, 2007). However, attention is not a unified function; it is
comprised of sub-processes. Our ability to focus on a single task
or stimulus while ignoring distracting information, called selective
attention. There is a sharp improvement in selective attention from
age six into adolescence (Vakil, Blachstein, Sheinman, & Greenstein,
2009). Sustained attention is the ability to stay on task for long
periods. The ability to switch our focus between tasks or external
stimuli is called divided attention or multitasking, which also
improves into adolescence (Carlson, Zelazo, & Faja, 2013).

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=56#oembed-1

Video 3.8.1. Attention explains the ways in which we may attend or
fail to attend to stimuli.

Selective Attention

The ability with selective attention tasks improves through
childhood and into adolescence. While children's selective attention
may be inconsistent during middle childhood, adolescents
demonstrate the ability to select and prioritize stimuli for attention
reliably. The development of this ability is influenced by the child's

276 | Information Processing Theories
temperament (Rothbart & Rueda, 2005), the complexity of the
stimulus or task (Porporino, Shore, Iarocci & Burack, 2004), and may
be dependent on whether the stimuli are visual or auditory (Guy,
Rogers & Cornish, 2013). Guy et al. (2013) found that children's ability
to attend to visual information selectively outpaced that of auditory
stimuli. This change may explain why young children are not able to
hear the voice of the teacher over the cacophony of sounds in the
typical preschool classroom (Jones, Moore & Amitay, 2015). Jones
and his colleagues found that 4 to 7 year-olds could not filter out
background noise, especially when its frequencies were close in
sound to the target sound. In comparison, teens often performed
similarly to adults.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=56#oembed-2

Video 3.8.2. Theories of Selective Attention explains how and why we
attend to some stimuli and not others.

Sustained Attention

Most measures of sustained attention typically ask individuals to
spend several minutes focusing on one task, while waiting for an
infrequent event, while there are multiple distractors for several
minutes. Young children can retain their visual and auditory
attention for approximately 5 minutes if they are 5-years-old, 6
minutes if they are 6-years old, 7 minutes if they are 7-years-old,
and so on. If a task is interesting or novel, the child may sustain

                                                    Information Processing Theories | 277
attention substantially longer. Sustained attention improves to
around age 10, then plateaus with only small improvements to
adulthood. Common estimates of the attention span of healthy
teenagers and adults range from 10 to 20 minutes. There is some
debate as to whether attention is consistently sustained or whether
people repeatedly choose to re-focus on the same thing (Raichle,
1999) This ability to renew attention permits people to `pay
attention' to things that last for more than a few minutes.

   For time-on-task measurements, the type of activity used in the
test affects the results, as people are generally capable of a longer
attention span when they are doing something that they find
enjoyable or intrinsically motivating (Raichle,1999). Attention is also
increased if the person can perform the task fluently, compared to
a person who has difficulty performing the task, or to the same
person when he or she is just learning the task. Fatigue, hunger,
noise, and emotional stress reduce the time focused on the task.
After losing attention from a topic, a person may restore it by
resting, doing a different kind of activity, changing mental focus, or
deliberately choosing to re-focus on the first topic.

Divided Attention

Divided attention can be thought of in a couple of ways. We may
look at how well people can multitask, performing two or more tasks
simultaneously, or how people can alternate attention between two
or more tasks. For example, walking and talking to a friend at the
same time is multitasking, where trying to text while driving
requires us to alternate attention between two tasks quickly.

   Young children (age 3-4) have considerable difficulties in dividing
their attention between two tasks and often perform at levels
equivalent to our closest relative, the chimpanzee. However, by age
five, they have surpassed the chimp (Hermann, Misch, Hernandez-
Lloreda & Tomasello, 2015; Hermann & Tomasello, 2015). Despite

278 | Information Processing Theories
these improvements, 5-year-olds continue to perform below the
level of school-age children, adolescents, and adults. These skills
continue to develop into adolescence.

   Regardless of age, we have a limited capacity for attention, and
the division of attention is confined to that limitation. Our ability
to effectively multitask or alternate attention is dependent on the
automaticity or complexity of the task, but are also influenced by
conditions like anxiety, arousal, task difficulty, and skills (Sternberg
& Sternberg, 2012). Research shows that when dividing attention,
people are more apt to make mistakes or perform their tasks more
slowly (Matlin, 2013). Attention must be divided among all of the
component tasks to perform them.

   Classical research on divided attention involved people
performing simultaneous tasks, like reading stories while listening
and writing something else, or listening to two separate messages
through different ears. Subjects were often tested on their ability
to learn new information while engaged in multiple tasks. More
current research examines the performance of doing two tasks
simultaneously (Matlin, 2013), such as driving while performing
another task. This research reveals that the human attentional
system has limits for what it can process. For examples, driving
performance is worse while engaged in other tasks; drivers make
more mistakes, brake harder and later, get into more accidents,
veer into other lanes, and/or are less aware of their surroundings
when engaged in the previously discussed tasks (Collet et al., 2009;
Salvucci & Taatgen, 2008; Strayer & Drews, 2007).

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=56#oembed-3

                                                    Information Processing Theories | 279
Video 3.8.3. The Spotlight Model of Attention and Our
Ability to Multitask explains how we divide our
attention to attend to different tasks or
information.

Memory

Memory is an information processing system; therefore, we often
compare it to a computer. Memory is the set of processes used to
encode, store, and retrieve information over different periods of
time.

    Figure 3.8.1. Encoding involves the input of information into the
 memory system. Storage is the retention of encoded information.
 Retrieval, or getting the information out of memory and back into

                         awareness, is the third function.

Encoding

We get information into our brains through a process
called encoding, which is the input of information into the memory
system. Once we receive sensory information from the
environment, our brains label or code it. We organize the

280 | Information Processing Theories
information with other similar information and connect new
concepts to existing concepts. Encoding information occurs
through automatic processing and effortful processing.

   If someone asks you what you ate for lunch today, more than
likely, you could recall this information quite easily. This is known
as automatic processing, or the encoding of details like time, space,
frequency, and the meaning of words. Automatic processing is
usually done without any conscious awareness. Recalling the last
time you studied for a test is another example of automatic
processing. However, what about the actual test material that you
studied? It probably required a lot of work and attention on your
part in order to encode that information. This is known as effortful
processing.

   There are three types of encoding. The encoding of words and
their meaning is known as semantic encoding. It was first
demonstrated by William Bousfield (1935) in an experiment in which
he asked people to memorize words. The 60 words were divided
into 4 categories of meaning, although the participants did not
know this because the words were randomly presented. When they
were asked to remember the words, they tended to recall them in
categories, showing that they paid attention to the meanings of the
words as they learned them.

   Visual encoding is the encoding of images, and acoustic
encoding is the encoding of sounds, words in particular. To see
how visual encoding works, read over this list of words: car, level,
dog, truth, book, value. If you were asked later to recall the words
from this list, which ones do you think you'd most likely remember?
You would probably have an easier time recalling the words car,
dog, and book, and a more difficult time recalling the words level,
truth, and value. Why is this? Because you can recall images (mental
pictures) more easily than words alone. When you read the
words car, dog, and book, you created images of these things in your
mind. These are concrete, high-imagery words. On the other hand,
abstract words like level, truth, and value are low-imagery words.

                                                    Information Processing Theories | 281
High-imagery words are encoded both visually and semantically
(Paivio, 1986), thus building a more reliable memory.

   Now let us turn our attention to acoustic encoding. You are
driving in your car, and a song comes on the radio that you have not
heard in at least ten years, but you sing along, recalling every word.
In the United States, children often learn the alphabet through
song, and they learn the number of days in each month through
rhyme: "Thirty days hath September, / April, June, and November;
/ All the rest have thirty-one, / Save February, with twenty-eight
days clear, / And twenty-nine each leap year." These lessons are
easy to remember because of acoustic encoding. We encode the
sounds the words make. This is one of the reasons why much of
what we teach young children is done through song, rhyme, and
rhythm.

   Which of the three types of encoding do you think would give
you the best memory of verbal information? Some years ago,
psychologists Fergus Craik and Endel Tulving (1975) conducted a
series of experiments to find out. Participants were given words
along with questions about them. The questions required the
participants to process the words at one of the three levels. The
visual processing questions included such things as asking the
participants about the font of the letters. The acoustic processing
questions asked the participants about the sound or rhyming of
the words, and the semantic processing questions asked the
participants about the meaning of the words. After participants
were presented with the words and questions, they were given an
unexpected recall or recognition task.

   Words that had been encoded semantically were better
remembered than those encoded visually or acoustically. Semantic
encoding involves a deeper level of processing than shallower visual
or acoustic encoding. Craik and Tulving concluded that we process
verbal information best through semantic encoding, especially if we
apply what is called the self-reference effect. The self-reference
effect is the tendency for an individual to have a better memory for
information that relates to oneself in comparison to material that

282 | Information Processing Theories
has less personal relevance (Rogers, Kuiper & Kirker, 1977). Could
semantic encoding be beneficial to you as you attempt to memorize
the concepts in this chapter?

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=56#oembed-4

Video 3.8.4. Encoding Strategies discusses various encoding
techniques that help us store information in memory.

Storage

Once the information has been encoded, we have to retain it
somehow. Our brains take the encoded information and place it
in storage. Storage is the creation of a permanent record of
information.

   In order for a memory to go into storage (i.e., long-term memory),
it has to pass through three distinct stages: Sensory
Memory, Short-Term Memory, and finally, Long-Term Memory.
These stages were first proposed by Richard Atkinson and
Richard Shiffrin (1968). Their model of human memory, called
Atkinson-Shiffrin (A-S) or three-box model, is based on the belief
that we process memories in the same way that a computer
processes information.

                                                    Information Processing Theories | 283
         Figure 3.8.2. According to the Atkinson-Shiffrin model of
memory, information passes through three distinct stages in order

                   for it to be stored in long-term memory.
   The three-box is just one model of memory. Others, such as
Baddeley and Hitch (1974), have proposed a model where short-term
memory itself has different forms. In this model, storing memories
in short-term memory is like opening different files on a computer
and adding information. The type of short-term memory (or
computer file) depends on the type of information received. There
are memories in visual-spatial form, as well as memories of spoken
or written material, and they are stored in three short-term
systems: a visuospatial sketchpad, an episodic buffer, and a
phonological loop. According to Baddeley and Hitch, a central
executive part of memory supervises or controls the flow of
information to and from the three short-term systems.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=56#oembed-5

284 | Information Processing Theories
Video 3.8.5. Information Processing Model: Sensory, Working, and
Long Term Memory explains the three-box model of memory.

Sensory Memory

In the Atkinson-Shiffrin model, stimuli from the environment are
processed first in sensory memory: storage of brief sensory events,
such as sights, sounds, and tastes. It is very brief storage, essentially
long enough for the brain to register and start processing the
information. Sensory memory can hold visual information for about
half of a second and auditory information for a few seconds. Unlike
other cognitive processes, it seems that sensory memory does not
change from infancy (Siegler, 1998). However, without the ability
to encode the information, it fades from sensory memory quickly
(Papalia et al., 2008). As children and adolescence become more
capable of encoding, they can take more advantage of the
information available to them in the sensory memory.

   We are constantly bombarded with sensory information. We
cannot absorb all of it, or even most of it. Moreover, most of it
has no impact on our lives. For example, what was your professor
wearing the last class period? As long as the professor was dressed
appropriately, it does not matter what she was wearing. Sensory
information about sights, sounds, smells, and even textures, which
we do not view as valuable information, we discard. If we view
something as valuable, the information will move into our short-
term memory system.

   One study of sensory memory researched the significance of
valuable information on short-term memory storage. J. R. Stroop
discovered a memory phenomenon in the 1930s: you will name a
color more easily if it appears printed in that color, which is called
the Stroop effect. In other words, the word "red" will be named
more quickly, regardless of the color the word appears in, than any
word that is colored red. Try an experiment: name the colors of the

                                                    Information Processing Theories | 285
words you are given in Figure 3.8.3. Do not read the words, but say
the color the word is printed in. For example, upon seeing the word
"yellow" in green print, you should say "green," not "yellow." This
experiment is fun, but it is not as easy as it seems.

   Figure 3.8.3. The Stroop effect describes why it is difficult for us
    to name a color when the word and the color of the word are

                                         different.

Short-Term (Working) Memory

Short-term memory (STM), also called working memory, is a
temporary storage system that processes incoming sensory
memory. Short-term memory is the bridge between information
taken in through sensory memory and the more permanent storage
of information in long-term memory. Information that is not moved
along from short-term memory to long-term memory will be
forgotten. Short-term memory is also called working memory
because this is the system where the "work" of memory happens.
If you are retrieving information from your long-term memory, you
286 | Information Processing Theories
are moving it into your working memory, where you can think about
that information.

   Think of working memory as the information you have displayed
on your computer screen--a document, a spreadsheet, or a web
page. Then, the information in this memory system goes to long-
term memory (you save it to your hard drive), or it is discarded (you
delete a document or close a web browser). This step of rehearsal,
the conscious repetition of information to be remembered, to move
STM into long-term memory is called memory consolidation.

   You may find yourself asking, "How much information can our
memory handle at once?" To explore the capacity and duration of
your short-term memory, have a partner read the strings of random
numbers (Figure 3.8.4) out loud to you, beginning each string by
saying, "Ready?" and ending each by saying, "Recall," at which point
you should try to write down the string of numbers from memory.

       Figure 3.8.4. Work through this series of numbers using the
 recall exercise explained above to determine the longest string of

                              digits that you can store.
   Note the longest string at which you got the series correct. For
most people, this will be close to 7. Recall is somewhat better for
random numbers than for random letters (Jacobs, 1887), and also
often slightly better for information we hear (acoustic encoding)
rather than see (visual encoding) (Anderson, 1969).
   Short-term or working memory often requires conscious effort
and adequate use of attention to function effectively. As you read
earlier, children struggle with many aspects of attention, and this
greatly diminishes their ability to juggle several pieces of
information in memory consciously. The capacity of working
memory is the amount of information someone can hold in

                                                    Information Processing Theories | 287
consciousness is smaller in young children than in older children
and adults. The typical 5-year-old can hold only a four-digit number
active. The typical adult and teenager can hold a seven-digit
number active in their short-term memory. The capacity of working
memory expands during middle and late childhood, and research
has suggested that both an increase in processing speed and the
ability to inhibit irrelevant information from entering memory are
contributing to the greater efficiency of working memory during
this age (de Ribaupierre, 2002). Changes in myelination and synaptic
pruning in the cortex are likely behind the increase in processing
speed and ability to filter out irrelevant stimuli (Kail, McBride-
chang, Ferrer, Cho, & Shu, 2013).

   Short-term memory can only hold information for a short period
of time, without rehearsal. For a typical adolescent or adult, storage
lasts about 20-30 seconds. Older children and adults use mental
strategies to aid their memory performance. For instance, simple
rote rehearsal may be used to commit information to memory.
Young children often do not rehearse unless reminded to do so, and
when they do rehearse, they often fail to use clustering rehearsal. In
clustering rehearsal, the person rehearses previous material while
adding in additional information. If a list of words is read out loud
to you, you are likely to rehearse each word as you hear it along
with any previous words you were given. Young children will repeat
each word they hear, but often fail to repeat the prior words in the
list. In Schneider, Kron-Sperl, and Hunnerkopf's (2009) longitudinal
study of 102 kindergarten children, the majority of children used
no strategy to remember information, a finding that was consistent
with previous research. As a result, their memory performance was
reduced when compared to their abilities as they aged and started
to use more effective memory strategies.

Executive Functions

Changes in attention and the working memory system also involve

288 | Information Processing Theories
changes in executive function. Executive function (ef) refers to
self-regulatory processes, such as the ability to inhibit behavior
or cognitive flexibility, that enable adaptive responses to new
situations or to reach a specific goal. Executive function skills
gradually emerge during early childhood and continue to develop
throughout childhood and adolescence. Like many cognitive
changes, brain maturation, especially the prefrontal cortex, along
with experience, influence the development of executive function
skills. A child, whose parents are more warm and responsive, use
scaffolding when the child is trying to solve a problem, and who
provide cognitively stimulating environments for the child show
higher executive function skills (Fay-Stammbach, Hawes &
Meredith, 2014). For instance, scaffolding was positively correlated
with greater cognitive flexibility at age two and inhibitory control at
age four (Bibok, Carpendale & Mller, 2009).

STM and Learning

Individuals differ in their memory abilities, and these differences
predict academic performance (Prebler, Krajewski, & Hasselhorn,
2013). Children with learning disabilities in math and reading often
have difficulties with working memory (Alloway, 2009). They may
struggle with following the directions of an assignment. When a task
calls for multiple steps, children with poor working memory may
miss steps because they may lose track of where they are in the
task. Adults working with such children may need to communicate:
using more familiar vocabulary, using shorter sentences, repeating
task instructions more frequently, and breaking more complex tasks
into smaller, more manageable steps. Some studies have also shown
that more intensive training of working memory strategies, such
as chunking, aid in improving the capacity of working memory in
children with poor working memory (Alloway, Bibile, & Lau, 2013).

                                                    Information Processing Theories | 289
Long-term Memory

Long-term memory (LTM) is the continuous storage of information.
Unlike short-term memory, the storage capacity of LTM has no
real limits. It encompasses all the things you can remember what
happened more than just a few minutes ago to all of the things that
you can remember what happened days, weeks, and years ago. In
keeping with the computer analogy, the information in your LTM
would be like the information you have saved on the hard drive. It is
not there on your desktop (your short-term memory), but you can
pull up this information when you want it, at least most of the time.
Not all long-term memories are strong memories. Some memories
can only be recalled through prompts. For example, you might easily
recall a fact-- "What is the capital of the United States?"--or a
procedure--"How do you ride a bike?"--but you might struggle to
recall the name of the restaurant you had dinner when you were
on vacation in France last summer. A prompt, such as that the
restaurant was named after its owner, who spoke to you about
your shared interest in soccer, may help you recall the name of the
restaurant.

   Long-term memory is divided into two types: explicit and implicit
(Figure 3.8.5). Understanding the different types is important
because a person's age or particular types of brain trauma or
disorders can leave certain types of LTM intact while having
disastrous consequences for other types. Explicit memories, also
called declarative memories, are those we consciously try to
remember and recall. For example, if you are studying for your
chemistry exam, the material you are learning will be part of your
explicit memory. (Note: Sometimes, but not always, the terms
explicit memory and declarative memory are used interchangeably.)

   Implicit memories, also called non-declarative memories, are
memories that are not part of our consciousness. They are
memories formed from behaviors. Implicit memory is also called
non-declarative memory.

290 | Information Processing Theories
    Figure 3.8.5. There are two components of long-term memory:
     explicit and implicit. Explicit memory includes episodic and
 semantic memory. Implicit memory includes procedural memory

                  and things learned through conditioning.
   Procedural memory is a type of implicit memory: it stores
information about how to do things. It is the memory for skilled
actions, such as how to brush your teeth, how to drive a car, how
to swim the crawl (freestyle) stroke. If you are learning how to swim
freestyle, you practice the stroke: how to move your arms, how to
turn your head to alternate breathing from side to side, and how to
kick your legs. You would practice this many times until you become
good at it. Once you learn how to swim freestyle and your body
knows how to move through the water, you will never forget how
to swim freestyle, even if you do not swim for a couple of decades.
Similarly, if you present an accomplished guitarist with a guitar,
even if he has not played in a long time, he will still be able to play
quite well.

                                                    Information Processing Theories | 291
   Explicit or declarative memory has to do with the storage of facts
and events we personally experienced. Explicit (declarative)
memory has two parts: semantic memory and episodic memory.
Semantic means having to do with language and knowledge about
language. An example would be the question, "what
does argumentative mean?" Stored in our semantic memory is
knowledge about words, concepts, and language-based knowledge
and facts. For example, answers to the following questions are
stored in your semantic memory:

   Who was the first President of the United States?
   What is democracy?
   What is the longest river in the world?

Episodic memory is information about events we have personally
experienced. The concept of episodic memory was first proposed
about 40 years ago (Tulving, 1972). Since then, Tulving and others
have looked at the scientific evidence and reformulated the theory.
Currently, scientists believe that episodic memory is memory about
happenings in particular places at particular times, the what, where,
and when of an event (Tulving, 2002). It involves recollection of
visual imagery as well as the feeling of familiarity (Hassabis &
Maguire, 2007).

   A component of episodic memory is autobiographical memory,
or our personal narrative. Adolescents and adults rarely remember
events from the first few years of life. We refer to this normal
experience as infantile amnesia. In other words, we lack
autobiographical memories from our experiences as an infant,
toddler, and very young preschooler. Several factors contribute to
the emergence of autobiographical memory, including brain
maturation, improvements in language, opportunities to talk about
experiences with parents and others, the development of theory
of mind, and a representation of "self" (Nelson & Fivush, 2004).
Two-year-olds do remember fragments of personal experiences,
but these are rarely coherent accounts of past events (Nelson &

292 | Information Processing Theories
Ross, 1980). Between 2 and 2  years of age, children can provide
more information about past experiences. However, these
recollections require considerable prodding by adults (Nelson &
Fivush, 2004). Over the next few years, children will form more
detailed autobiographical memories and engage in more reflection
of the past.

Retrieval

So you have worked hard to encode (via effortful processing) and
store some important information for your upcoming final exam.
How do you get that information back out of storage when you need
it? The act of getting information out of memory storage and back
into conscious awareness is known as retrieval. This process would
be similar to finding and opening a paper you had previously saved
on your computer's hard drive. Now it is back on your desktop, and
you can work with it again. Our ability to retrieve information from
long-term memory is vital to our everyday functioning. You must be
able to retrieve information from memory in order to do everything
from knowing how to brush your hair and teeth, to driving to work,
to knowing how to perform your job once you get there.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=56#oembed-6

Video 3.8.6. Retrieval Cues discusses how cues prompt memory
retrieval.

   There are three ways to retrieve information from long-term

                                                    Information Processing Theories | 293
memory storage systems: recall, recognition, and
relearning. Recall is what we most often think about when we talk
about memory retrieval: it means you can access information
without cues. For example, you would use recall for an essay
test. Recognition happens when you identify information that you
have previously learned after re-encountering it. It involves a
process of comparison. When you take a multiple-choice test, you
are relying on recognition to help you choose the correct answer.
Here is another example. Let us say you graduated from high school
ten years ago, and you have returned to your hometown for your
10-year reunion. You may not be able to recall all of your classmates,
but you recognize many of them based on their yearbook photos.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=56#oembed-7

Video 3.8.7. Free Recall, Cued Recall, and Recognition discusses the
various ways in which information can be retrieved from long term
memory.

   The third form of retrieval is relearning, and it is just as it sounds.
It involves learning information that you previously learned.
Whitney took Spanish in high school, but after high school, she
did not have the opportunity to speak Spanish. Whitney is now 31,
and her company has offered her an opportunity to work in their
Mexico City office. In order to prepare herself, she enrolls in a
Spanish course at the local community center. She is surprised at
how quickly she can pick up the language after not speaking it for 13
years; this is an example of relearning.

294 | Information Processing Theories
Organization of Thinking

During middle childhood and adolescence, young people can learn
and remember more due to improvements in the way they attend
to and store information. As people learn more about the world,
they develop more categories for concepts and learn more efficient
strategies for storing and retrieving information. One significant
reason is that they continue to have more experiences on which
to tie new information. In other words, their knowledge base,
knowledge in particular areas that makes learning new information
easier, expands (Berger, 2014).

Cognitive control

As noted earlier, executive functions, such as attention, increases
in working memory, and cognitive flexibility, have been steadily
improving since early childhood. Studies have found that executive
function is very competent in adolescence. However, self-
regulation, or the ability to control impulses, may still fail. A failure
in self-regulation is especially true when there is high stress or high
demand on mental functions (Luciano & Collins, 2012). While high
stress or demand may tax even an adult's self-regulatory abilities,
neurological changes in the adolescent brain may make teens
particularly prone to more risky decision-making under these
conditions.

Inductive and Deductive Reasoning

Inductive reasoning emerges in childhood and is a type of
reasoning that is sometimes characterized as "bottom-up-

                                                    Information Processing Theories | 295
processing" in which specific observations, or specific comments
from those in authority, may be used to draw general conclusions.
However, in inductive reasoning, the veracity of the information
that created the general conclusion does not guarantee the
accuracy of that conclusion. For instance, a child who has only
observed thunder on summer days may conclude that it only
thunders in the summer. In contrast, deductive reasoning,
sometimes called "top-down-processing," emerges in adolescence.
This type of reasoning starts with some overarching principle and,
based on this, propose specific conclusions. Deductive reasoning
guarantees an accurate conclusion if the premises on which it is
based are accurate.

       Figure 3.8.6. Models of inductive and deductive reasoning.

Intuitive versus Analytic Thinking

Cognitive psychologists often refer to intuitive and analytic thought
as the Dual-Process Model, the notion that humans have two
296 | Information Processing Theories
distinct networks for processing information (Albert & Steinberg,
2011). Intuitive thought is automatic, unconscious, and fast
(Kahneman, 2011), and it is more experiential and emotional. In
contrast, Analytic thought is deliberate, conscious, and rational.
While these systems interact, they are distinct (Kuhn, 2013).
Intuitive thought is easier and more commonly used in everyday life.
It is also more commonly used by children and teens than by adults
(Klaczynski, 2001). The quickness of adolescent thought, along with
the maturation of the limbic system, may make teens more prone to
emotional, intuitive thinking than adults.

Critical Thinking

According to Bruning et al. (2004), there is a debate in U.S. education
as to whether schools should teach students what to think or how to
think. Critical thinking, or a detailed examination of beliefs, courses
of action, and evidence, involves teaching children how to think.
The purpose of critical thinking is to evaluate information in ways
that help us make informed decisions. Critical thinking involves
better understanding a problem through gathering, evaluating, and
selecting information, and also by considering many possible
solutions. Ennis (1987) identified several skills useful in critical
thinking. These include: Analyzing arguments, clarifying
information, judging the credibility of a source, making value
judgments, and deciding on an action. Metacognition is essential to
critical thinking because it allows us to reflect on the information as
we make decisions.

Metacognition

As children mature through middle and late childhood and into

                                                    Information Processing Theories | 297
adolescence, they have a better understanding of how well they
are performing a task and the level of difficulty of a task. As they
become more realistic about their abilities, they can adapt studying
strategies to meet those needs. Young children spend as much time
on an unimportant aspect of a problem as they do on the main point,
while older children start to learn to prioritize and gauge what is
significant and what is not. As a result, they develop metacognition.
Metacognition refers to the knowledge we have about our thinking
and our ability to use this awareness to regulate our cognitive
processes (Bruning, Schraw, Norby, & Ronning, 2004).

   Bjorklund (2005) describes a developmental progression in the
acquisition and use of memory strategies. Such strategies are often
lacking in younger children but increase in frequency as children
progress through elementary school. Examples of memory
strategies include rehearsing information you wish to recall,
visualizing and organizing information, creating rhymes, such as
"i" before "e" except after "c," or inventing acronyms, such as
"ROYGBIV" to remember the colors of the rainbow. Schneider,
Kron-Sperl, and hnnerkopf (2009) reported a steady increase in
the use of memory strategies from ages six to ten in their
longitudinal study (see table 3.8.1). Moreover, by age ten, many
children were using two or more memory strategies to help them
recall information. Schneider and colleagues found that there were
considerable individual differences at each age in the use of
strategies and that children who utilized more strategies had better
memory performance than their same-aged peers.

    Table 3.8.1. Percentage of children who did not use any memory
                                   strategies by age.

298 | Information Processing Theories
   A person may experience three deficiencies in their use of
memory strategies. A mediation deficiency occurs when a person
does not grasp the strategy being taught, and thus, does not benefit
from its use. If you do not understand why using an acronym might
be helpful, or how to create an acronym, the strategy is not likely
to help you. In a production deficiency, the person does not
spontaneously use a memory strategy and has to be prompted to
do so. In this case, the person knows the strategy and is more
than capable of using it, but they fail to "produce" the strategy
on their own. For example, a child might know how to make a
list but may fail to do this to help them remember what to bring
on a family vacation. A utilization deficiency refers to a person
using an appropriate strategy, but it fails to aid their performance.
Utilization deficiency is common in the early stages of learning a
new memory strategy (Schneider & Pressley, 1997; miller, 2000).
Until the use of the strategy becomes automatic, it may slow down
the learning process, as space is taken up in memory by the strategy
itself. Initially, children may get frustrated because their memory
performance may seem worse when they try to use the new
strategy. Once children become more adept at using the strategy,
their memory performance will improve. Sodian and Schneider
(1999) found that new memory strategies acquired before age 8
often show utilization deficiencies, with there being a gradual
improvement in the child's use of the strategy. In contrast,

                                                   Information Processing Theories | 299
strategies acquired after this age often followed an "all-or-nothing"
principle in which improvement was not gradual, but abrupt.
CC licensed content, Original

   Information Processing Theory. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-
      Van Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/
      chapter/information-processing-theories/. License: CC BY-
      NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Adolescent Psychology. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      adolescent. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Specific attribution

   Divided Attention, Selective Attention, Inattentional Blindness,
      & Change Blindness. Authored by: Carole Yue. Provided by:
      Khan Academy. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/
      s4JBqLoY3tY. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike

   Theories of Selective Attention. Authored by: Carole Yue.
      Provided by: Khan Academy . Retrieved from:
      https://youtu.be/qpsaHE_uZic. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

   The Spotlight Model of Attention and Our Ability to Multitask.
      Provided by: Khan Academy. Retrieved from:
      https://youtu.be/THJgaznSBu8. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

   Information Processing Model: Sensory, Working, and Long
      Term Memory. Authored by: Carole Yue. Provided by: Khan

300 | Information Processing Theories
   Academy. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/pMMRE4Q2FGk.
   License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
 Free Recall, Cued Recall, and Recognition. Authored by: Carole
   Yue. Provided by: Khan Academy. Retrieved from:
   https://youtu.be/Uhyk2bRTguI. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
   Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

                                                 Information Processing Theories | 301
Language Development

Language is a system of communication that uses symbols in a
regular way to create meaning. Language gives us the ability to
communicate our intelligence to others by talking, reading, and
writing. Although other species have at least some ability to
communicate, none of them have language.
If you've ever tried to learn a new language, you know it's not easy.
There are new rules of grammar that come with many exceptions,
new sounds that are hard to make, endless lists of vocabulary to
commit to memory and so on. And yet, you managed to learn the
basics of your very first language around the time you were two
years old; no textbooks in sight.
Not only are children able to absorb the complicated rules of
grammar without formal teaching, they do so from a limited
vocabulary. Regardless of how much a child is spoken to, they will
not hear every possible word and sentence by the time they begin
speaking. Yet when they do start to talk, children begin to follow
grammatical rules and apply them to form new, innovative phrases.
This level of information processing is incredibly impressive in
anyone, much less someone still figuring out counting and
skipping!

Given the remarkable complexity of a language, one might expect
that mastering a language would be an especially arduous task;
indeed, for those of us trying to learn a second language as adults,
this might seem to be true. However, young children master
language very quickly with relative ease. B. F. Skinner (1957)
proposed that language is learned through reinforcement. Noam
Chomsky (1965) criticized this behaviorist approach, asserting
instead that the mechanisms underlying language acquisition are
biologically determined. The use of language develops in the
absence of formal instruction and appears to follow a very similar
pattern in children from vastly different cultures and backgrounds.

302 | Language Development
It would seem, therefore, that we are born with a biological
predisposition to acquire a language (Chomsky, 1965; Fernndez &
Cairns, 2011). Moreover, it appears that there is a critical period
for language acquisition, such that this proficiency at acquiring
language is maximal early in life; generally, as people age, the ease
with which they acquire and master new languages diminishes
(Johnson & Newport, 1989; Lenneberg, 1967; Singleton, 1995).

   There are many components of language that will now be
reviewed.

The Structures of Language

All languages have underlying structural rules that make meaningful
communication possible. Every language is different. In English, an
adjective comes before a noun ("red house"), whereas in Spanish,
the adjective comes after ("casa [house] roja [red].") In German, you
can put noun after noun together to form giant compound words;
in Chinese, the pitch of your voice determines the meaning of your
words; in American Sign Language, you can convey full, grammatical
sentences with tense and aspect by moving your hands and face. But
all languages have structural underpinnings that make them logical
for the people who speak and understand them.

                                                                Language Development | 303
      Figure 3.9.1. Major levels of linguistic structure. This diagram
 outlines the relationship between types of linguistic units. Speech
sounds make up phonemes, which make up words. Words make up
 sentences, which have literal meanings and contextual meanings.

Phoneme

A phoneme is the smallest unit of sound that makes a meaningful
difference in a language. This small sound may cause a change of
meaning within a language, but that doesn't have meaning by itself.
For example, in the words "bake" and "brake," only one phoneme

304 | Language Development
has been altered, but a change in meaning has been triggered. The
phoneme /r/ has no meaning on its own, but by appearing in
the word it has completely changed the word's meaning. In spoken
languages, phonemes are produced by the positions and
movements of the vocal tract, including our lips, teeth, tongue, vocal
cords, and throat, whereas in sign languages phonemes are defined
by the shapes and movement of the hands.

   Phonemes correspond to the sounds of the alphabet, although
there is not always a one-to-one relationship between a letter and
a phoneme (the sound made when you say the word). For example,
the word "dog" has three phonemes: /d/, /o/, and / g /. However,
the word "shape," despite having five letters, has only three
phonemes: /sh/, /long-a/, and /p/. There are hundreds of unique
phonemes that can be made by human speakers, but most languages
only use a small subset of the possibilities. English contains about
45 phonemes, whereas other languages have as few as 15 and others
more than 60. The Hawaiian language contains fewer phonemes as
it includes only 5 vowels (a, e, i, o, and u) and 7 consonants (h, k, l, m,
n, p, and w).

   Babies can discriminate among the sounds that make up a
language (for example, they can tell the difference between the "s"
in vision and the "ss" in fission); early on, they can differentiate
between the sounds of all human languages, even those that do not
occur in the languages that are used in their environment. However,
they lose their ability to do so as they get older; by 10 months of age,
they can only discriminate among those phonemes that are used
in the language or languages in their environments (Jensen, 2011;
Werker & Lalonde, 1988; Werker & Tees, 1984). Phonemes that were
initially differentiated come to be treated as equivalent (Werker &
Tees, 2002).

                                                                Language Development | 305
Morpheme

Whereas phonemes are the smallest units of sound in language,
a morpheme is a string of one or more phonemes that makes up the
smallest units of meaning in a language. Thus, a morpheme is a
series of phonemes that has a special meaning. If a morpheme is
altered in any way, the entire meaning of the word can be changed.
Some morphemes are individual words (such as "eat" or "water").
These are known as free morphemes because they can exist on their
own. Other morphemes are prefixes, suffixes, or other linguistic
pieces that aren't full words on their own but do affect meaning
(such as the "-s" at the end of "cats" or the "re-" at the beginning
of "redo.") Because these morphemes must be attached to another
word to have meaning, they are called bound morphemes.

Semantics

Semantics refers to the set of rules we use to obtain meaning from
morphemes. For example, adding "ed" to the end of a verb makes it
past tense.

Grammar and Syntax

Because all language obeys a set of combinatory rules, we can
communicate an infinite number of concepts. While every language
has a different set of rules, all languages do obey rules. These rules
are known as grammar. Speakers of a language have internalized the
rules and exceptions for that language's grammar. There are rules
for every level of language--word formation (for example, native
speakers of English have internalized the general rule that -ed is the
ending for past-tense verbs, so even when they encounter a brand-

306 | Language Development
new verb, they automatically know how to put it into past tense);
phrase formation (for example, knowing that when you use the verb
"buy," it needs a subject and an object; "She buys" is wrong, but "She
buys a gift" is okay); and sentence formation.

   Syntax is the set of rules of a language by which we construct
sentences. Each language has a different syntax. The syntax of the
English language requires that each sentence have a noun and a
verb, each of which may be modified by adjectives and adverbs.
Some syntaxes make use of the order in which words appear. For
example, in English "The man bites the dog" is different from "The
dog bites the man."

Pragmatics

The social side of language is expressed through pragmatics, or how
we communicate effectively and appropriately with others. Examples
of pragmatics include turn- taking, staying on topic, volume and
tone of voice, and appropriate eye contact. Lastly, words do not
possess fixed meanings but change their interpretation as a
function of the context in which they are spoken. We use contextual
information, the information surrounding language, to help us
interpret it. Examples of contextual information include our
knowledge and nonverbal expressions such as facial expressions,
postures, and gestures. Misunderstandings can easily arise if people
are not attentive to contextual information or if some of it is
missing, such as it may be in newspaper headlines or in text
messages.

                                                                 Language Development | 307
     Pre-Linguistic Pragmatics

        Video 3.9.1. Talking Twin Babies demonstrates how
     children can learn and use pragmatics even before they can
     produce language.

                          One or more interactive elements has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You can
              view them online here:
              https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=57#oe
              mbed-2

Language Development Progression

Children begin to learn about language from a very
early age (Table 3.9.1). In fact, it appears that this
is occurring even before we are born. Newborns
show a preference for their mother's voice and
appear to be able to discriminate between the
language spoken by their mother and other
languages. Babies are also attuned to the languages
being used around them and show preferences for
videos of faces that are moving in synchrony with
the audio of spoken language versus videos that
do not synchronize with the audio (Blossom &

308 | Language Development
Morgan, 2006; Pickens, 1994; Spelke & Cortelyou,
1981).

                                                                Language Development | 309
   Table 3.9.1. Stages of Language and Communication Development

Stage Age     Developmental Language and Communication

1  0-3 months Reflexive communication

2  3-8 months Reflexive communication; interest in others

3  8-12 months Intentional communication; sociability

4  12-18 months First words

5  18-24 months Simple sentences of two words

6  2-3 years  Sentences of three or more words

7  3-5 years  Complex sentences; has conversations

Intentional Vocalizations

In terms of producing spoken language, babies begin to coo almost
immediately. Cooing is a one-syllable combination of a consonant
and a vowel sound (e.g., coo or ba). Interestingly, babies replicate
sounds from their own languages. A baby whose parents speak
French will coo in a different tone than a baby whose parents speak
Spanish or Urdu. These gurgling, musical vocalizations can serve as
a source of entertainment to an infant who has been laid down for a
nap or seated in a carrier on a car ride. Cooing serves as practice for
vocalization, as well as the infant hears the sound of his or her own
voice and tries to repeat sounds that are entertaining. Infants also
begin to learn the pace and pause of conversation as they alternate
their vocalization with that of someone else and then take their turn
again when the other person's vocalization has stopped.

   At about four to six months of age, infants begin making even
more elaborate vocalizations that include the sounds required for
any language. Guttural sounds, clicks, consonants, and vowel
sounds stand ready to equip the child with the ability to repeat
whatever sounds are characteristic of the language heard.

                                                                                                    | 311
Eventually, these sounds will no longer be used as the infant grows
more accustomed to a particular language.

   At about 7 months, infants begin Babbling, engaging in intentional
vocalizations that lack specific meaning and comprise a consonant-
vowel repeated sequence, such as ma-ma-ma, da-da- da. Children
babble as practice in creating specific sounds, and by the time
they are 1 year old, the babbling uses primarily the sounds of the
language that they are learning (de Boysson- Bardies, Sagart, &
Durand, 1984). These vocalizations have a conversational tone that
sounds meaningful even though it isn't. Babbling also helps children
understand the social, communicative function of language.
Children who are exposed to sign language babble in sign by making
hand movements that represent real language (Petitto &
Marentette, 1991).

Gesturing

Children communicate information through gesturing long before
they speak, and there is some evidence that gesture usage predicts
subsequent language development (Iverson & Goldin-Meadow,
2005). Deaf babies also use gestures to communicate wants,
reactions, and feelings. Because gesturing seems to be easier than
vocalization for some toddlers, sign language is sometimes taught
to enhance one's ability to communicate by making use of the ease
of gesturing. The rhythm and pattern of language is used when deaf
babies sign just as it is when hearing babies babble.

312 |
     Baby Sign Lanugage

        Video 3.9.2. Baby Sign Language demonstrates how
     infants can be taught sign language to communicate before
     they can speak. Most infants will begin gesturing on their
     own around 10 months old, but infants can be taught
     gestures, like signs, before they are 6 months old.

                          One or more interactive elements has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You can
              view them online here:
              https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=57#oe
              mbed-3

Receptive Language

At around ten months of age, the infant can understand more than
he or she can say, which is referred to as receptive language. You
may have experienced this phenomenon as well if you have ever
tried to learn a second language. You may have been able to follow
a conversation more easily than contribute to it. One of the first
words that children understand is their own name, usually by about
6 months, followed by commonly used words like "bottle," "mama,"
and "doggie" by 10 to 12 months (Mandel, Jusczyk, & Pisoni, 1995).

   Infants shake their head "no" around 6-9 months, and they
respond to verbal requests to do things like "wave bye-bye" or "blow

                                                                                                    | 313
a kiss" around 9-12 months. Children also use contextual
information, particularly the cues that parents provide, to help them
learn language. Children learn that people are usually referring to
things that they are looking at when they are speaking (Baldwin,
1993), and that that the speaker's emotional expressions are related
to the content of their speech.

Productive Language

Children begin using their first words at about 12 or 13 months of
age and may use partial words to convey thoughts at even younger
ages. These one-word expressions are referred to as holophrasic
speech. For example, the child may say "ju" for the word "juice"
and use this sound when referring to a bottle. The listener must
interpret the meaning of the holophrase, and when this is someone
who has spent time with the child, interpretation is not too difficult.
But, someone who has not been around the child will have trouble
knowing what is meant. Imagine the parent who to a friend
exclaims, "Ezra's talking all the time now!" The friend hears only "ju
da ga" to which the parent explains means, "I want some milk when
I go with Daddy."

First words and Cultural Influences

First words if the child is using English tend to be nouns. The child
labels objects such as cup, ball, or other items that they regularly
interact with. In a verb-friendly language such as Chinese, however,
children may learn more verbs. This may also be due to the different
emphasis given to objects based on culture. Chinese children may
be taught to notice action and relationships between objects, while
children from the United States may be taught to name an object
and its qualities (color, texture, size, etc.). These differences can be

314 |
seen when comparing interpretations of art by older students from
China and the United States.

Two-word Sentences and Telegraphic Speech

By the time they become toddlers, children have a vocabulary of
about 50-200 words and begin putting those words together in
telegraphic speech, such as "baby bye-bye" or "doggie pretty".
Words needed to convey messages are used, but the articles and
other parts of speech necessary for grammatical correctness are
not yet used. These expressions sound like a telegraph, or perhaps
a better analogy today would be that they read like a text
message. Telegraphic Speech/Text Message Speech occurs when
unnecessary words are not used. "Give baby ball" is used rather than
"Give the baby the ball."

Language Errors

The early utterances of children contain many errors, for instance,
confusing /b/ and /d/, or /c/ and /z/. The words children create
are often simplified, in part because they are not yet able to make
more complex sounds of the real language (Dobrich & Scarborough,
1992). Children may say "keekee" for kitty, "nana" for banana, and
"vesketti" for spaghetti because it is easier. Often these early words
are accompanied by gestures that may also be easier to produce
than the words themselves. Children's pronunciations become
increasingly accurate between 1 and 3 years, but some problems
may persist until school age.

   A child who learns that a word stands for an object may initially
think that the word can be used for only that particular object, which
is referred to as Underextension. Only the family's Irish Setter is a
"doggie", for example. More often, however, a child may think that a

                                                                                                    | 315
label applies to all objects that are similar to the original object, which
is called Overextension. For example, all animals become "doggies".

     Link to Learning

        Read this article to learn more about common linguistic
     mistakes that children make and what they mean: 10
     Language Mistakes Kids Make That Are Actually Pretty
     Smart.

Child-Directed Speech

Why is a horse a "horsie"? Have you ever wondered why adults
tend to use "baby talk" or that sing-song type of intonation and
exaggeration used when talking to children? This represents a
universal tendency and is known as child-directed Speech. It
involves exaggerating the vowel and consonant sounds, using a high-
pitched voice, and delivering the phrase with great facial
expression (Clark, 2009). Why is this done? Infants are frequently
more attuned to the tone of voice of the person speaking than to
the content of the words themselves, and are aware of the target of
speech. Werker, Pegg, and McLeod (1994) found that infants listened
longer to a woman who was speaking to a baby than to a woman
who was speaking to another adult. It may be in order to clearly
articulate the sounds of a word so that the child can hear the sounds
involved. It may also be because when this type of speech is used,
the infant pays more attention to the speaker and this sets up a
pattern of interaction in which the speaker and listener are in tune
with one another.

316 |
     Watch It

        Video 3.9.3. This video examines new research on child-
     directed speech.

                          One or more interactive elements has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You can
              view them online here:
              https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=57#oe
              mbed-4

Vocabulary

A child's vocabulary expands between the ages of two to six from
about 200 words to over 10,000 words. This "vocabulary spurt"
typically involves 10-20 new words per week and is accomplished
through a process called fast-mapping. Words are easily learned by
making connections between new words and concepts already known.
The parts of speech that are learned depend on the language and
what is emphasized. Children speaking verb-friendly languages,
such as Chinese and Japanese, learn verbs more readily, while those
speaking English tend to learn nouns more readily. However, those
learning less verb-friendly languages, such as English, seem to need
assistance in grammar to master the use of verbs (Imai et al., 2008).

   One of the reasons that children can classify objects in so many
ways is that they have acquired a vocabulary to do so. By fifth

                                                                                                    | 317
grade, a child's vocabulary has grown to 40,000 words. It grows at
a rate that exceeds that of those in early childhood. This language
explosion, however, differs from that of younger children because
it is facilitated by being able to associate new words with those
already known, and because it is accompanied by a more
sophisticated understanding of the meanings of a word.

   Children can repeat words and phrases after having heard them
only once or twice, but they do not always understand the meaning
of the words or phrases. This is especially true of expressions or
figures of speech that are taken literally. For example, a classroom
full of preschoolers hears the teacher say, "Wow! That was a piece of
cake!" The children began asking "Cake? Where is my cake? I want
cake!"

   Those in middle and late childhood are also able to think of
objects in less literal ways. For example, if asked for the first word
that comes to mind when one hears the word "pizza", the younger
child is likely to say "eat" or some word that describes what is done
with a pizza. However, the older child is more likely to place pizza
in the appropriate category and say "food". This sophistication of
vocabulary is also evidenced by the fact that older children tell jokes
and delight in doing so. They may use jokes that involve plays on
words such as "knock- knock" jokes or jokes with punch lines. Young
children do not understand play on words and tell "jokes" that are
literal or slapstick, such as "A man fell down in the mud! Isn't that
funny?"

     30 Million Word Gap

        To accomplish the tremendous rate of word learning that
     needs to occur during early childhood, it is important that
     children are learning new words each day. Research by

318 |
Betty Hart and Todd Risley in the late 1990s and early
2000s indicated that children from less advantaged
backgrounds are exposed to millions of fewer words in
their first three years of life than children who come from
more privileged socioeconomic backgrounds. In their
research, families were classified by socioeconomic status,
(SES) into "high" (professional), "middle" (working class), and
"low" (welfare) SES. They found that the average child in a
professional family hears 2,153 words per waking hour, the
average child in a working-class family hears 1,251 words
per hour, and an average child in a welfare family only 616
words per hour. Extrapolating, they stated that, "in four
years, an average child in a professional family would
accumulate experience with almost 45 million words, an
average child in a working-class family 26 million words,
and an average child in a welfare family 13 million words."
The line of thinking following their study is that children
from more affluent households would enter school knowing
more words, which would give them advantage in school.

   Hart and Risley's research has been criticized by scholars.
Critics theorize that the language and achievement gaps
are not a result of the number of words a child is exposed
to, but rather alternative theories suggest it could reflect
the disconnect of linguistic practices between home and
school. Thus, judging academic success and linguistic
capabilities from socioeconomic status may ignore bigger
societal issues. A recent replication of Hart and Risley's
study with more participants has found that the "word gap"
may be closer to 4 million words, not the oft-cited 30
million words previously proposed. The ongoing word gap
research is evidence of the importance of language
development in early childhood.

                                                                                              | 319
             Video 3.9.4. Watch as Dr. John Gabrieli, from the
          MIT McGovern Institute for Brain Development
          explains how early language exposure affects
          language development. His research uses the
          current technology to correlate home language
          experiences with brain function. They determined
          that the number of conversational turns was more
          important to development in Broca's area (brain
          region linked to speech production) than the
          number of words heard or the family's
          socioeconomic status.

                                One or more interactive elements has
                                been excluded from this version of the
                    text. You can view them online here:
                    https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?
                    p=57#oembed-1

Grammar and Flexibility

Older children are also able to learn new rules of grammar with
more flexibility. While younger children are likely to be reluctant to

320 |
give up saying "I goed there", older children will learn this rather
quickly along with other rules of grammar.

Bilingualism

Although monolingual speakers often do not realize it, the majority
of children around the world are Bilingual, meaning that they
understand and use two languages (Meyers- Sutton, 2005). Even in
the United States, which is a relatively monolingual society, more
than 47 million people speak a language other than English at home,
and about 10 million of these people are children or youths in public
schools (United States Department of Commerce, 2003). The large
majority of bilingual students (75%) are Hispanic, but the rest
represent more than a hundred different language groups from
around the world. In larger communities throughout the United
States, it is therefore common for a single classroom to contain
students from several language backgrounds at once. In classrooms,
as in other social settings, bilingualism exists in different forms and
degrees. At one extreme are students who speak both English and
another language fluently; at the other extreme are those who speak
only limited versions of both languages. In between are students
who speak their home (or heritage) language much better than
English, as well as others who have partially lost their heritage
language in the process of learning English (Tse, 2001). Commonly,
a student may speak a language satisfactorily but be challenged
by reading or writing it. Whatever the case, each bilingual student
poses unique challenges to teachers.

   The student who speaks both languages fluently has a definite
cognitive advantage. As you might suspect and research confirmed,
a fully fluent bilingual student is in a better position to express
concepts or ideas in more than one way, and to be aware of doing
so (Jimenez, Garcia, & Pearson, 1995; Francis, 2006). Unfortunately,
the bilingualism of many students is unbalanced in the sense that

                                                                                                    | 321
they are either still learning English, or else they have lost some
earlier ability to use their original, heritage language. Losing one's
original language is a concern as research finds that language loss
limits students' ability to learn English as well or as quickly as they
could do. Having a large vocabulary in a first language has been
shown to save time in learning vocabulary in a second language
(Hansen, Umeda & McKinney, 2002). Preserving the first language
is important if a student has impaired skills in all languages and
therefore needs intervention or help from a speech-language
specialist. Research has found, in such cases, that the specialist can
be more effective if the specialist speaks and uses the first language
as well as English (Kohnert, Yim, Nett, Kan, & Duran, 2005).

     How Do Babies Become Bilingual?

        Video 3.9.5. This video explains some of the research
     surrounding language acquisition in babies, particularly
     those learning a second language.

                          One or more interactive elements has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You can
              view them online here:
              https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=57#oe
              mbed-5

Theories of Language Development

322 |
Psychological theories of language learning differ in terms of the
importance they place on nature and nurture. Remember that we
are a product of both nature and nurture. Researchers now believe
that language acquisition is partially inborn and partially learned
through our interactions with our linguistic environment (Gleitman
& Newport, 1995; Stork & Widdowson, 1974).

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=57#oembed-6

Video 3.9.6. Theories of Language Development discusses the major
theories of how language develops in children.

Learning Theory

Perhaps the most straightforward explanation of language
development is that it occurs through the principles of learning,
including association and reinforcement (Skinner, 1953).
Additionally, Bandura (1977) described the importance of
observation and imitation of others in learning language. There
must be at least some truth to the idea that language is learned
through environmental interactions or nurture. Children learn the
language that they hear spoken around them rather than some
other language. Also supporting this idea is the gradual
improvement of language skills with time. It seems that children
modify their language through imitation and reinforcement, such
as parental praise and being understood. For example, when a two-

                                                                                                   | 323
year-old child asks for juice, he might say, "me juice," to which his
mother might respond by giving him a cup of apple juice.

   However, language cannot be entirely learned. For one, children
learn words too fast for them to be learned through reinforcement.
Between the ages of 18 months and 5 years, children learn up to
10 new words every day (Anglin, 1993). More importantly, language
is more generative than it is imitative. Language is not a predefined
set of ideas and sentences that we choose when we need them, but
rather a system of rules and procedures that allows us to create an
infinite number of statements, thoughts, and ideas, including those
that have never previously occurred. When a child says that she
"swimmed" in the pool, for instance, she is showing generativity. No
adult speaker of English would ever say "swimmed," yet it is easily
generated from the normal system of producing language.

   Other evidence that refutes the idea that all language is learned
through experience comes from the observation that children may
learn languages better than they ever hear them. Deaf children
whose parents do not speak ASL very well nevertheless are able
to learn it perfectly on their own, and may even make up their
own language if they need to (Goldin-Meadow & Mylander, 1998).
A group of deaf children in a school in Nicaragua, whose teachers
could not sign, invented a way to communicate through made-
up signs (Senghas, Senghas, & Pyers, 2005). The development of
this new Nicaraguan Sign Language has continued and changed as
new generations of students have come to the school and started
using the language. Although the original system was not a real
language, it is becoming closer and closer every year, showing the
development of a new language in modern times.

Nativism

The linguist Noam Chomsky is a believer in the nature approach
to language, arguing that human brains contain a Language

324 |
Acquisition Device that includes a universal grammar that
underlies all human language (Chomsky, 1965, 1972). According to
this approach, each of the many languages spoken around the world
(there are between 6,000 and 8,000) is an individual example of the
same underlying set of procedures that are hardwired into human
brains. Chomsky's account proposes that children are born with a
knowledge of general rules of syntax that determine how sentences
are constructed. Language develops as long as the infant is exposed
to it. No teaching, training, or reinforcement is required for
language to develop as proposed by Skinner.

   Chomsky differentiates between the deep structure of an idea;
that is, how the idea is represented in the fundamental universal
grammar that is common to all languages, and the surface
structure of the idea or how it is expressed in any one language.
Once we hear or express a thought in surface structure, we
generally forget exactly how it happened. At the end of a lecture,
you will remember a lot of the deep structure (i.e., the ideas
expressed by the instructor), but you cannot reproduce the surface
structure (the exact words that the instructor used to communicate
the ideas).

   Although there is general agreement among psychologists that
babies are genetically programmed to learn language, there is still
debate about Chomsky's idea that there is a universal grammar that
can account for all language learning. Evans and Levinson (2009)
surveyed the world's languages and found that none of the
presumed underlying features of the language acquisition device
were entirely universal. In their search, they found languages that
did not have noun or verb phrases, that did not have tenses (e.g.,
past, present, future), and even some that did not have nouns or
verbs at all, even though a basic assumption of a universal grammar
is that all languages should share these features.

                                                                                                   | 325
Critical Periods

Anyone who has tried to master a second language
as an adult knows the difficulty of language
learning. Yet children learn languages easily and
naturally. Children who are not exposed to
language early in their lives will likely never learn
one. Case studies, including Victor the "Wild Child,"
who was abandoned as a baby in France and not
discovered until he was 12, and Genie, a child
whose parents kept her locked in a closet from
18 months until 13 years of age, are (fortunately)
two of the only known examples of these deprived
children. Both of these children made some
progress in socialization after they were rescued,
but neither of them ever developed language
(Rymer, 1993). This is also why it is important to
determine quickly if a child is deaf, and to
communicate in sign language immediately. Deaf
children who are not exposed to sign language
during their early years will likely never learn it
(Mayberry, Lock, & Kazmi, 2002). The concept of
critical periods highlights the importance of both
nature and nurture for language development.

326 |
Brain Areas for Language

                                                     For the 90% of people who
                                                  are right-handed, language is
                                                  stored and controlled by the
                                                  left cerebral cortex, although
                                                  for some left-handers this
                                                  pattern is reversed. These
                                                  differences can easily be seen
                                                  in the results of neuroimaging
studies that show that listening to and producing language creates
greater activity in the left hemisphere than in the right. Broca's
area, an area in front of the left hemisphere near the motor cortex, is
responsible for language production (Figure 3.21). This area was first
localized in the 1860s by the French physician Paul Broca, who
studied patients with lesions to various parts of the
brain. Wernicke's area, an area of the brain next to the auditory
cortex, is responsible for language comprehension.
   Figure 3.9.2. Drawing of Brain Showing Broca's and Wernicke's
Areas for most people the left hemisphere is specialized for
language. Broca's area, near the motor cortex, is involved in
language production, whereas Wernicke's area, near the auditory
cortex, is specialized for language comprehension.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=57#oembed-7

Video 3.9.7. Language and the Brain reviews major brain structures
and functions involved in language.

                                                                                                    | 327
Interactionist Approach

The interactionist approach (sociocultural theory) combines ideas
from psychology and biology to explain how language is developed.
According to this theory, children learn language out of a desire
to communicate with the world around them. Language emerges
from and is dependent upon social interaction. The Interactionist
approach claims that if our language ability develops out of a desire
to communicate, then language is dependent upon with whom we
want to communicate. This means the environment you grow up in
will heavily affect how well and how quickly you learn to talk. For
example, infants being raised by only their mother are more likely to
learn the word "mama", and less likely to develop "dada". Among the
first words we learn are ways to demand attention or food. If you've
ever tried to learn a new language, you may recognize this theory's
influence. Language classes often teach commonly used vocabulary
and phrases first, and then focus on building conversations rather
than simple rote memorization. Even when we expand our
vocabularies in our native language, we remember the words we use
the most.

Social pragmatics

Language from this view is not only a cognitive skill but also a
social one. Language is a tool humans use to communicate, connect
to, influence, and inform others. Most of all, language comes out
of a need to cooperate. The social nature of language has been
demonstrated by a number of studies that have shown that children
use several pre-linguistic skills (such as pointing and other gestures)
to communicate not only their own needs but what others may
need. So a child watching her mother search for an object may point
to the object to help her mother find it.

   Eighteen-month to 30-month-olds have been shown to make

328 |
linguistic repairs when it is clear that another person does not
understand them (Grosse, Behne, Carpenter & Tomasello, 2010).
Grosse et al. (2010) found that even when the child was given the
desired object, if there had been any misunderstanding along the
way (such as a delay in being handed the object, or the experimenter
calling the object by the wrong name), children would make
linguistic repairs. This would suggest that children are using
language not only as a means of achieving some material goal, but
to make themselves understood in the mind of another person.

Vygotsky and Language Development

Lev Vygotsky hypothesized that children had a zone of proximal
development (ZPD). The ZPD is the range of material that a child is
ready to learn if proper support and guidance are given from either
a peer who understands the material or by a more knowledgeable
adult. We can see the benefit of this sort of guidance when we
think about the acquisition of language. Children can be assisted
in learning language by others who listen attentively, model more
accurate pronunciations, and encourage elaboration. For example,
if the child exclaims, "I'm goed there!" then the adult responds, "You
went there?"

   Children may be hard-wired for language development, as Noam
Chomsky suggested in his theory of universal grammar, but active
participation is also important for language development. The
process of scaffolding is one in which the guide provides needed
assistance to the child as a new skill is learned. Repeating what a
child has said, but in a grammatically correct way, is scaffolding for
a child who is struggling with the rules of language production.

                                                                                                   | 329
Private Speech

Do you ever talk to yourself? Why? Chances are, this occurs when
you are struggling with a problem, trying to remember something,
or feel very emotional about a situation. Children talk to themselves
too. Piaget interpreted this as egocentric speech or a practice
engaged in because of a child's inability to see things from other
points of view. Vygotsky, however, believed that children talk to
themselves in order to solve problems or clarify thoughts. As
children learn to think in words, they do so aloud before eventually
closing their lips and engaging in private speech or inner
speech. Thinking out loud eventually becomes thought
accompanied by internal speech, and talking to oneself becomes a
practice only engaged in when we are trying to learn something
or remember something, etc. This inner speech is not as elaborate
as the speech we use when communicating with others (Vygotsky,
1962).

CC licensed content, Original

   Language Development. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/
      chapter/language-development/. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Lifespan Development. Authored by: Martha Lally and Suzanne
      Valentine-French. Provided by: College of Lake County
      Foundation. Retrieved from:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-
      lifespandevelopment/. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike

   Boudless Psychology. Provided by: Boundless. Retrieved from:

330 |
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/boundless-psychology/
      chapter/introduction-to-language/. License: CC BY-SA:
      Attribution-ShareAlike
   Theories of the early stages of language acquisition. Provided
      by: Khan Academy. Retrieved from:
      https://www.khanacademy.org/test-prep/mcat/processing-
      the-environment/language/a/theories-of-the-early-stages-
      of-language-acquisition. License: CC BY-NC-ND: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-NoDerivatives
CC licensed content, Specific attribution
   Language and the Brain. Authored by: Carole Yue. Provided by:
      Khan Academy . Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/
      lBqShvm4QRA. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike
   Theories of Language Development. Authored by: Carole Yue.
      Provided by: Khan Academy. Retrieved from:
      https://youtu.be/RRGwdfQV8kU. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

                                                                                                    | 331
Psychosocial Development

Social development refers to the long-term changes in relationships
and interactions involving self, peers, and family. As with cognitive
development, each of these areas has broad, well-known theories
(and theorists) that provide a framework for thinking about how
the area relates to teaching. Educators need to be aware of the
development of self, for which we look to theorists like Erikson
and Marcia. For many students, play is a foundation for learning
and social interactions, for which we look to theorists like For the
development of ethical knowledge and moral reasoning, it is the
work of Kohlberg and Gilligan. These theories are not the only
related to the social development of students, but their accounts do
explain much about social development that is relevant to teaching
and education.

Erikson's Stages of Psychosocial Development

Like Piaget, Erik Erikson developed a theory of social development
that relies on stages, except that Erikson thought of stages as a
series of psychosocial crises--turning points in a person's
relationships and feelings about himself or herself (Erikson, 1963,
1980). Each crisis consists of a dilemma or choice that carries both
advantages and risks, but in which one choice or alternative is
usually considered more desirable or "healthy." How one crisis is
resolved affects how later crises are resolved. The resolution also
helps to create an individual's developing personality, sense of self,
and relationships. Erikson proposed eight crises that extend from
birth through old age; they are summarized in Table 3.6. Four of
the stages occur during the school years, so we give these special
attention here, but it is also helpful to know what crises are thought
to come both before and after those in the school years.

332 | Psychosocial Development
Table 3.10.1. Eight
psychosocial crises
according to Erikson

Psychosocial crisis Approximate age Description

Trust and mistrust    Birth to one Development of trust between

                      year        caregiver and child

Autonomy and          Age 1-3     Development of control over
shame                             bodily functions and activities

Initiative and guilt Age 3-6      Testing limits of self-assertion
                                  and purposefulness

Industry and          Age 6-12    Develop sense of mastery and
inferiority                       competence

Identity and role     Age 12-19   Development of identity and
confusion                         acknowledge of identity by
                                  others

Intimacy and          Age 19-25+  Formation of intimate
isolation                         relationships and
                                  commitments

Generativity and      Age 25-50+  Development of creative or
stagnation                        productive activities that
                                  contribute to future
                                  generations

Integrity and despair Age 50+     Acceptance of personal life
                                  history and forgiveness of self
                                  and others

           One or more interactive elements has been excluded
           from this version of the text. You can view them online
here:
https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=58#oembed-1

Video 3.10.1 Erikson's Psychosocial Development explains all stages
of this theory.

                                  Psychosocial Development | 333
Crises of Infants and Preschoolers: Trust,
Autonomy, and Initiative

Almost from the day they are born, infants face a crisis (in Erikson's
sense) about trust and mistrust. They are happiest if they can eat,
sleep, and excrete according to their own physiological schedules,
regardless of whether their schedules are convenient for the
caregiver (often the mother). Unfortunately, though, a young infant
is in no position to control or influence a mother's caregiving or
scheduling needs; so the baby faces a dilemma about how much
to trust or mistrust the mother's helpfulness. It is as if the baby asks,
"If I demand food (or sleep or a clean diaper) now, will my mother
actually be able to help me meet this need?" Hopefully, between the
two of them, mother and child resolve this choice in favor of the
baby's trust: the mother proves herself at least "good enough" in her
attentiveness, and the baby risks trusting mother's motivation and
skill at caregiving.

   Almost as soon as this crisis is resolved, however, a new one
develops over the issue of autonomy and shame. The child (who is
now a toddler) may now trust his or her caregiver (mother), but the
very trust contributes to a desire to assert autonomy by taking care
of basic personal needs, such as feeding, toileting, or dressing. Given
the child's lack of experience in these activities, however, self-care
is risky at first--the toddler may feed (or toilet or dress) clumsily and
ineffectively. The child's caregiver, for her part, risks overprotecting
the child and criticizing his early efforts unnecessarily and thus
causing the child to feel shame for even trying. Hopefully, as with
the earlier crisis of trust, the new crisis gets resolved in favor of
autonomy through the combined efforts of the child to exercise
autonomy and of the caregiver to support the child's efforts.

   Eventually, about the time a child is of preschool age, the
autonomy exercised during the previous period becomes more
elaborate, extended, and focused on objects and people other than
the child and basic physical needs. The child at a daycare center may

334 | Psychosocial Development
now undertake, for example, to build the "biggest city in the world"
out of all available unit blocks--even if other children want some of
the blocks for themselves. The child's projects and desires create
a new crisis of initiative and guilt, because the child soon realizes
that acting on impulses or desires can sometimes have negative
effects on others--more blocks for the child may mean fewer for
someone else. As with the crisis over autonomy, caregivers have to
support the child's initiatives where possible, but also not make the
child feel guilty just for desiring to have or to do something that
affects others' welfare. By limiting behavior where necessary but
not limiting internal feelings, the child can develop a lasting ability
to take initiative. Expressed in Erikson's terms, the crisis is then
resolved in favor of initiative.

   Even though only the last of these three crises overlap with the
school years, all three relate to issues faced by students of any age,
and even by their teachers. A child or youth who is fundamentally
mistrustful, for example, has a serious problem in coping with
school life. If you are a student, it is essential for your long-term
survival to believe that teachers and school officials have your best
interests at heart and that they are not imposing assignments or
making rules, for example, "just for the heck of it." Even though
students are not infants anymore, teachers function like Erikson's
caregiving parents in that they need to prove worthy of students'
trust through their initial flexibility and attentiveness.

   Parallels from the classroom also exist for the crises of autonomy
and initiative. To learn effectively, students need to make choices
and undertake academic initiatives at least some of the time, even
though not every choice or initiative may be practical or desirable.
Teachers, for their part, need to make true choices and initiatives
possible, and refrain from criticizing, even accidentally, a choice or
intention behind an initiative even if the teacher privately believes
that it is "bound to fail." Support for choices and initiative should
be focused on providing resources and on guiding the student's
efforts toward more likely success. In these ways teachers function

                                                            Psychosocial Development | 335
like parents of toddlers and preschoolers in Erikson's theory of
development, regardless of the age of their students

The Crisis of Childhood: Industry and Inferiority

Once into elementary school, the child is faced for the first time
with becoming competent and worthy in the eyes of the world at
large, or more precisely in the eyes of classmates and teachers. To
achieve their esteem, he or she must develop skills that require
effort that is sustained and somewhat focused. The challenge
creates the crisis of industry and inferiority. To be respected by
teachers, for example, the child must learn to read and to behave
like a "true student." To be respected by peers, he or she must
learn to cooperate and to be friendly, among other things. There
are risks involved in working on these skills and qualities because
there can be no guarantee of success with them in advance. If the
child does succeed, therefore, he or she experiences the satisfaction
of a job well done and of skills well learned--a feeling that Eriks0n
called industry. If not, however, the child risks feeling
lasting inferiority compared to others. Teachers, therefore, have a
direct, explicit role in helping students to resolve this crisis in favor
of industry or success. They can set realistic academic goals for
students--ones that tend to lead to success--and then provide
materials and assistance for students to reach their goals. Teachers
can also express their confidence that students can in fact meet
their goals if and when the students get discouraged, and avoid
hinting (even accidentally) that a student is simply a "loser."
Paradoxically, these strategies will work best if the teacher is also
tolerant of less-than-perfect performance by students. Too much
emphasis on perfection can undermine some students'
confidence--foster Erikson's inferiority--by making academic goals
seem beyond reach.

336 | Psychosocial Development
The Crisis of Adolescence: Identity

As the child develops lasting talents and attitudes as a result of the
crisis of industry, he begins to face a new question: what do all the
talents and attitudes add up to be? Who is the "me" embedded in
this profile of qualities? These questions are the crisis of identity
and role confusion. Defining identity is riskier than it may appear
for a person simply because some talents and attitudes may be
poorly developed, and some even may be undesirable in the eyes of
others. (If you are poor at math, how do you live with family and
friends if they think you should be good at this skill?) Still others may
be valuable but fail to be noticed by other people. The result is that
who a person wants to be may not be the same as who he or she is
in actual fact, nor the same as who other people want the person to
be. In Erikson's terms, role confusion is the result.

   Teachers can minimize role confusion in a number of ways. One is
to offer students lots of diverse role models-- by identifying models
in students' reading materials, for example, or by inviting diverse
guests to school. The point of these strategies would be to express
a key idea: that there are many ways to be respected, successful,
and satisfied with life. Another way to support students' identity
development is to be alert to students' confusion about their
futures, and refer them to counselors or other services outside
school that can help sort these out. Still another strategy is to
tolerate changes in students' goals and priorities--sudden changes
in extra-curricular activities or in personal plans after graduation.
Since students are still trying roles out, discouraging
experimentation may not be in students' best interests.

                                                            Psychosocial Development | 337
The Crises of Adulthood: Intimacy, Generativity,
and Integrity

Beyond the school years, according to Erikson, individuals continue
psychosocial development by facing additional crises. Young adults,
for example, face a crisis of intimacy and isolation. This crisis is
about the risk of establishing close relationships with a select
number of others. Whether the relationships are heterosexual,
homosexual, or not sexual at all, their defining qualities are depth
and sustainability. Without them, an individual risks feeling isolated.
Assuming that a person resolves this crisis in favor of intimacy,
however, he or she then faces a crisis about generativity and
stagnation. This crisis is characteristic of most of adulthood, and
not surprisingly, therefore, is about caring for or making a
contribution to society, and especially to its younger generation.
Generativity is about making life productive and creative so that
it matters to others. One obvious way for some to achieve this
feeling is by raising children, but there are also many other ways to
contribute to the welfare of others. The final crisis is about integrity
and despair, and is characteristically felt during the final years of
life. At the end of life, a person is likely to review the past and to
ask whether it has been lived as well as possible, even if it was
clearly not lived perfectly. Since personal history can no longer be
altered at the end of life, it is important to make peace with what
actually happened and to forgive oneself and others for mistakes
that may have been made. The alternative is despair, or depression
from believing not only that one's life was lived badly, but also that
there is no longer any hope of correcting past mistakes.

   Even though Erikson conceives of these crises as primarily
concerns of adulthood, there are precursors of them during the
school years. Intimacy, for example, is a concern of many children
and youth in that they often desire, but do not always find, lasting
relationships with others (Beidel, 2005; Zimbardo & Radl, 1999).
Personal isolation is a particular risk for students with disabilities,

338 | Psychosocial Development
as well as for students whose cultural or racial backgrounds differ
from classmates' or the teacher's. Generativity--feeling helpful to
others and to the young--is needed not only by many adults but also
by many children and youth; when given the opportunity as part of
their school program, they frequently welcome a chance to be of
authentic service to others as part of their school programs (Eyler
& Giles, 1999; Kay, 2003). Integrity--taking responsibility for your
personal past, "warts and all," is often a felt need for anyone, young
or old, who has lived long enough to have a past on which to look.
Even children and youth have a past in this sense, though their pasts
are of course shorter than persons who are older.

   Identity development is a stage in the adolescent life cycle. For
most, the search for identity begins in the adolescent years. During
these years, adolescents are more open to `trying on' different
behaviors and appearances to discover who they are. In an attempt
to find their identity and discover who they are, adolescents are
likely to cycle through several identities to find one that suits them
best. Developing and maintaining identity (in adolescent years) is
a difficult task due to multiple factors such as family life,
environment, and social status. Empirical studies suggest that this
process might be more accurately described as identity
development, rather than formation, but confirms a normative
process of change in both content and structure of one's thoughts
about the self.

Self-Concept

Self-concept is the idea of self-constructed from opinions and
beliefs about one's self and is foundational to developing self-
identity. These concepts are defined confidently, consistently, and
with stability. Cognitive developments result in greater self-
awareness, greater awareness of others and their thoughts and
judgments, the ability to think about future possibilities, and the

                                                            Psychosocial Development | 339
ability to consider multiple possibilities at once. As a result, by
adolescence, children experience a significant shift from the simple,
concrete, and global self-descriptions typical of young children;
as children, they defined themselves by physical traits, whereas
adolescents define themselves based on their values, thoughts, and
opinions.

   Further distinctions in self-concept, called "differentiation," occur
as the adolescent recognizes the contextual influences on their
behavior and the perceptions of others, and begin to qualify their
traits when asked to describe themselves. Differentiation appears
fully developed by mid-adolescence. Peaking in the 7th-9th grades,
the personality traits adolescents use to describe themselves refer
to specific contexts, and therefore may contradict one another.
The recognition of inconsistent content in the self-concept is a
common source of distress in these years, but this distress may
benefit adolescents by encouraging structural development.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=58#oembed-2

Video 3.10.2. Self-Concept, Self-Identity, and Social Identity explains
the various types of self and the formation of identity.

Cooley's Looking-Glass Self

Charles Horton Cooley (1964) suggested that our self-concept
comes from looking at how others respond to us. This process,
known as the looking-glass self involves looking at how others seem

340 | Psychosocial Development
to view us and interpreting this as we make judgments about
whether we are good or bad, strong or weak, beautiful or ugly,
and so on. Of course, we do not always interpret their responses
accurately so our self-concept is not simply a mirror reflection
of the views of others. After forming an initial self-concept, we
may use our existing self-concept as a mental filter screening out
those responses that do not seem to fit our ideas of who we
are. So compliments may be negated, for example.

   Think of times in your life when you felt more self-
conscious. The process of the looking-glass self is pronounced
when we are preschoolers. Later in life, we also experience this
process when we are in a new school, new job, or are taking on
a new role in our personal lives and are trying to gauge our own
performance. When we feel more sure of who we are we focus less
on how we appear to others.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=58#oembed-3

Video 3.10.3. Charles Cooley-Looking Glass Self explains more about
this theory.

Mead's I and Me

George Herbert Mead (1967) offered an explanation of how we
develop a social sense of self by being able to see ourselves through
the eyes of others. There are two parts of the self: the "I" which
is the part of the self that is spontaneous, creative, innate, and is

                                                             Psychosocial Development | 341
not concerned with how others view us and the "me" or the social
definition of who we are.

   When we are born, we are all "I" and act without concern about
how others view us. But the socialized self begins when we are able
to consider how one important person views us. This initial stage
is called "taking the role of the significant other." For example, a
child may pull a cat's tail and be told by his mother, "No! Don't do
that, that's bad" while receiving a slight slap on the hand. Later,
the child may mimic the same behavior toward the self and say
aloud, "No, that's bad" while patting his own hand. What has
happened? The child is able to see himself through the eyes of the
mother. As the child grows and is exposed to many situations and
rules of culture, he begins to view the self in the eyes of many
others through these cultural norms or rules. This is referred to as
"taking the role of the generalized other" and results in a sense of
self with many dimensions. The child comes to have a sense of self
as a student, as a friend, as a son, and so on.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=58#oembed-5

Video 3.10.4. George Herbert Mead-The I and the Me explains more
about this theory.

Exaggerated Sense of Self

One of the ways to gain a clearer sense of self is to exaggerate those
qualities that are to be incorporated into the self. Preschoolers

342 | Psychosocial Development
often like to exaggerate their own qualities or to seek validation as
the biggest or smartest or child who can jump the highest. Much
of this may be due to the simple fact that the child does not
understand their own limits. Young children may really believe that
they can beat their parent to the mailbox, or pick up the
refrigerator.

   This exaggeration tends to be replaced by a more realistic sense
of self in middle childhood as children realize that they do have
limitations. Part of this process includes having parents who allow
children to explore their capabilities and give the child authentic
feedback. Another important part of this process involves the child
learning that other people have capabilities, too and that the child's
capabilities may differ from those of other people. Children learn to
compare themselves to others to understand what they are "good
at" and what they are not as good at.

Self-Esteem

Another aspect of identity formation is self-esteem. Self-esteem is
defined as one's thoughts and feelings about one's self-concept and
identity. Most theories on self-esteem state that there is a grand
desire, across all genders and ages, to maintain, protect, and
enhance their self-esteem.

   There are several self-concepts and situational factors that tend
to impact self-esteem. Children that are close to their parents and
their parents are supportive, yet firm, tend to have higher self-
esteem. Further, when people are recognized for their successes,
have set high vocational aspirations, are athletic, or feel attractive,
they have higher self-esteem. Teens tend to have lower self-esteem
when entering middle school, feel peer rejection, and experience
academic failure. Also, children that have authoritarian or
permissive parents, need to relocate, or have low socioeconomic
status, are more likely to experience lower self-esteem.

                                                            Psychosocial Development | 343
   Girls are most likely to enjoy high self-esteem when engaged in
supportive relationships with friends; the most important function
of friendship to them is having someone who can provide social and
moral support. When they fail to win friends' approval or cannot
find someone with whom to share common activities and interests,
in these cases, girls suffer from low self-esteem.

   In contrast, boys are more concerned with establishing and
asserting their independence and defining their relation to
authority. As such, they are more likely to derive high self-esteem
from their ability to influence their friends. On the other hand,
the lack of romantic competence, for example, failure to win or
maintain the affection of romantic interest is the major contributor
to low self-esteem in adolescent boys.

Self Esteem Types

According to Mruk (2003), self-esteem is based on two factors:
competence and worthiness. The relationship between competence
and worthiness defines one's self-esteem type. As these factors are
a spectrum, we can even further differentiate self-esteem types and
potential issues associated with each.

344 | Psychosocial Development
    Figure 3.10.1. Self-Esteem meaning matrix with basic types and
                        levels. Adapted from Mruk, 2003.

   Those with high levels of competence and those that feel highly
worthy will have high self-esteem. This self-esteem type tends to
be stable and characterized by openness to new experiences and a
tendency towards optimism. Those at the medium-high self-esteem
type feel adequately competent and worthy. At the authentic level,
individuals are realistic about their competence and feel worthy.
They will actively pursue a life of positive, intrinsic values.

   Individuals with low levels of competence and worthiness will
have low self-esteem. At the negativistic level, people tend to be
cautious and are protective of what little self-esteem that they
do possess. Those at the classic low self-esteem level experienced
impaired function due to their low feelings of competence and
worth and are at risk for depression and giving up.

   It is also possible to have high levels of competence but feel
unworthy. This combination is a defensive or fragile self-esteem
type, called competence-based self-esteem, where the person
tends to compensate for their low levels of worthiness by focusing
on their competence. At the success seeking level, these individuals'
self-esteem is contingent on their achievements, and they are often
anxious about failure. The Antisocial level includes an exaggerated
need for success and power, even as to the point of acting out
aggressively to achieve it.

   The combination of low competence and high worthiness is
worthiness-based self-esteem. This type is another defensive or
fragile self-esteem where the individual has a low level of
competence and compensates by focusing instead on their
worthiness. At the approval-seeking level, these individuals are
sensitive to criticism and rejection and base their self-esteem on
the approval of others. At the narcissistic level, people will have
an exaggerated sense of self-worth regardless of the lack of
competencies. They also tend to be highly reactive to criticism and
are very defensive.

                                                            Psychosocial Development | 345
Marcia's Identity Statuses

Expanding on Erikson's theory, Marcia (1966) described identity
formation during adolescence as involving both exploration and
commitment concerning ideologies and occupations (e.g., religion,
politics, career, relationships, gender roles). Identity development
begins when individuals identify with role models who provide them
with options to explore for whom they can become. As identity
development progresses, young people are expected to make
choices and commit to options within the confines of their social
contexts. In some cases, options are not provided or are limited,
and the individual will fail to commit or will commit without the
opportunity to explore various options (Marcia, 1980).

   Identity confusion/diffusion occurs when individuals neither
explore nor commit to any identities. Foreclosure occurs when an
individual commits to an identity without exploring options. A
moratorium is a state in which people are actively exploring options
but have not yet made commitments. As mentioned earlier,
individuals who have explored different options, discovered their
purpose, and have made identity commitments are in a state
of identity achievement.

346 | Psychosocial Development
           Figure 3.10.2. Marcia's identity statuses. Adapted from
             Discovering the Lifespan, by R. S. Feldman, 2009.

   The least mature status, and one common in many children, is
identity diffusion. Identity diffusion is a status that characterizes
those who have neither explored the options nor made a
commitment to an identity. Marcia (1980) proposed that when
individuals enter the identity formation process, they have little
awareness or experience with identity exploration or the
expectation to commit to an identity. This period of identity
diffusion is typical of children and young adolescents, but
adolescents are expected to move out of this stage as they are
exposed to role models and experiences that present them with
identity possibilities. Those who persist in this identity may drift
aimlessly with little connection to those around them or have little
sense of purpose in life. Characteristics associated with prolonged
diffusion include low self-esteem, easily influenced by peers, lack of
meaningful friendships, little commitment, or fortitude in activities
or relationships, self-absorbed, and self-indulgent.

   Those in identity foreclosure have committed to an identity
without having explored the options. Often, younger adolescence
will enter a phase of foreclosure where they may, at least
preliminarily, commit to an identity without an investment in the
exploration process. This commitment is often a response to
anxiety about uncertainty or change during adolescence or
pressure from parents, social groups, or cultural expectations. It
is expected that most young people will progress beyond the
foreclosure phase as they can think independently, and we multiple
identity options. However, sometimes foreclosure will persist into
late adolescence or even adulthood.

   In some cases, parents may make these decisions for their
children and do not grant the teen the opportunity to make choices.
In other instances, teens may strongly identify with parents and
others in their life and wish to follow in their footsteps.
Characteristics associated with prolonged foreclosure well-behaved
and obedient children with a high need for approval, authoritarian

                                                            Psychosocial Development | 347
parenting style, low levels of tolerance or acceptance of change,
high levels of conformity, and conventional thinking.

   During high school and college years, teens and young adults
move from identity diffusion and foreclosure toward moratorium
and achievement. The most significant gains in the development of
identity are in college, as college students are exposed to a greater
variety of career choices, lifestyles, and beliefs. This experience is
likely to spur on questions regarding identity. A great deal of the
identity work we do in adolescence and young adulthood is about
values and goals, as we strive to articulate a personal vision or
dream for what we hope to accomplish in the future (McAdams,
2013).

   Identity moratorium is a status that describes those who are
actively exploring in an attempt to establish an identity but have
yet to have made any commitment. This time can be an anxious
and emotionally tense period as the adolescent experiments with
different roles and explores various beliefs. Nothing is guaranteed,
and there are many questions, but few answers. This moratorium
phase is the precursor to identity achievement. During the
moratorium period, it is normal for adolescents to be rebellious
and uncooperative, avoid dealing with problems, procrastinate,
experience low self-esteem, feel anxious, and uncertain about
decisions.

   Identity achievement refers to those who, after exploration, have
committed. Identity achievement is a long process and is not often
realized by the end of adolescence. Individuals that do reach
identity achievement feel self-acceptance, stable self-definition,
and are committed to their identity.

   While Marcia's statuses help us understand the process of
developing identity, there are several criticisms of this theory. First,
identity status may not be global; different aspects of your identity
may be in different statuses. An individual may be in multiple
identity statuses at the same time for different aspects of identity.
For example, one could be in the foreclosure status for their

348 | Psychosocial Development
religious identity, but in moratorium for career identity, and
achievement for gender identity.

   Further, identity statuses do no always develop in the sequence
described above, although it is the most common progression. Not
all people will reach identity achievement in all aspects of their
identity, and not all may remain in identity achievement. There
may be a third aspect of identity development, beyond exploration
and commitment, and that is the reconsideration of commitment.
This addition would create a fifth status, searching moratorium.
This status is a re-exploring after a commitment has been made
(Meesus et al., 2012). It is not usual that commitments to aspects of
our identity may change as we gain experiences, and more options
become available to explore. This searching moratorium may
continue well into adulthood.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=58#oembed-4

Video 3.10.5. Macia's Stages of Adolescent Identity Development
summarizes the various identity statuses and how an individual may
move through them.

Supporting Identity Development

As the process of identity development can be a confusing and
challenging period, how can adults support children through this
process? First, affirm that the anxiety, doubts, and confusion are
reasonable and that most teens do not complete identity

                                                            Psychosocial Development | 349
achievement before graduating high school. Exposing young people
to various role models can help them imagine different roles or
options for their future selves. Role models can come from within
the family, schools, or community. Adults should talk with children
about their values, goals, and identities to help build awareness.
They may be interested to know how others made decisions while
developing their own identities. Finally, support the commitments
that adolescents have made. Identity commitments can help
someone feel grounded and less confused while they engage in
identity exploration.
CC licensed content, Original

   Psychosocial Development. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/
      chapter/psychosocial-development/. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Adolescent Psychology. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      adolescent. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. . Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      License: CC BY: Attribution

CC licensed content, Specific attribution

   Erikson's Psychosocial Development. Authored by: Shreena
      Desai. Provided by: Khan Academy. Retrieved from:
      https://youtu.be/SIoKwUcmivk. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

350 | Psychosocial Development
   Self concept, self identity, and social identity . Authored by:
      Shreena Desai. Provided by: Khan Academy. Retrieved from:
      https://youtu.be/PaA0mLVQd3k. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

   George Herbert Mead- The I and the Me. Authored by: Brooke
      Miller. Provided by: Khan Academy. Retrieved from:
      https://youtu.be/oMNaQ jtXSGc. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

   Charles Cooley- Looking Glass Self . Authored by: Brooke
      Miller. Provided by: Khan Academy. Retrieved from:
      https://youtu.be/bU0BQUa11ek. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

All rights reserved content
   Marcia's States of Adolescent Identity Development. Authored
      by: Tiffany Dickie. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/
      a8HIY_bqrVo. License: All Rights Reserved

                                                             Psychosocial Development | 351
Peer Relationships

Relationships within the family (parent-child and siblings) are not
the only significant relationships in a child's life. Peer relationships
are also important. Social interaction with another child who is
similar in age, skills, and knowledge provokes the development of
many social skills that are valuable for the rest of life (Bukowski,
Buhrmester, & Underwood, 2011). In peer relationships, children
learn how to initiate and maintain social interactions with other
children. They learn skills for managing conflict, such as turn-
taking, compromise, and bargaining. Play also involves the mutual,
sometimes complex, coordination of goals, actions, and
understanding. For example, as preschoolers engage in pretend play
they create narratives together, choose roles, and collaborate to
act out their stories. Through these experiences, children develop
friendships that provide additional sources of security and support
to those provided by their parents.

   However, peer relationships can be challenging as well as
supportive (Rubin, Coplan, Chen, Bowker, & McDonald, 2011). Being
accepted by other children is an essential source of affirmation
and self-esteem. At the same time, peer rejection can foreshadow
later behavior problems (especially when children are rejected due
to aggressive behavior). With increasing age, children confront the
challenges of bullying, peer victimization, and managing conformity
pressures. Social comparison with peers is an important means
by which children evaluate their skills, knowledge, and personal
qualities, but it may cause them to feel that they do not measure up
well against others. For example, a boy who is not athletic may feel
unworthy of his football-playing peers and revert to shy behavior,
isolating himself, and avoiding conversation. Conversely, an athlete
who does not "get" Shakespeare may feel embarrassed and avoid
reading altogether. Also, with the approach of adolescence, peer
relationships become focused on psychological intimacy, involving

352 | Peer Relationships
personal disclosure, vulnerability, and loyalty (or its
betrayal)--which significantly influences a child's outlook on the
world. Each of these aspects of peer relationships requires
developing very different social and emotional skills than those that
emerge in parent-child relationships. They also illustrate the many
ways that peer relationships influence the growth of personality and
self-concept.

    Figure 3.11.1. Functions of friendship. By Florida State College at
                   Jacksonville, licensed under CC-BY 4.0 .

   As children become adolescents, they usually begin spending
more time with their peers and less time with their families, and

                                                                        Peer Relationships | 353
these peer interactions are increasingly unsupervised by adults.
Children's notions of friendship often focus on shared activities,
whereas adolescents' notions of friendship increasingly focus on
intimate exchanges of thoughts and feelings.

   During adolescence, peer groups evolve from primarily single-sex
to mixed-sex. Adolescents within a peer group tend to be similar to
one another in behavior and attitudes, which has been explained as
being a function of homophily (adolescents who are similar to one
another choose to spend time together in a "birds of a feather flock
together" way) and influence (adolescents who spend time together
shape each other's behavior and attitudes).

        Figure 11.2.1.Reciprocal influences on friend selection and
                              personal characteristics.

   Peer pressure is usually depicted as peers pushing a teenager to
do something that adults disapprove of, such as breaking laws or
using drugs. One of the most widely studied aspects of adolescent
peer influence is known as deviant peer contagion (Dishion &
Tipsord, 2011). This influence is the process by which peers
reinforce problem behavior by laughing or showing other signs of
approval that then increase the likelihood of future problem
behavior. Although deviant peer contagion is more extreme, regular
354 | Peer Relationships
peer pressure is not always harmful. Peers can serve both positive
and negative functions during adolescence. Negative peer pressure
can lead adolescents to make riskier decisions or engage in more
problematic behavior than they would alone or in the presence of
their family. For example, adolescents are much more likely to drink
alcohol, use drugs, and commit crimes when they are with their
friends than when they are alone or with their family. However,
peers also serve as an essential source of social support and
companionship during adolescence, and adolescents with positive
peer relationships are happier and better adjusted than those who
are socially isolated or who have conflictual peer relationships.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=59#oembed-3

Crowds are an emerging level of peer relationships in adolescence.
In contrast to friendships (which are reciprocal dyadic relationships)
and cliques (which refer to groups of individuals who interact
frequently), crowds are characterized more by shared reputations
or images than actual interactions (Brown & Larson, 2009)These
crowds reflect different prototypic identities (such as jocks or
brains) and are often linked with adolescents' social status and
peers' perceptions of their values or behaviors. Eventually, these
crowds and cliques become less critical to teens as they place more
value on close friendships and romantic relationships.

                                                                        Peer Relationships | 355
Crowds

Crowds are large groups of adolescents socially connected by a
shared image and reputation (Brown, 2004), especially within the
setting of a single school. A single person can belong to more than
one crowd if their image matches the crowd's criteria (Brown, 2004;
Mory, 1994). Because membership in a crowd depends on peers'
perceptions, crowds in any given peer group will correspond to the
local preconceived "types" of adolescents. Specific stereotypes vary
from place to place, but many remain consistent. They are based
on peer status, socioeconomic status, residential area, activities,
social characteristics, or a combination of attributes (jocks, nerds,
populars, and druggies are among the most commonly observed)
(Brown, 2004; Mory, 1994; Arnett, 2002). Crowds are very different
from cliques: while cliques are relatively small, close-knit groups
based on frequent interaction and collectively determined
membership, members of a crowd may not even know each other.
Crowd membership reflects external assessments and expectations,
providing a social context for identity exploration and self-
definition as adolescents internalize or reject their crowd identities.

   Because crowd membership is initially outwardly imposed, an
adolescent's peers can classify them as belonging to a crowd that
they do not consider themselves a member. Members of some
crowds are more aware of and comfortable with their crowd
designation than others; members of stigmatized or low-status
groups, in particular, may resist or deny their undesirable
categorization (Brown et al., 1992). Usually, however, adolescents
embrace their crowd affiliation, using it to define themselves and
advertise where they fit in their peer group's social structure
(Newman & Newman, 2001; Brown et al., 1990).

356 | Peer Relationships
Crowds and Identity Development

Crowds serve an essential purpose in adolescent identity
development, shaping individual values, behavior, and personal and
peer expectations. "[One's group] is often tantamount to one's own
provisional identity" (Brown et al., 1994); the
individual defines themself by the crowd to which they see themself
as belonging. Different crowds expose the individual to different
norms. These norms encourage adolescents to interact with some
people while avoiding others and reward certain behaviors while
discouraging others, a process of normative social influence (Brown
et al., 1990; Brown et al., 1994; Brown et al., 1995; Brown & Larson,
2009). For example, a member of a "preppy" crowd might be
rewarded for dressing in a fashion for which a member of an "emo"
crowd would be teased, and vice versa.

   Crowd effects on norms of interaction:

   Norms affect how the individual interacts with others.
      Members of high-status (preppie, popular) groups often
      interact with many people, but most of these relationships are
      superficial and instrumental; interpersonal connections are
      used to establish and maintain social status (Eder, 1985; Lesko,
      1988). By contrast, members of lower-caste groups (e.g., dorks,
      druggies) generally have fewer friends, mostly from within the
      crowd; however, these relationships are typically marked by
      greater loyalty, stability, and honesty (Lesko, 1988).

   Norms affect with whom the individual interacts. Crowds steer
      the individual toward certain people, attitudes, and behaviors.
      There are also effects of peer perception and expectations
      when individuals attempt to interact across crowds. In
      essence, one may be interested in a cross-crowd friendship,
      but whether or not the target reciprocates depends on their
      crowd's norms as well. The adolescent's social options for
      friendship and romance are limited by their crowd and by

                                                                        Peer Relationships | 357
      other crowds (Brown et al., 1994).

Often crowds reinforce the behaviors that initially caused an
individual to be labeled part of that crowd, which can positively or
negatively influence the individual (toward academic achievement
or drug use, for example). These pressures are often linked to the
stereotypes members of crowds hold about themselves and
members of other crowds: unity by the denigration of the outgroup
(Brown et al., 1994).

Racial Crowds and Sub-Crowds

Adolescents' perception of crowd differences may depend on how
closely related the adolescent observer is to a particular crowd. The
primary, recurring crowd divisions (jocks, geeks, partiers) have been
most often studied in predominantly white high schools, but they
also exist for minority students. In multiracial schools, students
seem to divide along ethnic lines first, then into these archetypical
crowds within their ethnicity. However, one ethnic group may not
notice the further divisions in other ethnic groups after the first,
race-based split (Brown & Mounts, 1989). For instance, black
students see themselves as divided into jocks, geeks, emos, stoners,
popular kids, and so on, but white students may see them as just
one crowd defined solely by ethnicity, "the black kids." Sometimes
crowd membership transcends race, however, and adolescents are
classified as "jocks" or "geeks" regardless of race (Horvat & Lewis,
2003; Tyson et al., 2005). This classification seems to vary and
depends heavily on the context of the individual school.

358 | Peer Relationships
Stereotypes, Stigma, and Cross-Crowd
Friendships

While crowds are structured around prototypical caricatures of
their members, real adolescents rarely match these extremes.
Furthermore, not all adolescents agree on the characteristics
typical of a stereotype (Brown et al., 1994). In other words, a regular
manifestation of just a few central characteristics of a crowd is a
sufficient basis for classification as a member of that crowd. Thus,
not all "jocks" neglect their schoolwork, though that is part of the
typical jock stereotype, and a person interested in fashion could still
be considered a "geek."

   Often a crowd is stigmatized by one or more other crowds. This
stigmatization can affect adolescents' willingness to associate with
members of that crowd, or even other crowds similar to it. For
example, people may avoid being seen as a "brain," a middle-status
crowd, because of the similarity between brains and "nerds," a
lower-status crowd (Brown et al., 1990).

   Shared interests form the basis of many friendships, so often
adolescents are drawn to members of their own crowds, especially
if their crowd is defined by activities rather than more superficial
characteristics such as race or socioeconomic status. However,
interests can be shared across crowd divisions. Accordingly, while
an adolescent's closest friends are almost always part of the
same clique (i.e., they interact frequently within the same small
friend group), they are not always part of the same crowd, especially
if multiple crowds have similar lifestyles (Brown et al., 1994).

Crowd-Hopping

Further emphasizing the flexible nature of crowd membership,
some adolescents are not stably linked to one specific crowd--some

                                                                        Peer Relationships | 359
individuals are associated with multiple crowds, while others are
not stably linked to any crowds and "float" among several. These
appear more closely attached to individuals outside the peer group
(family, dropout friends, friends from a non-school organization,
etc.). Others may consciously work to change crowd affiliations to
express different interests or achieve a change in social status. The
crowd with which an adolescent desires to be identified is far less
stable than the personal attributes by which the adolescent is likely
to be categorized by peers. Accordingly, adolescents who change
crowd membership (a process known as "crowd-hopping") tend to
have lower self-esteem, perhaps because they have not yet found
an environment and peer group that supports them. They likely
continue changing crowd membership until they find a fulfilling
niche (Brown et al., 1992).

The Rise of Crowds

Crowds first emerge in middle or junior high school, when children
transition from stable, self-contained classroom peer groups into
larger schools, where they interact with a more diverse body of
peers with less adult guidance. Crowds emerge to group students by
caricature and structure interactions between students of each type
(Brown et al., 1994). Early crowds are often based on social status,
especially among girls, with a small group of well-known children
being "popular" and the rest "unpopular." To maintain their status,
popular girls will avoid the overtures of less-popular children, which
actually makes them disliked (Eder, 1985). Many children stop
attempting to gain entry into the popular crowd and make friends
with other children instead, giving rise to new crowds (Brown et al.,
1994).

   The stereotypes on which crowd definitions are based change
over time as adolescents shift from grouping people by abstract
characteristics rather than activities ("geeks" rather than "the kids

360 | Peer Relationships
who read a lot"). With age, adolescents become more conscious of
crowd divisions and the social hierarchy (Brown, 2004). Distinctions
between crowds also become more nuanced, developing from
simple popular/unpopular dichotomies to less hierarchical
structures in which there are more than two levels of social
acceptability, often with several crowds at each level (Kinney, 1993;
Horn, 2003). As seen in cross-crowd friendships, some crowds
interact with each other more readily than others. This transition
to a more fluid social structure allows adolescents to change their
status over time by changing crowds, remaining in a crowd that
undergoes a change in status, or gaining the confidence and
perspective to reject the assumptions of the social hierarchy (Brown
et al., 1994; Kinney, 1993). Willingness to do so reflects a growing
sense of personal identity distinct from crowd membership.

The Decline of Crowds

Adolescents' attitudes toward crowds change over time--while
ninth-graders are willing to discriminate against members of other
crowds, twelfth-graders are less likely to do so (Horn,
2003). Adolescents also develop more multifaceted self-concepts
and reject crowd labels as simplistic attempts to describe an entire
personality (Brown et al., 1994). Across the high school years, crowd
significance as a basis for affiliation wanes (Horn, 2003), as does the
influence of crowds on an individual's behavior (Brown, 2004). In
fact, some studies indicate the importance of crowds peaks at age
12 or 13 (Brown et al., 1986). By the end of high school, adolescents
often feel constrained by impersonal, crowd-derived identities
(Larkin, 1979). This constraint, combined with the splintering off of
romantic couples from the rest of the crowd, may account for the
decline of crowd significance over time(Kuttler & La Greca, 2004).

                                                                        Peer Relationships | 361
Cliques

                          A clique is a group of

                          individuals who interact with

                          one another and share similar

                          interests. Interacting  with

                          cliques is part of normative

                          social development regardless

                          of gender, ethnicity, or

popularity. Although cliques are most commonly studied

during adolescence and middle childhood development, they exist

in all age groups. They are often bound together by shared social

characteristics such as ethnicity and socioeconomic status

(Labrum, 2016).

Typically, people in a clique will not have a completely open friend

group and can, therefore, "ban" members if they do something

considered unacceptable, such as talking to someone disliked. Some

cliques tend to isolate themselves as a group and view themselves

as superior to others, which can be demonstrated

through bullying and other antisocial behaviors.

One person may be part of multiple cliques, each forming and

functioning independently from one another. Cliques are relevant

in society due to the social influence or peer pressure that results

from interactions with individuals who share a common

characteristic. The outcomes associated with clique formations may

be endless, with varying degrees of influence (Miller, 1958). So, a

formal clique, such as a professional organization, would have a

different kind of influence as compared to a social clique consisting

of close friends.

A clique can also involve a high degree of social commitment

to a specific group. A stronger level of commitment results in an

individual having a reduced amount of interaction with other social

groups. Cliquish behavior often involves repetition with regard to

activities, vernacular, preferences, and manner, which can result in

362 | Peer Relationships
conflict with other cliques, creating "outsiders." Individuals can also
experience social isolation within their clique if their values and/or
behavior begin to differ from the rest of the group.

   Every clique has some form of organization that makes up the
network of social interaction (Peay, 1974). Informal clique networks
are groups that do not have a legitimate organizational structure
in which they can be established and dissolved in a shorter period.
An informal clique may consist of a person's friend group or co-
workers, while it may also identify other, more informal groups,
such as criminal gangs (Krackhardt, 1988). On the other hand, a
formal clique is a group with a socially accepted organization that is
hierarchical in structure. A formal clique is composed of members
who have identifiable roles and interactions with one another and
is found in the structure of numerous professional organizations,
businesses, and even family structures. Culture is a very influential
factor in the organization of clique structures because the
boundaries established through differences in cultural aspects are
persistent, even when the membership varies from time to time. For
example, the differences in language, beliefs, traditions, etc. have
always created a distinct separation or boundary between groups
of people even though the members of that particular group are
continually changing (Barth, 1998).

Development of Cliques

The formation and deformation of clique structures do not end with
adolescence, even though the number of interactions with clique
groups decreases, and the type of groups may change. As individuals
become adults, their social interpretations alter, and the formation
of their cliques originates from their immediate environment, rather
than from common social characteristics (Carstensen, 2016). A
clique should not be confused with a crowd because the smaller
size and specific boundaries of a group are what cause the group

                                                                        Peer Relationships | 363
formation to be considered a clique. A clique can develop in several
different ways and within environments that consist of individuals
who interact regularly. The structural cohesion of the clique is the
constant face-to-face interaction between members that can either
create or dissolve the group, depending upon the level of
interaction. If face-to-face interaction is regularly established, then
cohesion between individuals will form. However, if the face-to-face
interaction depreciates, then the cohesive social bond between said
individuals will eventually dissolve (Friedkin, 1984).

Social impact of Cliques

A clique may inhibit external social influence by impacting the
emotions, opinions, or behaviors of group members (Hochschild,
1979). There are many ways in which the perception of information
between members in a clique can influence other members on a
greater level than if they had received the same information from
a different source. For example, receiving information from a close
friend or family member is interpreted and responded to differently
compared to receiving the same information from someone who is
not within the clique structure. The satisfaction, interaction, and
closeness between the clique groups that we involve ourselves in
develops and changes throughout the years. Nevertheless, there is
always a constant morphing of both the individual and the group as
time goes on.

Homosociality to Hetersociality

Homosociality is the relationship between people of the same-sex,
not romantic in nature. In children and young adolescents, more
friendships are with peers of the same sex. As adolescents mature,

364 | Peer Relationships
they become open to heterosociality, having relationships with
people of the opposite sex, and bisociality, having relationships
with same- and opposite-sex peers.

   This process tends to occur in stages, as children transition from
almost exclusive homosociality to heterosociality and eventually to
romantic relationships. In stage one of this progression, cliques
are same-sex and segregated from the opposite sex. In the second
stage, opposite-sex cliques with similar interests start to associate.
During the third stage, sex-segregated cliques break down, often
with clique leaders pairing off into close friendships and romantic
relationships. The fourth stage is when other clique members also
leave the homosocial clique for hetero- and bisocial or romantic
relationships. By stage five, cliques are less important to teens, and
close or romantic relationships are the priority.

     Cliques, Crowds, and Conformity

                          One or more interactive elements has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You can
              view them online here:
              https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=59#oe
              mbed-1

        Video 11.2.1. Adolescence, Cliques, Crowds, Conformity
     discusses the different peer groups and their influence on
     youth culture.

                                                                        Peer Relationships | 365
Romantic Relationships

Adolescence is the developmental period during which romantic
relationships typically first emerge. Initially, same-sex peer groups
that were common during childhood expand into mixed-sex peer
groups that are more characteristic of adolescence. Romantic
relationships often form in the context of these mixed-sex peer
groups (Connolly, Furman, & Konarski, 2000).

   Although romantic relationships during adolescence are often
short-lived rather than long-term committed partnerships, their
importance should not be minimized. Adolescents spend a great
deal of time focused on romantic relationships, and their positive
and negative emotions are more tied to romantic relationships (or
lack thereof) than to friendships, family relationships, or school
(Furman & Shaffer, 2003). Romantic relationships contribute to
adolescents' identity formation, changes in family and peer
relationships, and adolescents' emotional and behavioral
adjustment.

   Furthermore, romantic relationships are centrally connected to
adolescents' emerging sexuality. Parents, policymakers, and
researchers have devoted a great deal of attention to adolescents'
sexuality, in large part because of concerns related to sexual
intercourse, contraception, and preventing teen pregnancies.
However, sexuality involves more than this narrow focus. Romantic
relationships are a domain in which adolescents experiment with
new behaviors and identities.

Sociometric Status

A child's status among their peers will influence their membership
in peer groups and their ability to make friends. Sociometric
status is a measurement that reflects the degree to which someone

366 | Peer Relationships
is liked or disliked by their peers as a group. In developmental
psychology, this system has been used to examine children's status
in peer groups, its stability over time, the characteristics that
determine it, and the long-term implications of one's popularity or
rejection by peers.

   The most commonly used sociometric system, developed by Coie
& Dodge (1988), asks children to rate how much they like or dislike
each of their classmates and uses these responses to classify them
into five groups.

                   Figure 3.11.2. Sociometric peer statuses.
   Popular children are those liked by many of their peers and
disliked by few. These individuals are skilled at social interactions
and maintain positive peer relationships. They tend to be
cooperative, friendly, sociable, and sensitive to others. They are
capable of being assertive without being aggressive, and thus can
get what they want without harming others. Among this group,
there may be distinct levels of popularity:

   Accepted kids are the most common sub-group among the
      popular. While they are generally well-liked, they are not as
      magnetic as the very popular kids.

   Very popular kids are highly charismatic and draw peers to
      them.

Rejected children are designated as rejected if they receive many

                                                                        Peer Relationships | 367
negative nominations and few positive nominations. These
individuals often have poor academic performance and more
behavior problems in school. They are also at higher risk for
delinquent behaviors and legal problems. These kids are more likely
to be diagnosed with ADHD, conduct disorder, and substance abuse.
They tend to be isolated, lonely, and at risk for depression. Rejected
youth can be categorized into two types:

   Aggressive-rejected kids display hostile and threatening
      behavior, are physically aggressive, and disruptive. They may
      bully others, withhold friendship, ignore and exclude others.
      While they are lacking, they tend to overestimate their social
      competence.

   Withdrawn-rejected kids are socially withdrawn, wary, timid,
      anxious in social situations, and lack confidence. They are at
      risk of being bullied.

Individuals that are liked by many peers, but also disliked by many
are designated as controversial. This group may possess
characteristics of both the popular and the rejected group. These
individuals tend to be aggressive, disruptive, and prone to anger.
However, they may also be cooperative and social. They are often
socially active and good group leaders. Their peers often view them
as arrogant and snobbish.

   The neglected children are designated as neglected if they receive
few positive or negative nominations. These children are not
especially liked or disliked by peers and tend to go unnoticed. As
a result, they may be isolated and especially avoid confrontation
or aggressive interactions. This group does tend to do well
academically.

   Finally, the average kids are designated as such because they
receive an average number of both positive and negative
nominations. They are liked by a small group of peers, but not
disliked by very many.

368 | Peer Relationships
       Figure 3.11.3. Sociometric peer statuses and characteristics.

Popularity

What makes a child popular? Several physical, cognitive, and
behavioral factors impact popularity. First, adolescents that are
perceived to be physically attractive tend to be more popular among
their peers. Cognitive traits matter too. Individuals that
demonstrate higher intelligence and do well academically tend to
be more liked. Also, those that can take another's perspective and
demonstrate social problem-solving skills are favored. Kids that can
manage their emotions and behave appropriately gain higher status.
Finally, kids like peers that are confident without being conceited.

Interventions

What can be done to help those that are not well-liked? For
neglected kids, social skills training and encouraging them to join
activities can help them become noticed by their peers and make

                                                                       Peer Relationships | 369
friends. For rejected kids, they may need support to help with anger
management, to overcome anxiety, and cope with depression. This
group can also benefit from social skills training to learn social
competence and gain confidence.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=59#oembed-4

Bullying

Bullying is unwanted, aggressive behavior among school-aged
children that involves a real or perceived power imbalance. The
behavior is repeated, or has the potential to be repeated, over time.
Both kids who are bullied and who bully others may have serious,
lasting problems.

   In order to be considered bullying, the behavior must be
aggressive and include:

   An Imbalance of Power: Kids who bully use their power--such
      as physical strength, access to embarrassing information, or
      popularity--to control or harm others. Power imbalances can
      change over time and in different situations, even if they
      involve the same people.

   Repetition: Bullying behaviors happen more than once or have
      the potential to happen more than once.

Bullying includes actions, such as making threats, spreading rumors,
attacking someone physically or verbally, and excluding someone

370 | Peer Relationships
from a group on purpose. Bullying is not peer conflict, dating
violence, hazing, gang violence, harassment (legal definition), or
stalking. While these issues may also be problematic, they do not
meet the criteria for bullying behavior.

Types of Bullying

There are several types of bullying, and it is not unusual for a bully
to utilize more than one type. Verbal bullying is saying, or writing
mean things and may include behaviors like teasing or name-calling,
inappropriate sexual comments, taunting, and threatening to cause
harm. Social bullying is sometimes referred to as relational bullying.
It involves behaviors such as hurting someone's reputation or
relationships by purposely excluding them or getting others to
exclude them, spreading rumors about someone, or embarrassing
someone in public. Physical bullying is hurting a person's body or
possessions by hitting, kicking, or pinching, spitting, tripping or
pushing, taking or breaking someone's things, or making mean or
rude hand gestures.

The Roles in Bullying

There are many roles that individuals may take in bullying
situations. Kids can bully others, they can be bullied, or they may
witness bullying. Some may play more than one role, sometimes
being both bullied and the bully. It is important to understand the
multiple roles involved in these situations in order to prevent and
respond to bullying effectively.

                                                                         Peer Relationships | 371
Importance of Not Labeling Kids

When referring to a bullying situation, it is easy to call the kids who
bully others "bullies" and those who are targeted "victims," but this
may have unintended consequences. When children are labeled as
"bullies" or "victims," it may send the message that the individual's
behavior cannot change. It also fails to recognize the multiple roles
one might play in different bullying situations. Labeling also
disregards other factors contributing to the behavior such as peer
influence or school climate.

   Instead of labeling the teens involved, focus on the behavior. For
instance, instead of calling someone a "bully," refer to them as "the
person who bullied." Instead of calling a person a "victim," refer to
them as "the person who was bullied."

The Role of Bully

The roles individuals play in bullying are not limited to those who
bully others and those who are bullied. Some researchers talk about
the "circle of bullying" to define both those directly involved in
bullying and those who actively or passively assist the behavior or
defend against it. Direct roles include:

   Those who Bully: These teens engage in bullying behavior
      towards their peers. There are many risk factors that may
      contribute to their involvement in the behavior. Often, these
      kids require support to change their behavior and address any
      other challenges that may be influencing their behavior.

   Those who are Bullied: These teens are the targets of bullying
      behavior. Some factors put them at more risk of being bullied,
      but not all kids with these characteristics will be bullied.
      Sometimes, these individuals may need help learning how to
      respond to bullying.

372 | Peer Relationships
Witnesses to Bullying

Even if a person is not directly involved in bullying, they may be
contributing to the behavior. Witnessing the behavior may also
affect the situation, so they need to learn what they should do
when they see bullying happen. Roles kids play when they witness
bullying include:

   Those who Assist: These individuals may not start the bullying
      or lead in the bullying behavior, but serve as an "assistant" to
      those who are bullying. These kids may encourage bullying
      behavior and occasionally join in.

   Those who Reinforce: These kids are not directly involved in
      the bullying behavior, but they give the bullying an audience.
      They will often laugh or provide support for those who are
      engaging in bullying. This may encourage the bullying
      to continue.

   Outsiders: These individuals remain separate from the bullying
      situation. They neither reinforce the bullying behavior nor
      defend the person being bullied. Some may watch what is
      going on but do not provide feedback about the situation to
      show they are on anyone's side. Even so, providing an audience
      may encourage bullying behavior. These witnesses may want to
      help but do not know-how.

   Those who Defend: These witnesses actively comfort the
      person being bullied and may come to their defense when
      bullying occurs.

Most participants play more than one role in bullying over time. In
some cases, they may be directly involved in bullying as the one
bullying others or being bullied. In others, they may witness bullying
and play an assisting or defending role. Every situation is different.
Some kids are both bullied and bully others. It is important to note
the multiple roles kids play, because those who are both bullied
and bully others may be at more risk for adverse outcomes, such

                                                                        Peer Relationships | 373
as depression or suicidal ideation. Also, it highlights the need to
engage all kids in prevention efforts, not just those who are known
to be directly involved.

     Bystanders: Become an Upstander to Bullying

                          One or more interactive elements has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You can
              view them online here:
              https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=59#oe
              mbed-2

        Video 11.4.1. Bystander discusses the roles of a bullying
     incident and how bystanders may be key to preventing and
     stopping bullying.

Who Is at Risk?

No single factor puts a child at risk of being bullied or bullying
others. Bullying can happen anywhere--cities, suburbs, or rural
towns. Depending on the environment, some groups--such as
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, or questioning (LGBTQ) youth,
youth with disabilities, and socially isolated youth--may be at an
increased risk of being bullied.

374 | Peer Relationships
Those at Risk of Being Bullied

Generally, those who are bullied have one or more risk factors.
Adolescents that are perceived as different from their peers, such
as being overweight or underweight, wearing glasses or different
clothing, being new to a school, or being unable to afford what kids
consider "cool" are at risk for bullying. As are those perceived as
weak or unable to defend themselves or are less popular than others
and have few friends. Also, at risk for bullying are those that are
depressed, anxious, or have low self-esteem. Finally, those that do
not get along well with others, are seen as annoying or provoking,
or antagonize others for attention are more likely to be bullied.
However, even if a child has these risk factors, it does not mean that
they will be bullied.

Those More Likely to Bully Others

There are two types of kids who are more likely to bully others. The
first is well-connected to their peers, have social power, is overly
concerned about their popularity, and likes to dominate or be in
charge of others. The others are more isolated from their peers and
may be depressed or anxious, have low self-esteem, be less involved
in school, be easily pressured by peers, or not identify with the
emotions or feelings of others.

   There are specific risk factors that make someone more likely to
bully others. Those that are aggressive or easily frustrated, have
difficulty following rules, and view violence in a positive way are
more likely to bully. Also, those that think badly of others and have
friends who bully are at higher risk for the same behavior. Finally,
kids that have less parental involvement or are having issues at
home may display more bullying behaviors.

   Remember, those who bully others do not need to be stronger

                                                                        Peer Relationships | 375
or bigger than those they bully. The power imbalance can come
from several sources--popularity, strength, cognitive ability--and
children who bully may have more than one of these characteristics.

Warning Signs of Bullying

There are many warning signs that may indicate that someone is
affected by bullying--either being bullied or bullying others.
Recognizing the warning signs is an essential first step in taking
action against bullying. Not all children who are bullied or are
bullying others ask for help.

   It is important to talk with children who show signs of being
bullied or bullying others. These warning signs can also point to
other issues or problems, such as depression or substance abuse.
Talking to the child can help identify the root of the problem.

Signs of Being Bullied

Look for changes in the child. However, be aware that not all
children who are bullied exhibit warning signs. Some signs that
may point to a bullying problem are unexplainable injuries or lost
and destroyed clothing, books, electronics, or jewelry. Those being
bullied may report frequent headaches or stomach aches, feeling
sick, or faking illness. They may have changes in eating habits, like
suddenly skipping meals or binge eating. Kids may come home from
school hungry because they did not eat lunch. They may also have
difficulty sleeping or frequent nightmares.

376 | Peer Relationships
Signs of Bullying Others

Kids may be bullying others if they get into physical or verbal fights
or have friends who bully others. They may demonstrate increasing
levels of aggressive behavior and get sent to the principal's office or
detention frequently. They may also have unexplained extra money
or new belongings.

Why Don't Kids Ask for Help?

Statistics from the 2012 Indicators of School Crime and Safety show
that an adult was notified in less than half (40%) of bullying
incidents. Kids do not tell adults for many reasons. Fo one, bullying
can make a child feel helpless. Kids may want to handle it on their
own to feel in control again. They may fear being seen as weak or
a tattletale. Kids may fear backlash from the kid who bullied them.
Bullying can be a humiliating experience. Kids may not want adults
to know what is being said about them, whether true or false. They
may also fear that adults will judge them or punish them for being
weak. Kids who are bullied may already feel socially isolated. They
may feel like no one cares or could understand. Finally, kids may fear
being rejected by their peers. Friends can help protect kids from
bullying, and kids can fear losing this support.

Effects of Bullying

Bullying can affect everyone--those who are bullied, those who
bully, and those who witness bullying. Bullying is linked to many
negative outcomes, including impacts on mental health, substance
use, and suicide. It is important to talk to kids to determine whether
bullying--or something else--is a concern.

                                                                        Peer Relationships | 377
Kids Who Are Bullied

Kids who are bullied can experience negative physical, school, and
mental health issues. Kids who are bullied are more likely to
experience depression and anxiety, increased feelings of sadness
and loneliness, changes in sleep and eating patterns, and loss of
interest in activities they used to enjoy. These issues may persist
into adulthood. They may have more health complaints. Decreased
academic achievement and school participation is a common effects
of being bullied. They are also more likely to miss, skip, or drop
out of school. A very small number of bullied kids might retaliate
through extremely violent measures. In 12 of 15 school shooting
cases in the 1990s, the shooters had a history of being bullied.

Kids Who Bully Others

Kids who bully others can also engage in violent and other risky
behaviors into adulthood. Kids who bully are more likely to abuse
alcohol and other drugs in adolescence and as adults. They are
also more likely to get into fights, vandalize property, and drop
out of school. They have criminal convictions and traffic citations
as adults. They may engage in early sexual activity. They are also
more likely to be abusive toward their romantic partners, spouses,
or children as adults.

Bystanders

Kids who witness bullying are more likely to miss or skip school.
They are also more like to use tobacco, alcohol, or other drugs.
Bystanders are at increased risk of developing mental health
problems, including depression and anxiety.

378 | Peer Relationships
The Relationship Between Bullying and Suicide

Media reports often link bullying with suicide. However, most youth
who are bullied do not have thoughts of suicide or engage in suicidal
behaviors. Although kids who are bullied are at risk of suicide,
bullying alone is not the cause. Many issues contribute to suicide
risk, including depression, problems at home, and trauma history.
Additionally, specific groups have an increased risk of suicide,
including American Indian and Alaskan Native, Asian American,
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender youth. This risk can be
increased further when these kids are not supported by parents,
peers, and schools. Bullying can make an unsupportive situation
worse.

Special Concern: Cyberbullying

Cyberbullying is bullying that takes place over digital devices like
cell phones, computers, and tablets. Cyberbullying can occur
through SMS, Text, and apps, or online in social media, forums,
or gaming where people can view, participate in, or share content.
Cyberbullying includes sending, posting, or sharing negative,
harmful, false, or mean content about someone else. It can include
sharing personal or private information about someone else,
causing embarrassment or humiliation. Some cyberbullying crosses
the line into unlawful or criminal behavior.

   With the prevalence of social media and digital forums,
comments, photos, posts, and content shared by individuals can
often be viewed by strangers, as well as acquaintances. The content
an individual shares online -- both their personal content as well
as any negative, mean, or hurtful content -- creates a kind of
permanent public record of their views, activities, and behavior.
This public record can be thought of as an online reputation, which

                                                                        Peer Relationships | 379
may be accessible to schools, employers, colleges, clubs, and others
who may be researching an individual now or in the future.
Cyberbullying can harm the online reputations of everyone involved
- not just the person being bullied, but those doing the bullying or
participating in it. Cyberbullying has unique concerns in that it can
be:

   Persistent: Digital devices offer the ability to immediately and
      continuously communicate 24 hours a day, so it can be difficult
      for children experiencing cyberbullying to find relief.

   Permanent: Most information communicated electronically is
      permanent and public, if not reported and removed. A negative
      online reputation, including for those who bully, can impact
      college admissions, employment, and other areas of life.

   Hard to Notice: Because teachers and parents may not
      overhear or see cyberbullying taking place, it is
      harder to recognize.

Cyberbullying and Online Gaming

Playing video games is a popular activity, with 72 percent of teens
gaming online. Many video games -- whether they are console,
web, or computer-based -- allow users to play with friends they
know in person and others they have met only online. While gaming
can have positive benefits like making new friends, socializing, and
learning how to strategize and problem solve, it is also another
place where cyberbullying occurs.

   The anonymity of players and the use of avatars allow users to
create alter-egos or fictional versions of themselves, which is part of
the fun of gaming. However, it also allows users to harass, bully, and
sometimes gang up on other players, sending or posting negative
or hurtful messages and using the game as a tool of harassment. If
someone is not performing well, other children may curse or make

380 | Peer Relationships
negative remarks that turn into bullying, or they might exclude the
person from playing together.

   Because players are anonymous, they cannot necessarily be held
accountable for their behavior, and their harassment can cause
some players to leave games. Some anonymous users use the game
as a means to harass strangers or to get their personal information,
like user names and passwords.

   There are things adults can do to prevent cyberbullying of
children who are gaming. Parents should play the game or observe
when the gaming happens to understand how it works and what a
child is exposed to in the game. Check in periodically with children
about who is online, and playing the game with them. Teach
children about safe online behavior, including not clicking on links
from strangers, not sharing personal information, not participating
in bullying behavior of other players, and what to do if they observe
or experience bullying. Establish rules about how much time a child
can spend playing video games.

Warning Signs of Cyberbullying

Many of the warning signs that cyberbullying is occurring happen
around a child's use of their device. Some of the warning signs that
a kid may be involved in cyberbullying include noticeable increases
or decreases in device use. Kids may exhibit unusual emotional
responses (laughter, anger, upset) to what is happening on their
devices. A teen hides their screen or device when others are near,
and avoids discussion about what they are doing on their device.
There may be sudden changes to social media accounts, with
accounts being shut down or new ones appearing. If a teen starts
to avoid social situations, even those that were enjoyed in the past.
Alternatively, if they become withdrawn or depressed, or lose
interest in people and activities.

                                                                        Peer Relationships | 381
What to Do When Cyberbullying Happens

When warning signs that a child may be involved in cyberbullying,
adults should take steps to investigate that kid's digital behavior.
Cyberbullying is a form of bullying, and adults should take the same
approach to address it: support the person being bullied, address
the bullying behavior of a participant, and show all involved that
cyberbullying is taken seriously. Because cyberbullying happens
online, responding to it requires different approaches. If an adult
thinks that cyberbullying is occurring, several things can be done.
First, recognize if there has been a change in mood or behavior
and explore what the cause might be. Try to determine if these
changes happen around a child's use of their digital devices. Ask
questions to learn what is happening, how it started, and who is
involved. Document what is happening and where. Take screenshots
of harmful posts or content, if possible. Most laws and policies note
that bullying is a repeated behavior, so records help to document
it. Report issues to social media platforms and refer to the school's
reporting policies. If a child has received physical threats, or if a
potential crime or illegal behavior is occurring, report it to the

police. Provide support. Peers, mentors, and trusted
adults can sometimes intervene publicly to
positively influence a situation where negative or
hurtful content posts about a child. Public
Intervention can include posting positive
comments about the person targeted with bullying
to try to shift the conversation in a positive
direction. It can also help to reach out to the child
who is bullying and the target of the bullying to
express concern. If possible, try to determine if
more professional support is needed for those
involved, such as speaking with a guidance
counselor or mental health professional.

382 | Peer Relationships
     Ways to Stop Bullying

        Video #. Ways to Stop Bullying.

                          One or more interactive elements has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You can
              view them online here:
              https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=59#oe
              mbed-5

CC licensed content, Original
   Peer Relationships. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van Hoose.
      Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College. Retrieved
      from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/chapter/
      peer-relationships/. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously
   Adolescent Psychology. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      adolescent. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike

                                                                        Peer Relationships | 383
Play

While play is often seen as something children do for leisure and
recreation, play is actually a crucial part of a children's
development. Play is a self-chosen and self-directed activity that
is focused on the process of play and not the product of it. Play
is individually constructed to meet the child's desires and needs.
Finally, play is imaginative and active (Gray, 2013). Play is children's
work. Through play, children develop cognitive skills and learn new
information. They learn and practice social skills, like effective
communication, self-regulation, conflict resolution, problem-
solving, and cooperation. Furthermore, they learn about themselves
by exploring roles, interests, skills, and relationships. Play is how
children explore their world.

Types of Play

According to Piaget, children engage in types of play that reflect
their level of cognitive development. Originally proposing three
levels of play: functional play, symbolic play, and games with rules.
Smilansky expanded on Piaget's model to add a fourth level:
constructive play. Each type of play emerges at different ages and
stages of cognitive development, and the prominence of the level of
play changes with maturation, as well (Johnson, Christie & Wardle
2005).

384 | Play
Functional Play

                                                  Functional play is the first type
                                                  of play activity in which
                                                  children engage. Functional
                                                  play involves repetitive,
                                                  physical actions, language, and
                                                  manipulation of objects.
                                                  Beginning in infancy, children
                                                  learn that they have control of
their bodies and objects, and they can act upon those objects.
Infants play through repetitive actions, like shaking a rattle,
splashing in the bath, or repeatedly dropping toys from their high
chair. These basic actions become play when the child deliberately
engages in the activity for pleasure (Frost, 1992). Eventually, as
children become more cognitively sophisticated, simple, repetitive
actions are replaced by more complex, coordinated actions.
Functional play is enjoyed by children throughout their childhood,
particularly as they discover and practice new motor skills, such as
sliding, climbing, stacking, jumping, and bouncing.

Constructive Play

By the age of two, children progress from simple,
repetitive functional play to goal-directed, creative activities. When
children manipulate objects to create something, they are engaging
in constructive play. They use objects like blocks, clay, and craft
supplies in an organized way to achieve a goal. Constructive play
is a form of hand-on inquiry where children gain knowledge by
posing questions, testing ideas, and gathering information (Drew et
al., 2008) through experimentation with basic materials to create

                                                                                            Play | 385
something more complex. This type of play encourages planning,

exploration, and discovery (Child Development Institute, 2010).

Constructive play facilitates

the      development  of

imagination, problem-solving

skills, fine motor skills,

and self-esteem. Build with

blocks help children learn

spatial  relationships.

Manipulating objects can

translate into comfort with manipulating words, ideas, and

concepts. This type of play prepares children for later academic,

social, and emotional successes (Leong & Bodrova, 2015) and to be

flexible thinking (Bruner 1972). Creating encourages the

development of positive self-esteem by offering children power

over their environment and a sense of accomplishment (Chaille,

2008). Constructive play also helps children develop character

virtues, such as tenacity, flexibility, creativity, courage, enthusiasm,

persistence, and adaptability (Child Development Institute, 2010).

Young children tend to prefer constructive play. When given a

choice of play activities, preschool children choose constructive

play more than 50% of the time (Rubin, Fein, & Vandenberg 1983).

Further, constructive play is a way to scaffold play as children

transition from function to symbolic play. Children should be

encouraged to engage in constructive play by providing children

with playtime and play materials for exploration. Providing inspiring

materials is key to promoting constructive play.

Symbolic Play

Symbolic play is the ability of children to use objects, actions, or
ideas to represent other objects, actions, or ideas in play. These
activities may include role-playing or make-believe play, such as

386 | Play
pretending to be a baby, firefighter, or monster, and make-believe
actions, such as driving a car by moving a pretend steering wheel, or
using a banana as a telephone. This level of play is widely considered
the most sophisticated play activity during the preschool and
kindergarten years. Symbolic play encourages the development of
social skills, academic abilities, early literacy concepts, and
behavioral self-regulation (Leong & Bodrova 2015).

                                                     At around 18-months-old,
                                                  toddlers begin to engage
                                                  in pretend play, and type of
                                                  symbolic play. They use objects
                                                  to represent something else,
                                                  like drinking from an empty cup
                                                  or pretending to feed a doll. As
                                                  children advance cognitive,
linguistically, and socially, their play begins to include fantasy,
drama, and imitation. Preschoolers are more capable of playing
roles and incorporating social norms in their pretend play. Their
role-plays and imagination become more sophisticated, and
socialization becomes an important aspect of their play activities.
Children assign roles to themselves and others, and their
interactions often involve sequenced steps and a predetermined
plan. Pretend play allows children to explore various roles and
expectations and do participate in activities that they may not
otherwise be allowed to explore in the real world. Through pretend
play, children learn skills in negotiation, listening, sharing, taking
turns, and respecting others' feelings, thoughts, ideas, and physical
space.
   The sophistication of symbolic play progresses through several
substages. The substages include either the child acting a role, the
child using an agent to act a role (such as a doll), or a group of
children with different roles. These stages also include different
types of objects in the play activity. Children may use objects that
resemble the real-life object that this represents, such as using
toy food to represent real food. Alternatively, the child may use

                                                                                            Play | 387
nonrealistic objects to represent real-life objects, such as using a
stick as a for a horse.

   Tabel 3.12.1. Substages of symbolic play development

Single pretend        Child takes role and uses object that resembles
transformation        the real object, such as the child pretending to
toward self with      eat toy food.
realistic objects

Object is pretend     Child uses object that resembles real objects
agent with            and that object is treated as if it acts, such as
realistic objects     the child has a doll and act as if it is eating.

Single pretend        Child uses object that has no resemblance to
transformation        real objects, such as the child forms a pancake
with nonrealistic     from molding clay.
object

Pretend role with     Child uses objects associated with a role that
realistic object      resembles real objects, such as the child
                      pretends to be a cook with toy food.

Multiple pretend      Child uses objects that resemble real-world
role                  objects while the child takes roles, such as
transformations       doctor, patient, and nurse while playing with
with realistic        dolls or toy animals.
object

Pretend role with     Child uses objects that have no resemblance to
nonrealistic object   real objects, such as using molding clay to
                      construct a farm.

Multiple pretend      Children use objects that resemble real objects,
roles with realistic  such as a group of children use a toy doctor's
object                kit and play the roles as doctor, patient, and
                      nurse.

Multiple pretend      Children use objects that have no resemblance
roles with            to real objects, such as molding clay to create
nonrealistic object   the pretend setting and designate roles to
                      enact.

Source: Frost et
al., 2001

       "In play a child is always above his average age, above
       his daily behavior; in play it is as though he were a head taller
       than himself. As in
       the focus of a magnifying glass, play contains all
       developmental tendencies in a condensed form; in play it is

388 | Play
       as though the child were trying to jump above the level of his
       normal behavior" (Vygotsk,1967, p.16).

While Piaget and others believed different types of play activities
were essential to development, Vygotsky's definition of play was
limited to pretend play. He believed that play must include the
creation of an imaginary situation, assigning and acting out of roles,
and following a set of rules specific to those roles (Bodrova & Leong,
2007). Play is a way for children to learn about symbols and separate
thoughts from objects. Vygotsky saw play as a means to help
children self-gratify. Through play, children can create fantasy
situations to get their needs met, regulate emotions, and delay
gratification. This level of play also aids children in learning self-
regulation by following the rules and adhering to the roles of the
play activity. Vygotsky believed that play provided scaffolding for
learning to assist children in operating at the upper-end of their
zone of proximal development.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=60#oembed-1

Video 3.12.1. Play: A Vygotskian Approach explains Vygotsky's beliefs
about the functions of play.

   Smilansky also emphasized the importance of symbolic and
pretend play. Her research in this area found that children that did
not engage in this level of play displayed cognitive and emotional
delays. This effect was especially present in underprivileged
children. In response, Smilansky proposed that to facilitate
children's development of pretend play, adults should encourage:

 1. Imitative role play. The child pretends to play a role and

                                                                                            Play | 389
      expresses it in an imitates that role. For example, "I am the
      teacher, and you are my students."
2. Make-believe with objects. Use nonrealistic objects to
      represent real objects and actions. For example, pretending a
      stick is a horse and riding it.
3. Verbal make-believe. Incorporate verbal dialog and
      descriptions in place of actions. For example, "Let's pretend I
      cooked the dinner, and now I am setting the table" when only
      the last activity is actually imitated.
4. Persistence in role play. The pretend play episode lasts for at
      least 10 minutes.
5. Interaction. Two or more players interact within the context of
      a play episode.
6. Verbal communication. There is some verbal interaction with
      other players related to the play episode (Frost, 1992).

Games with Rules

                                                  The final type of play is games
                                                  with rules. At this level, the play
                                                  activity has imposed rules that
                                                  must be followed by the
                                                  players. To successfully
                                                  participate at this level of play,
                                                  children must have the
                                                  cognitive ability to understand
                                                  and remember the rules. These
                                                  games also require the children
                                                  to self-regulation, curbing their
own desires and needs to adhere to the rules of the game. Games
with rules are often characterized by logic and order, and as
children mature they can develop method and planning in their
game playing (Frost et al., 2004).

390 | Play
   Through games with rules, school-age children develop an
understanding of cooperation and competition. By initiating their
own games with rules, children learn the need for rules, how to
negotiate with each other, and fairness so that the game is enjoyable
for everyone. Team sports and board games are games that have
very specific rules and encourage the development of strategy.
Electronic games are designed to target children at different stages
of development and often encourage the practice and mastery of
new skills through challenging tasks and fantasy (Frost et al., 2001).

Parten's Stages of Social Play

As we consider how play develops through childhood, we must
also examine changes in socialization during playing. As children
mature, they progress through several stages of non-social and
social play. Parten's stages of social play is a theory that categorizes
the ways in which children may socialize while participating in play
during different periods of development. Parten observed
American children at free play and recognized six different types
of play. Three types she labeled as non-social (unoccupied, solitary,
and onlooker) and three types were categorized as social play
(parallel, associative, and cooperative). Parten also found that once
a child has developed the ability to participate in a particular stage
of social play, they will use combinations of that stage and earlier
stages while playing. However, we find that younger children engage
in non-social play more than those older and, by age five, associative
and cooperative play are the most common forms of play (Dyer &
Moneta, 2006).

                                                                                            Play | 391
Unoccupied

                                  The earliest and least common style of play
                                  throughout childhood is the unoccupied
                                  stage. This is a non-social stage that starts
                                  in infancy and may appear as random
                                  behavior without a specific goal. During
                                  this time, the child is not playing. Sitting or
                                  standing still, random movements or
                                  movements without purpose that do not
meet the above definition of play can all be considered unoccupied
time. Infants and toddlers may spend significant parts of their day
disengaged from any play, but the amount of time spent unoccupied
should decrease as children age.

Solitary Play

                                    Another non-social stage is solitary play.
                                    Common in children 2-3 years of age, this
                                    style of play involves a child playing alone
                                    and maintaining focus on their activity.
                                    They do not interact with others, nor are
                                    they interested in what others are doing.
They also are not engaging in similar activities as the children
around them. No matter the play activity, whether functional,
constructive, symbolic, or game play, if the child is playing alone
then it is solitary play.

392 | Play
Onlooker Play

                                     Onlooker play is the final type of non-
                                     social play. During this style of play,
                                     children are observing others playing.
                                     The child may socialize with the other
                                     children, such as commenting on the
                                     activities and even make suggestions, but
                                     they will not directly join the play.
Onlooker play is different from unoccupied play because, while the
child is not participating in the play activity, they are engaged in
social interaction and active observation. Children can still benefit
from play activities that they observe, possibly learning behavior
and rules before attempting participation.

Parallel Play

                                      Sometimes seen as a transitory stage
                                      from immature non-social types to the
                                      more socially mature types of play,
                                      parallel play is when a child plays
                                      adjacent to, but not with, others. The
                                      child plays separately from others,
engaged in their own play with their own goals; however, the
children are close enough to observe and mimicking other's
behaviors.

                                                                                            Play | 393
Associative Play

                                     Around the age of 3, children will interact
                                     with each other and share toys; however,
                                     they are not yet working toward a
                                     common play goal. This more
                                     sophisticated social contact is
                                     associative play. The children will
engage in the same play activity and show interest in what others
are doing, but not in coordinating their activities with those people.
There is a substantial amount of interaction involved, but the
activities are not in sync.

Cooperative Play

                                   When children are interacting to achieve a
                                   common goal, this is cooperative play.
                                   The child is interested both in the people
                                   playing and in coordinating their
                                   activities. In cooperative play, the activity
                                   is organized, participants have assigned
                                   roles, and children may take on different
                                   tasks to reach their shared goal. There is
also increased self-identification with a group, and a group
identity may emerge. This style of play is more common toward the
end of the early childhood stage. Examples would be dramatic play
activities with roles, like playing school, or a game with rules, such
as freeze tag.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded

394 | Play
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=60#oembed-2

Video 3.12.2. The 6 Types of Play provides an overview of Parten's
stages of social play.

     Imaginary Companions

        An intriguing occurrence in early childhood is the emergence
     of imaginary companions. Researchers differ in how they
     define what qualifies as an imaginary companion. Some
     studies include only invisible characters that the child refers to
     in conversation, or plays with for an extended period. Other
     researchers also include objects that the child personifies,
     such as a stuffed toy or doll, or characters the child
     impersonates every day. Estimates of the number of children
     who have imaginary companions vary greatly (from as little as
     6% to as high as 65%) depending on what is included in the
     definition (Gleason, Sebanc, & Hartup, 2000).

       Little is known about why children create
    imaginary companions, and more than half of
    all companions have no obvious trigger in the
    child's life (Masih, 1978). Imaginary
    companions are sometimes based on real

                                                                                            Play | 395
    people, characters from stories, or simply
    names the child has heard (Gleason et al.,
    2000). Imaginary companions often change
    over time. In their study, Gleason et al. (2000)
    found that 40% of the imaginary companions
    of the children they studied changed, such as
    developing superpowers, switching age,
    gender, or even dying, and 68% of the
    characteristics of the companion were
    acquired over time. This could reflect greater
    complexity in the child's "creation" over time
    and/or a greater willingness to talk about their
    imaginary playmates.

       In addition, research suggests that contrary
    to the assumption that children with imaginary
    companions are compensating for poor social
    skills, several studies have found that these
    children are very sociable (Mauro, 1991;
    Singer & Singer, 1990; Gleason, 2002).
    However, studies have reported that children
    with imaginary companions are more likely to
    be first-borns or only-children (Masih, 1978;
    Gleason et al., 2000; Gleason, 2002). Although
    not all research has found a link between birth

396 | Play
    order and the incidence of imaginary
    playmates (Manosevitz, Prentice, & Wilson,
    1973). Moreover, some studies have found
    little or no difference in the presence of
    imaginary companions and parental divorce
    (Gleason et al., 2000), the number of people in
    the home, or the amount of time children are
    spending with real playmates (Masih, 1978;
    Gleason & Hohmann, 2006).

       Do children treat real friends differently? The
    answer appears to be not really. Young
    children view their relationship with their
    imaginary companion to be as supportive and
    nurturing as with their real friends. Gleason
    has suggested that this might suggest that
    children form a schema of what is a friend, and
    use this same schema in their interactions with
    both types of friends (Gleason et al., 2000;
    Gleason, 2002; Gleason & Hohmann, 2006).

CC licensed content, Original

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

                                                                                            Play | 397
CC licensed content, Shared previously
   Lifespan Development. Authored by: Martha Lally and Suzanne
      Valentine-French. Provided by: College of Lake County
      Foundation . Retrieved from: http://dept.clcillinois.edu/psy/
      LifespanDevelopment.pdf. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike

All rights reserved content
   Play: A Vygotskian Approach . Provided by: Davidson Films.
      Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/bulTeiHu8ME. License:
      Public Domain: No Known Copyright
   The 6 Types of Play. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/
      EQhuSeKB7pQ. License: All Rights Reserved

398 | Play
Moral Development

The founder of psychoanalysis, Freud (1962), proposed the existence
of a tension between the needs of society and the individual.
According to Freud, moral development proceeds when the
individual's selfish desires are repressed and replaced by the values
of important socializing agents in one's life (for instance, one's
parents). A proponent of behaviorism, Skinner (1972) similarly
focused on socialization as the primary force behind moral
development. In contrast to Freud's notion of a struggle between
internal and external forces, Skinner focused on the power of
external forces (reinforcement contingencies) to shape an
individual's development. While both Freud and Skinner focused
on the external forces that bear on morality (parents in the case
of Freud, and behavioral contingencies in the case of
Skinner), Piaget (1965) focused on the individual's construction,
construal, and interpretation of morality from a social-cognitive and
social-emotional perspective.

   Kohlberg (1963) expanded upon Piagetian notions of moral
development. While they both viewed moral development as a
result of a deliberate attempt to increase the coordination and
integration of one's orientation to the world, Kohlberg provided a
systematic 3-level, 6-stage sequence reflecting changes in moral
judgment throughout the lifespan. Specifically, Kohlberg argued
that development proceeds from a selfish desire to avoid
punishment (personal), to a concern for group functioning (societal),
to a concern for the consistent application of universal ethical
principles (moral).

   Turiel (1983) argued for a social domain approach to social
cognition, delineating how individuals differentiate moral (fairness,
equality, justice), societal (conventions, group functioning,
traditions), and psychological (personal, individual prerogative)
concepts from early in development throughout the lifespan. Over

                                                                      Moral Development | 399
the past 40 years, research findings have supported this model,
demonstrating how children, adolescents, and adults differentiate
moral rules from conventional rules, identify the personal domain
as a nonregulated domain, and evaluate multifaceted (or complex)
situations that involve more than one domain.

   For the past 20 years, researchers have expanded the field of
moral development, applying moral judgment, reasoning, and
emotion attribution to topics such as prejudice, aggression, theory
of mind, emotions, empathy, peer relationships, and parent-child
interactions.

Piaget's Theory of Moral Development

To understand adult morality, Piaget believed that it was necessary
to study both how morality manifests in the child's world as well
as the factors that contribute to the emergence of central moral
concepts such as welfare, justice, and rights. By interviewing
children, Piaget (1965) found that young children were focused on
authority mandates and that with age, children become
autonomous, evaluating actions from a set of independent
principles of morality.

   He developed two phases of moral development, one common
among children and the other common among adults.

Heteronomous Phase

The first is the Heteronomous Phase. This phase, more common
among children, is characterized by morality of constraint, the idea
that rules come from authority figures in one's life, such as parents,
teachers, and God. It also involves the idea that rules are permanent
no matter what. Thirdly, this phase of moral development includes

400 | Moral Development
the belief of immanent justice, that "naughty" behavior must always
be immediately punished and that the punishment will be
proportional. This absolutism in moral development is seen in
children's play from the age of 5, where they exhibit a blind belief
in the rules and ideas of right and wrong passed to them by their
elders.

Autonomous Phase

The second phase in Piaget's theory of moral development is
referred to as the Autonomous Phase. This phase is more common
after one has matured and is no longer a child. In this phase, people
begin to view the intentions behind actions as more important than
their consequences, subjective judgments. For instance, if a person
who is driving swerves in order to not hit a dog and then knocks
over a road sign, adults are likely to be less angry at the person than
if he or she had done it on purpose just for fun. Even though the
outcome is the same, people are more forgiving because of the good
intention of saving the dog. This phase also includes the idea that
people have different morals and that morality is not necessarily
universal. People in the Autonomous Phase also believe rules may be
broken under certain circumstances. For instance, Rosa Parks broke
the law by refusing to give up her seat on a bus, which was against
the law but something many people consider moral nonetheless.
In this phase, people also stop believing in the idea of immanent
justice.

Kohlberg's Theory of Moral Development

Psychologist Lawrence Kohlberg (1927-1987) extended upon the
foundation that Piaget built regarding moral and cognitive

                                                                      Moral Development | 401
development. Kohlberg, like Piaget, was interested in moral
reasoning. Moral reasoning does not necessarily equate to moral
behavior. Holding a particular belief does not mean that our
behavior will always be consistent with the belief. To develop this
theory, Kohlberg posed moral dilemmas to people of all ages, and
then he analyzed their answers to find evidence of their particular
stage of moral development. After presenting people with this and
various dilemmas, Kohlberg reviewed people's responses and placed
them in different stages of moral reasoning. According to Kohlberg,
an individual progresses from the capacity for pre-
conventional morality (before age 9) to the capacity for
conventional morality (early adolescence), and toward attaining
post-conventional morality (once formal operational thought is
attained), which only a few fully achieve.

Moral Stages According to Kohlberg

Using a stage model similar to Piaget's, Kohlberg proposed three
levels, with six stages, of moral development. Individuals experience
the stages universally and in sequence as they form beliefs about
justice. He named the levels simply preconventional, conventional,
and postconventional.

402 | Moral Development
   Figure 3.13.1. Kohlberg identified three levels of moral reasoning:
 pre-conventional, conventional, and post-conventional: Each level

               is associated with increasingly complex stages
                               of moral development.

Preconventional: Obedience and Mutual Advantage

The preconventional level of moral development coincides
approximately with the preschool period of life and with Piaget's
preoperational period of thinking. At this age, the child is still
relatively self-centered and insensitive to the moral effects of
actions on others. The result is a somewhat short-sighted
orientation to morality. Initially (Kohlberg's Stage 1), the child adopts
ethics of obedience and punishment --a sort of "morality of

                                                                      Moral Development | 403
keeping out of trouble." The rightness and wrongness of actions
are determined by whether actions are rewarded or punished by
authorities, such as parents or teachers. If helping yourself to a
cookie brings affectionate smiles from adults, then taking the cookie
is considered morally "good." If it brings scolding instead, then it is
morally "bad." The child does not think about why action might be
praised or scolded; in fact, says Kohlberg, he would be incapable, at
Stage 1, of considering the reasons even if adults offered them.

   Eventually, the child learns not only to respond to positive
consequences but also learns how to produce them by exchanging
favors with others. The new ability creates Stage 2, ethics of market
exchange. At this stage, the morally "good" action is one that favors
not only the child but another person directly involved. A "bad"
action is one that lacks this reciprocity. If trading the sandwich
from your lunch for the cookies in your friend's lunch is mutually
agreeable, then the trade is morally good; otherwise, it is not. This
perspective introduces a type of fairness into the child's thinking
for the first time. However, it still ignores the larger context of
actions--the effects on people not present or directly involved. In
Stage 2, for example, it would also be considered morally "good"
to pay a classmate to do another student's homework--or even to
avoid bullying--provided that both parties regard the arrangement
as being fair.

Conventional: Conformity to Peers and Society

As children move into the school years, their lives expand to include
a larger number and range of peers and (eventually) of the
community as a whole. The change leads to conventional morality,
which are beliefs based on what this larger array of people agrees
on--hence Kohlberg's use of the term "conventional." At first, in
Stage 3, the child's reference group are immediate peers, so Stage
3 is sometimes called the ethics of peer opinion. If peers believe,
for example, that it is morally good to behave politely with as many

404 | Moral Development
people as possible, then the child is likely to agree with the group
and to regard politeness as not merely an arbitrary social
convention, but a moral "good." This approach to moral belief is a bit
more stable than the approach in Stage 2 because the child is taking
into account the reactions not just of one other person, but of many.
But it can still lead astray if the group settles on beliefs that adults
consider morally wrong, like "Shoplifting for candy bars is fun and
desirable."

   Eventually, as the child becomes a youth and the social world
expands, even more, he or she acquires even larger numbers of
peers and friends. He or she is, therefore, more likely to encounter
disagreements about ethical issues and beliefs. Resolving the
complexities leads to Stage 4, the ethics of law and order, in which
the young person increasingly frames moral beliefs in terms of what
the majority of society believes. Now, an action is morally good if it
is legal or at least customarily approved by most people, including
people whom the youth does not know personally. This attitude
leads to an even more stable set of principles than in the previous
stage, though it is still not immune from ethical mistakes. A
community or society may agree, for example, that people of a
certain race should be treated with deliberate disrespect, or that
a factory owner is entitled to dump wastewater into a commonly
shared lake or river. Developing ethical principles that reliably avoid
mistakes like these requires further stages of moral development.

Postconventional: Social Contract and Universal Principles

As a person becomes able to think abstractly (or "formally," in
Piaget's sense), ethical beliefs shift from acceptance of what the
community does believe to the process by which community beliefs
are formed. The new focus constitutes Stage 5, the ethics of social
contract. Now an action, belief, or practice is morally good if it
has been created through fair, democratic processes that respect
the rights of the people affected. Consider, for example, the laws

                                                                      Moral Development | 405
in some areas that require motorcyclists to wear helmets. In what
sense are the laws about this behavior ethical? Was it created by
consulting with and gaining the consent of the relevant people?
Were cyclists consulted, and did they give consent? Or how about
doctors or the cyclists' families? Reasonable, thoughtful individuals
disagree about how thoroughly and fairly these consultation
processes should be. In focusing on the processes by which the law
was created; however, individuals are thinking according to Stage
5, the ethics of social contract, regardless of the position they take
about wearing helmets. In this sense, beliefs on both sides of a
debate about an issue can sometimes be morally sound, even if they
contradict each other.

   Paying attention to due process certainly seems like it should help
to avoid mindless conformity to conventional moral beliefs. As an
ethical strategy, though, it too can sometimes fail. The problem is
that an ethics of social contract places more faith in the democratic
process than the process sometimes deserves, and does not pay
enough attention to the content of what gets decided. In principle
(and occasionally in practice), a society could decide democratically
to kill off every member of a racial minority, but would deciding
this by due process make it ethical? The realization that ethical
means can sometimes serve unethical ends leads some individuals
toward Stage 6, the ethics of self-chosen, universal principles. At
this final stage, the morally good action is based on personally held
principles that apply both to the person's immediate life as well as
to the larger community and society. The universal principles may
include a belief in democratic due process (Stage 5 ethics), but also
other principles, such as a belief in the dignity of all human life or
the sacredness of the natural environment. At Stage 6, the universal
principles will guide a person's beliefs even if the principles mean
occasionally disagreeing with what is customary (Stage 4) or even
with what is legal (Stage 5).

406 | Moral Development
                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=61#oembed-1

Video 3.13.1. Kohlberg's Six Stages of Moral Development explains the
stages of moral reasoning and applies it to an example scenario.

Kohlberg and the Heinz Dilemma

The Heinz dilemma is a frequently used example to help us
understand Kohlberg's stages of moral development. How would
you answer this dilemma? Kohlberg was not interested in whether
you answer yes or no to the dilemma: Instead, he was interested in
the reasoning behind your answer.

     Kohlberg's Moral Dilema: Heinz

        In Europe, a woman was near death from a special kind of
     cancer. There was one drug that the doctors thought might
     save her. It was a form of radium that a druggist in the same
     town had recently discovered. The drug was expensive to
     make, but the druggist was charging ten times what the drug
     cost him to make. He paid $200 for the radium and charged
     $2,000 for a small dose of the drug. The sick woman's

                                                                      Moral Development | 407
     husband, Heinz, went to everyone he knew to borrow the
     money, but he could only get together about $1,000, which is
     half of what it cost. He told the druggist that his wife was
     dying and asked him to sell it cheaper or let him pay later.
     But the druggist said: "No, I discovered the drug and I'm
     going to make money from it." So Heinz got desperate and
     broke into the man's store to steal the drug for his wife.
     Should the husband have done that? (Kohlberg, 1969, p. 379)

From a theoretical point of view, it is not important what the
participant thinks one should do. Kohlberg's theory holds that the
justification the participant offers is what is significant, the form
of their response. Below are some of many examples of possible
arguments that belong to the six stages:

   Stage one (obedience): Heinz should not steal the medicine
      because he will consequently be put in prison, which will mean
      he is a bad person. OR Heinz should steal the medicine
      because it is only worth $200 and not how much the druggist
      wanted for it; Heinz had even offered to pay for it and was not
      stealing anything else.

   Stage two (self-interest): Heinz should steal the medicine
      because he will be much happier if he saves his wife, even if he
      will have to serve a prison sentence. OR Heinz should not steal
      the medicine because prison is an awful place, and he would
      more likely languish in a jail cell than over his wife's death.

   Stage three (conformity): Heinz should steal the medicine
      because his wife expects it; he wants to be a good husband. OR
      Heinz should not steal the drug because stealing is bad, and he
      is not a criminal; he has tried to do everything he can without
      breaking the law, you cannot blame him.

   Stage four (law-and-order): Heinz should not steal the
      medicine because the law prohibits stealing, making it illegal.

408 | Moral Development
      OR Heinz should steal the drug for his wife but also take the
      prescribed punishment for the crime as well as paying the
      druggist what he is owed. Criminals cannot just run around
      without regard for the law; actions have consequences.
   Stage five (social contract orientation): Heinz should steal the
      medicine because everyone has a right to choose life,
      regardless of the law. OR Heinz should not steal the medicine
      because the scientist has a right to fair compensation. Even if
      his wife is sick, it does not make his actions right.
   Stage six (universal human ethics): Heinz should steal the
      medicine because saving a human life is a more fundamental
      value than the property rights of another person. OR Heinz
      should not steal the medicine because others may need
      medicine just as badly, and their lives are equally significant.

     Think It Over

        Consider your decision-making processes. What guides
     your decisions? Are you primarily concerned with your
     personal well-being? Do you make choices based on what
     other people will think about your decision? Or are you
     guided by other principles? To what extent is this approach
     guided by your culture?

Kohlberg continued to explore his theory after he published his
research. He postulated that there could be other stages and that
there could be transitions into each stage. One thing that Kohlberg
never fully addressed was his use of nearly all-male samples. Men
and women tend to have very different styles of moral decision
making; men tend to be very justice-oriented, while women tend to
be more compassion oriented. In terms of Kohlberg's stages, women

                                                                      Moral Development | 409
tend to be in lower stages than men because of their compassion
orientation.

   Carol Gilligan was one of Kohlberg's research assistants. She
believed that Kohlberg's theory was inherently biased against
women. Gilligan suggests that the biggest reason that there is a
gender bias in Kohlberg's theory is that males tend to focus on
logic and rules. In contrast, women focus on caring for others and
relationships. She suggests, then, that in order to truly measure
women's moral development, it was necessary to create a measure
specifically for women. Gilligan was clear that she did not believe
neither male nor female moral development was better, but rather
that they were equally important.

Gilligan's Morality of Care

As logical as they sound, Kohlberg's stages of moral justice are not
sufficient for understanding the development of moral beliefs. To
see why, suppose that you have a student who asks for an extension
of the deadline for an assignment. The justice orientation of
Kohlberg's theory would prompt you to consider issues of whether
granting the request is fair. Would the late student be able to put
more effort into the assignment than other students? Would the
extension place a difficult demand on you, since you would have less
time to mark the assignments? These are important considerations
related to the rights of the students and the teacher. In addition
to these, however, are considerations having to do with the
responsibilities that you and the requesting student have for each
other and others. Does the student have a valid personal reason
(illness, death in the family, etc.) for the assignment being late? Will
the assignment lose its educational value if the student has to turn it
in prematurely? These latter questions have less to do with fairness
and rights and more to do with taking care of and responsibility for

410 | Moral Development
students. They require a framework different from Kohlberg's to be
understood fully.

   One such framework has been developed by Carol Gilligan, whose
ideas center on a morality of care, or system of beliefs about human
responsibilities, care, and consideration for others. Gilligan
proposed three moral positions that represent different extents or
breadth of ethical care. Unlike Kohlberg or Piaget, she does not
claim that the positions form a strictly developmental sequence, but
only that they can be ranked hierarchically according to their depth
or subtlety. In this respect, her theory is "semi-developmental" in
a way similar to Maslow's theory of motivation (Brown & Gilligan,
1992; Taylor, Gilligan, & Sullivan, 1995). Table 9.1 summarizes the
three moral positions from Gilligan's theory.

   Table 3.13.1. Positions of moral development according to Gilligan

Moral position               Definition of what is morally good

Position 1: Survival         Action that considers one's personal
orientation                  needs only

Position 2: Conventional care Action that considers others' needs or preferences, but not one's own

Position 3: Integrated care  Action that attempts to coordinate
                             one's own personal needs with those
                             of others

Position 1: Caring as Survival

The most basic kind of caring is a survival orientation, in which a
person is concerned primarily with his or her welfare. If a teenage
girl with this ethical position is wondering whether to get an
abortion, for example, she will be concerned entirely with the
effects of the abortion on herself. The morally good choice will be
whatever creates the least stress for herself, and that disrupts her
own life the least. Responsibilities to others (the baby, the father, or
her family) play little or no part in her thinking.

                                                                       Moral Development | 411
   As a moral position, a survival orientation is obviously not
satisfactory for classrooms on a widespread scale. If every student
only looked out for himself or herself, classroom life might become
rather unpleasant! Nonetheless, there are situations in which
focusing primarily on yourself is both a sign of good mental health
and relevant to teachers. For a child who has been bullied at school
or sexually abused at home, for example, it is both healthy
and morally desirable to speak out about how bullying or abuse has
affected the victim. Doing so means essentially looking out for the
victim's own needs at the expense of others' needs, including the
bully's or abuser's. Speaking out, in this case, requires a survival
orientation and is healthy because the child is taking care of herself.

Position 2: Conventional Caring

A more subtle moral position is caring for others, in which a person
is concerned about others' happiness and welfare, and about
reconciling or integrating others' needs where they conflict with
each other. In considering an abortion, for example, the teenager at
this position would think primarily about what other people prefer.
Do the father, her parents, and/or her doctor want her to keep the
child? The morally good choice becomes whatever will please others
the best. This position is more demanding than Position 1, ethically,
and intellectually, because it requires coordinating several persons'
needs and values. Nevertheless, it is often morally insufficient
because it ignores one crucial person: the self.

   In classrooms, students who operate from Position 2 can be very
desirable in some ways; they can be eager to please, considerate,
and good at fitting in and at working cooperatively with others.
Because these qualities are usually welcome in a busy classroom,
teachers can be tempted to reward students for developing and
using them. The problem with rewarding Position 2 ethics, however,
is that doing so neglects the student's development--his or her own

412 | Moral Development
academic and personal goals or values. Sooner or later, personal
goals, values, and identity need attention and care, and educators
have a responsibility for assisting students in discovering and
clarifying them.

Position 3: Integrated Caring

The most developed form of moral caring in Gilligan's model
is integrated caring, the coordination of personal needs and values
with those of others. Now the morally good choice takes account
of everyone, including yourself, not everyone except yourself. In
considering an abortion, a woman at Position 3 would think not
only about the consequences for the father, the unborn child, and
her family but also about the consequences for herself. How would
bearing a child affect her own needs, values, and plans? This
perspective leads to moral beliefs that are more comprehensive
but ironically are also more prone to dilemmas because the widest
possible range of individuals is being considered.

   In classrooms, integrated caring is most likely to surface
whenever teachers give students wide, sustained freedom to make
choices. If students have little flexibility in their actions, there is
little room for considering anyone's needs or values, whether their
own or others'. If the teacher says simply: "Do the homework on
page 50 and turn it in tomorrow morning," then the main issue
becomes compliance, not a moral choice. Suppose instead that she
says something like this: "Over the next two months, figure out
an inquiry project about the use of water resources in our town.
Organize it any way you want--talk to people, read widely about
it, and share it with the class in a way that all of us, including
yourself, will find meaningful." An assignment like this poses moral
challenges that are not only educational but also moral since it
requires students to make value judgments. Why? For one thing,
students must decide what aspect of the topic matters to them.

                                                                      Moral Development | 413
Such a decision is partly a matter of personal values. For another
thing, students have to consider how to make the topic meaningful
or important to others in the class. Third, because the timeline for
completion is relatively far in the future, students may have to weigh
personal priorities (like spending time with friends or family) against
educational priorities (working on the assignment a bit more on
the weekend). As you might suspect, some students might have
trouble making good choices when given this sort of freedom--and
their teachers might, therefore, be cautious about giving such an
assignment. Nevertheless, the difficulties in making choices are part
of Gilligan's point: integrated caring is indeed more demanding than
the caring based only on survival or on consideration of others. Not
all students may be ready for it.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=61#oembed-2

Video 3.13.2. Carol Gilligan's Theory of Moral Development explains
the difference in moral development from the care perspective that
females often take in society.

Forming a Sense of Rights and Responsibilities

When it comes to schooling and teaching, moral choices are not
restricted to occasional dramatic incidents but are woven into
almost every aspect of classroom life. Imagine this simple example.
Suppose that you are teaching, reading to a small group of second-
graders, and the students are taking turns reading a story out loud.

414 | Moral Development
Should you give every student the same amount of time to read,
even though some might benefit from having additional time? Or
should you give more time to the students who need extra help,
even if doing so bores classmates and deprives others of equal
shares of "floor time"? Which option is fairer, and which is more
considerate? Simple dilemmas like this happen every day at all grade
levels simply because students are diverse, and because class time
and a teacher's energy are finite.

   Embedded in this rather ordinary example are moral themes
about fairness or justice, on the one hand, and about consideration
or care on the other. It is important to keep both themes in mind
when thinking about how students develop beliefs about right or
wrong. A morality of justice is about human rights--or, more
specifically, about respect for fairness, impartiality, equality, and
individuals' independence. A morality of care, on the other hand,
is about human responsibilities--more specifically, about caring for
others, showing consideration for individuals' needs, and
interdependence among individuals. Students and teachers need
both forms of morality. In the next sections, therefore, we explain
a major example of each type of developmental theory, beginning
with the morality of justice.

Character Development: Integrating Ethical
Understanding, Care, and Action

The theories described so far all offer frameworks for
understanding how children grow into youth and adults. Those by
Maslow, Kohlberg, and Gilligan are more specific than the ones by
Erikson in that they focus on the development of an understanding
of ethics. From a teacher's point of view, though, the theories are
all limited in two ways. One problem is that they focus primarily on
cognition--on what children think about ethical issues--more than
on emotions and actions. The other is that they say little about

                                                                      Moral Development | 415
how to encourage ethical development. Encouragement is part of
teachers' jobs, and doing it well requires understanding not only
what students know about ethics, but also how they feel about it and
what ethical actions they are prepared to take.

   Many educators have recognized the need for children to be
guided in the development of ethics and morals, and a number of
them have, therefore, developed practical programs that integrate
ethical understanding, care, and action. As a group, the programs
are often called character education. However, individual programs
have a variety of specific names (for example, moral dilemma
education, integrative ethical education, social competence
education, and many more). Details of the programs vary, but they
all combine a focus on ethical knowledge with attention to ethical
feelings and actions (Elkind & Sweet, 2004; Berkowitz & Bier, 2006;
Narvaez, 2010). Character education programs go well beyond just
teaching students to obey ethical rules, such as "Always tell the
whole truth" or "Always do what the teacher tells you to do." Such
rules require very little thinking on the part of the student, and
there are usually occasions in which a rule that is supposedly
universal needs to be modified, "bent," or even disobeyed. (For
example, if telling the whole truth might hurt someone's feelings, it
might sometimes be more considerate--and thus more ethical--to
soften the truth a bit, or even to say nothing at all.)

   Instead, character education is about inviting students to think
about the broad questions of their life, such as "What kind of person
should I be?" or "How should I live my life?" Thoughtful answers
to such broad questions help to answer a host of more specific
questions that have ethical implications. For example, "Should I
listen to the teacher right now, even if she is a bit boring, or just tune
out?" or "Should I offer to help my friend with the homework she is
struggling with, or hold back, so that learns to do it herself?" Most
of the time, there is not enough time to reason about questions
like these deliberately or consciously. Responses have to become
intuitive, automatic, and embodied --meaning that they have to be
based on fairly immediate emotional responses (Narvaez, 2009).

416 | Moral Development
The goal of character education is to develop students' capacities
to respond to daily ethical choices not only consciously and
cognitively, but also intuitively and emotionally. To the extent that
this goal is met, students can indeed live a good, ethically
responsible life.

Schoolwide Programs of Character Education

In the most comprehensive approaches to character education, an
entire school commits itself to developing students' ethical
character, despite the immense diversity among students (Minow,
Schweder, & Markus, 2008). All members of the staff--not just
teachers and administrators, but also custodians and educational
assistants--focus on developing positive relationships with
students. The underlying theme that develops is one of cooperation
and mutual care, not competition. Fairness, respect, and honesty
pervade class and school activities; discipline, for example, focuses
on solving conflicts between students and between students and
teachers, rather than on rewarding obedience or punishing wrong-
doers. The approach requires significant reliance on democratic
meetings and discussions, both in classrooms and wherever else
groups work together in school.

     Building a Culture of Kindness

                          One or more interactive elements has been

                                                                       Moral Development | 417
                          excluded from this version of the text. You can
              view them online here:
              https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=61#oe
              mbed-3

        Video 3.13.3. Building a Culture of Kindness with a Day of
     Services discusses ways that schools are building character
     education into their programs and the impact it is having
     on students.

Classroom Programs of Character Education

Even if a teacher is teaching character education simply within her
classroom, there are many strategies available. The goal, in this
case, is to establish the classroom as a place where everyone feels
included, and where everyone treats everyone else with civility and
respect. Conflicts and disagreements may still occur, but in a caring
community, they can be resolved without undue anger or hostility.
Here are a few ways to work toward this sort of classroom:

   Use class meetings to decide on as many important matters as
      possible--such as the expected rules of behavior, important
      classroom activities, or ongoing disagreements.

   Try arranging for students to collaborate on significant
      projects and tasks.

   Arrange a "Buddies" program in which students of different
      grade levels work together on a significant task. Older students

418 | Moral Development
      can sometimes assist younger students by reading to them, by
      listening to them read, or both. If an older student is having
      trouble with reading himself or herself, furthermore, a reading
      buddies program can sometimes also be helpful to the older
      student.
   Familiarize students with conflict resolution strategies and
      practice using them when needed.
   Many areas of curriculum lend themselves to discussions
      about ethical issues. Obvious examples are certain novels,
      short stories, and historical events. However, ethical issues
      lurk elsewhere as well. Teaching nutrition, for example, can
      raise issues about the humane treatment of animals that will be
      slaughtered for food, and about the ethical acceptability of
      using a large number of grains to feed animals even though
      many people in the world do not have enough to eat.
   Service-learning projects can be very helpful in highlighting
      issues of social justice. Planning, working at, and reflecting
      about a local soup kitchen, tutoring students from low-income
      families, performing simple repairs on homes in need: projects
      like these broaden knowledge of society and the needs of its
      citizens.

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Adolescent Psychology. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      adolescent. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike

                                                                      Moral Development | 419
Chapter Summary: The

Developing Learner

Understanding development, or the long-term changes in growth,
behavior, and knowledge, helps teachers to hold appropriate
expectations for students as well as to keep students' individual
diversity in perspective. From kindergarten through the end of high
school, students double their height, triple their weight, experience
the social and hormonal effects of puberty, and improve basic motor
skills. Their health is generally good, though illnesses are affected
significantly by students' economic and social circumstances.

   Cognitively, students develop major new abilities to think logically
and abstractly, based on a foundation of sensory and motor
experiences with the objects and people around them. Jean Piaget
has one well-known theory detailing how these changes unfold.

   Socially, students face and resolve a number of issues--especially
the issue of industry (dedicated, sustained work) during childhood
and the issue of identity during adolescence. Erik Erikson has
described these crises in detail, as well as social crises that precede
and follow the school years. Students are motivated both by basic
human needs (food, safety, belonging, esteem) and by needs to
enhance themselves psychologically (self-actualization). Abraham
Maslow has described these motivations and how they relate to
each other.

   Morally, students develop both a sense of justice and of care
for others, and their thinking in each of these realms undergoes
important changes as they mature. Lawrence Kohlberg has
described changes in children and youth's beliefs about justice, and
Carol Gilligan has described changes in their beliefs about care.
Character education goes beyond describing students' beliefs about
ethics; it is a group of educational programs and teaching strategies

420 | Chapter Summary: The
Developing Learner
that combines attention to moral belief with attention to students'
ethical feelings and ethical actions.

                                     Chapter Summary: The Developing Learner | 421
Glossary

analytic thought:
   thought that results from analysis, such as a systematic ranking

of pros and cons, risks and consequences, possibilities and facts.
Analytic thought depends on logic and rationality

   behavioral decision-making theory:
   proposes that adolescents and adults both weigh the potential
rewards and consequences of an action. However, research has
shown that adolescents seem to give more weight to rewards,
particularly social rewards, than do adults
   constructivist perspective:
   based on the work of Piaget, a quantitative, stage-theory
approach. This view hypothesizes that adolescents' cognitive
improvement is relatively sudden and drastic, as adolescents learn
by acting on their environment and they actively construct
knowledge
   deductive reasoning:
   reasoning from a general statement, premise, or principle, though
logical steps to figure out (deduce) specifics. Also called top-down
processing
   divided attention:
   the ability to pay attention to two or more stimuli at the same
time; this ability improves during adolescence
   dual process model/dual processing:
   the notion that two networks exist within the human brain, one
for emotional processing of stimuli and one for analytic reasoning
   formal operational thought:
   the fourth and final stage of Piaget's theory of cognitive
development, characterized by more systematic logical thinking and
by the ability to understand and systematically manipulate abstract
concepts
   hypothetical thought:

422 | Glossary
   reasoning that includes propositions and possibilities that may
not reflect reality

   -information-processing perspective:
   derives from the study of artificial intelligence and explains
cognitive development in terms of the growth of specific
components of the overall process of thinking
   intuitive thought:
   thoughts that arise from an emotion or a hunch, beyond rational
explanation, and are influenced by past experiences and cultural
assumptions
   metacognition:
   refers to "thinking about thinking" and it is relevant in social
cognition and results in increased introspection, self-
consciousness, and intellectualization during adolescence
   mnemonic devices:
   mental strategies to help learn and remember information more
efficiently; improves during adolescence
   relativistic thinking:
   thinking that understands the relative or situational nature of
circumstances
   selective attention:
   the process by which one focuses on one stimulus while tuning
out another; this ability improves during adolescence
   classification:
   the arrangement of information into categories or classes
   concrete operational stage of cognitive development:
   Piaget's stage of development during middle childhood that
emphasizes the use of logical thought, especially as applied to
concrete, or physical objects
   fast-mapping:
   a word learning process in which children are able to learn words
quickly because they associate new words to words that they
already know
   identity:

                                                                                      Glossary | 423
   the understanding that objects have an identity or qualities that
do not change even if the object is altered in some way

   long-term memory:
   the third component of the memory system where information is
stored for long periods of time
   reciprocity:
   the understanding that changing one quality of an object can be
compensated for by changes in another quality of that object
   reversibility:
   the understanding that some things that have been changed can
be returned to their original state
   sensory memory:
   the first component of the memory system where information
comes in through the 5 senses and is processed if the mind believes
that the information is important
   working memory:
   the second component of the memory system where information
that has been processed in sensory memory goes. Working memory
includes all the information that you are consciously aware of
   accommodation:
   when we restructure or modify what we already know so that new
information can fit in better
   assimilation:
   when we modify or change new information to fit into our
schemas (what we already know)
   a single word that is used to express a complete, meaningful
thought
   infantile or childhood amnesia:
   the idea that people forget everything that happened to them
before the age of 3
   object permanence:
   the realization that objects (including people) still exist even if
they can no longer be seen, touched, or heard
   primary circular reactions:

424 | Glossary
   the first two stages of Piaget's sensorimotor intelligence which
involve the infant's responses to its own body

   schema:
   a set of linked mental representations of the world, which we use
both to understand and to respond to situations
   secondary circular reactions:
   stages 3 and 4 of Piaget's sensorimotor intelligence which involves
the infant's responses to objects and people
   sensorimotor intelligence:
   Piaget's term for the way infants think (by using their senses and
motor skills) during the first stage of cognitive development
   tertiary circular reactions:
   consist of actions (stage 5) and ideas (stage 6) where infants
become more creative in their thinking
   classification: the arrangement of information into categories or
classes
   concrete operational stage of cognitive development: Piaget's
stage of development during middle childhood emphasizes the use
of logical thought, especially as applied to concrete, or physical
objects
   fast-mapping: a word learning process in which children are able
to learn words quickly because they associate new words with
words that they already know
   identity: the understanding that objects have an identity or
qualities that do not change even if the object is altered in some way
   long-term memory: the third component of the memory system
where information is stored for long periods of time
   reciprocity: the understanding that changing one quality of an
object can be compensated for by changes in another quality of that
object
   reversibility: the understanding that some things that have been
changed can be returned to their original state
   sensory memory: the first component of the memory system
where information comes in through the 5 senses and is processed
if the mind believes that the information is important

                                                                                      Glossary | 425
   working memory: the second component of the memory system
where information that has been processed in sensory memory
goes. Working memory includes all the information that you are
consciously aware of

   axons:
   fibers that extend from the neurons and transmit electrochemical
impulses from that neuron to the dendrites of other neurons
   bed-sharing:
   when two or more people sleep in the same bed
   cephalocaudal:
   refers to growth and development that occurs from the head
down
   circumcision:
   the surgical removal of the foreskin of the penis
   colostrum:
   the first secretion from the mammary glands after giving birth,
rich in antibodies
   cortex:
   the outer layers of the brain in humans and other mammals. Most
thinking, feeling, and sensing involves the cortex
   co-sleeping:
   a custom in which parents and their children (usually infants)
sleep together in the same room
   dendrites:
   fibers that extend from neurons and receive electrochemical
impulses transmitted from other neurons via their axons
   failure to thrive:
   decelerated or arrested physical growth (height and weight
measurements fall below the third or fifth percentile or a downward
change in growth across two major growth percentiles) and is
associated with abnormal growth and development
   fine motor skills:
   physical abilities involving small body movements, especially of
the hands and fingers, such as drawing and picking up a coin. The
word "fine" in this context means "small"

426 | Glossary
   gross motor skills:
   physical abilities involving large body movements, such as walking
and jumping. The word "gross" in this context means "big"
   immunization:
   a process that stimulates the body's immune system by causing
the production of antibodies to defend against attack by a specific
contagious disease
   infantile marasmus:
   starvation due to a lack of calories and protein
   kwashiorkor:
   also known as the "disease of the displaced child," results in a loss
of appetite and swelling of the abdomen as the body begins to break
down the vital organs as a source of protein
   malnutrition:
   a condition that results from eating a diet in which one or more
nutrients are deficient
   milk anemia:
   an iron deficiency in infants who have been maintained on a milk
diet for too long
   motor skills:
   the word "motor" refers to the movement of the muscles. Motor
skills refer to our ability to move our bodies and manipulate objects
   myelin:
   a coating of fatty tissues around the axon of the neuron
   neurons:
   nerve cells in the central nervous system, especially in the brain
   neurotransmitters:
   brain chemicals that carry information from the axon of a sending
neuron to the dendrites of a receiving neuron
   percentile:
   a point on a ranking scale of 0 to 100. The 50th percentile is the
midpoint; half of the infants in the population being studied rank
higher and half rank lower
   perception:
   the process of interpreting what is sensed

                                                                                      Glossary | 427
   pincer grasp:
   a developmental milestone that typically occurs at 9 to 12 months
of age; the coordination of the index finger and thumb to hold
smaller objects; represents a further development of fine motor
skills
   prefrontal cortex:
   the area of the cortex at the very front of the brain that specializes
in anticipation, planning, and impulse control
   proximodistal:
   development that occurs from the center or core of the body in
an outward direction
   pruning:
   the process by which unused connections in the brain atrophy
and die
   reflexes:
   the inborn, behavioral patterns that develop during uterine life
and are fully present at birth. These are involuntary movements
(not learned) or actions that are essential for a newborn's survival
immediately after birth and include: sucking, swallowing, blinking,
urinating, hiccuping, and defecating
   sensation:
   the interaction of information with the sensory receptors
   sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS):
   a situation in which a seemingly healthy infant, usually between 2
and 6 months old, suddenly stops breathing and dies unexpectedly
while asleep
   synapses:
   the intersection between the axon of one neuron to the dendrites
of another neuron
   transient exuberance:
   the great, but temporary increase in the number of dendrites that
develop in an infant's brain during the first two years of life
   fine motor skills:
   precise movements of the wrists, hands, fingers, feet, or toes,
such as the ability to reach and grasp an object

428 | Glossary
   gross motor skills:
   voluntary movements including the use of large muscle groups
such as the arms and legs
   myelination:
   an aspect of brain maturation in which more myelin is formed
around the axons of neurons, thereby increasing neural
transmission
   synaptic pruning:
   the selective elimination of non-essential synapses and the
strengthening of important neural connections
   adolescent growth spurt:
   rapid increase in the individual's height and weight during
puberty resulting from simultaneous release of growth hormones,
thyroid hormones, and androgens. Males experience their growth
spurt about two years later, on average, than females
   adrenarche:
   an increase in the production of androgens by the adrenal cortex
that usually occurs during the eighth or ninth year of life and
typically peaks at around 10 to 14 years of age and is eventually
involved in the development of pubic hair, body odor, skin oiliness,
and acne
   amygdala:
   part of the limbic system in the brain, which is involved with
emotions and emotional responses and is particularly active during
puberty
   anorexia nervosa:
   an eating disorder characterized by self-starvation. Affected
individuals voluntarily undereat and often overexercise, depriving
their vital organs of nutrition. Anorexia can be fatal
   binge-eating disorder:
   an eating disorder characterized by recurrent episodes of eating
large quantities of food (often very quickly and to the point of
discomfort); a feeling of a loss of control during the binge;
experiencing shame, distress or guilt afterwards; and not regularly
using unhealthy compensatory measures (e.g., purging) to counter

                                                                                     Glossary | 429
the binge eating. It is the most common eating disorder in the
United States

   body dissatisfaction:
   negative subjective evaluation of the weight and shape of one's
own body, which may predict the onset, severity, and treatment
outcomes of eating disorders
   body image:
   a person's idea of how his or her body looks
   bulimia nervosa:
   an eating disorder characterized by binge eating and subsequent
purging, usually by induced vomiting and/or use of laxatives
   dopamine:
   a neurotransmitter in the brain that plays a role in pleasure and
the reward system; increases in the limbic system and later in the
prefrontal cortex during adolescence
   estrogen:
   primary female sex hormone that is responsible for the
development and regulation of the female reproductive system and
secondary sex characteristics
   frontal lobes:
   the parts of the brain involved in impulse control, planning, and
higher order thinking; still developing in adolescence
   gonad:
   a sex organ that produces gametes; specifically, a testicle or ovary
   gonadarche:
   refers to the earliest gonadal changes of puberty. In response
to pituitary gonadotropins, the ovaries in girls and the testes in
boys begin to grow and increase the production of the sex steroids,
especially estradiol and testosterone
   limbic system:
   structures in the brain (including the amygdala) that involve
processing emotional experience and social information and
determining rewards and punishments; develops years before the
prefrontal cortex
   masturbation:

430 | Glossary
   sexual self-stimulation, usually achieved by touching, stroking, or
massaging the male or female genitals until this triggers an orgasm

   melatonin:
   sleep hormone whose levels rise later at night and decrease later
in the morning for teens, compared to children and adults
   menarche:
   a girl's first menstrual period, signaling that she has begun
ovulation. Pregnancy is biologically possible, but ovulation and
menstruation are often irregular for years after menarche
   muscle dysmorphia:
   sometimes called "reverse anorexia" this is an obsession with
being small and underdeveloped; extreme concern with becoming
more muscular
   myelination:
   insulation of neurons' axons with fatty substance (myelin sheath)
that helps speed up the processing of information; myelination
starts to increase in the prefrontal cortex during adolescence
   primary sex characteristics:
   the parts of the body that are directly involved in reproduction,
including the vagina, uterus, ovaries, testicles, and penis
   prefrontal cortex:
   part of the frontal lobes, involved with decision making, cognitive
control, and other higher order functions; prefrontal cortex
develops further during adolescence
   puberty:
   the period of rapid growth and sexual development that begins in
adolescence
   secondary sex characteristics:
   physical traits that are not directly involved in reproduction but
that indicate sexual maturity, such as a man's beard or a woman's
breasts
   serotonin:
   "calming chemical," a neurotransmitter in the brain involved with
the regulation of mood and behavior; serotonin levels increase in
the limbic system during adolescence

                                                                                      Glossary | 431
   sexually transmitted infections (STIs):
   diseases that are spread by sexual contact, including syphilis,
gonorrhea, genital herpes, chlamydia, and HIV/AIDS
   spermarche:
   a boy's first ejaculation of sperm. Erections can occur as early as
infancy, but ejaculation signals sperm production. Spermarche may
occur during sleep (nocturnal emission or "wet dream") or via direct
stimulation
   synaptic pruning:
   connections in the brain that are not used much are lost so that
other connections can be strengthened; this pruning happens with
prefrontal cortex connections in adolescence
   testosterone:
   the primary male sex hormone that plays a key role in the
development of male reproductive tissues such as testes and
prostate, as well as promoting secondary sexual characteristics
such as increased muscle and bone mass, and the growth of body
hair. Females also produce testosterone, but at lower level than
males

432 | Glossary
References

 1. Day & Liley, The Secret World of a Baby, Random House, 1968,
      p. 13 

2. Birth Defects Research and Tracking. Centers for Disease
      Control and Prevention. Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/
      ncbddd/birthdefects/research.html

3. STDs during Pregnancy - CDC Fact Sheet. Centers for Disease
      Control and Prevention. Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/
      std/pregnancy/stdfact-pregnancy.htm

4. Maternal Illness - Birth Defect Prevention for Expecting
      Parents. Birth Defect Research for Children. Retrieved
      from https://www.birthdefects.org/healthy-baby/maternal-
      illness/

5. Douros Konstantinos, Moustaki Maria, Tsabouri Sophia,
      Papadopoulou Anna, Papadopoulos Marios, Priftis Kostas N.
      (2017). Prenatal Maternal Stress and the Risk of Asthma in
      Children. Frontiers in Pediatrics. Retrieved
      from https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/
      fped.2017.00202

6. Maternal mortality (February 2018). World Health Organization.
      Retrieved from https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-
      sheets/detail/maternal-mortality

 7. Black Women's Maternal Health: A Multifaceted Approach to
      Addressing Persistent and Dire Health Disparities (April 2018).
      National Partnership for Women and Families. Retrieved
      from http://www.nationalpartnership.org/our-work/health/
      reports/black-womens-maternal-health.html. 

8. Reproductive Health. Pregnancy Mortality Surveillance System.
      Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Retrieved
      from https://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/
      maternalinfanthealth/pregnancy-mortality-surveillance-
      system.htm 

                                                                                  References | 433
 1. Van Rossem, R., & Pannecoucke, I. (2019). Poverty and a child's
      height development during early childhood: A double
      disadvantage? A study of the 2006-2009 birth cohorts in
      Flanders. PloS one, 14(1), e0209170. doi:10.1371/
      journal.pone.0209170 

 2. Neumann, Janice (September 2015). Small height differences
      among kids may reflect economic disparities. Reuters, Health
      News. Retried from https://www.reuters.com/article/us-
      health-children-height-poverty/small-height-differences-
      among-kids-may-reflect-economic-disparities-
      idUSKCN0RR11720150927. 

 3. Kerr GR, Lee ES, Lorimor RJ, Mueller WH, Lam MM (1982)
      Height distributions of U.S. children: associations with race,
      poverty status and parental size. Growth 46: 135-149. 

 4. How to Talk to Young Children About Body Safety. Kids First,
      Inc. Retrieved from https://www.kidsfirstinc.org/how-to-
      talk-to-young-children-about-body-safety/. 

 5. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Childhood
      Obesity Facts. Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/
      healthyschools/obesity/facts.htm. 

 6. Harvard School of Public Health. Child Obesity. Retrieved
      from https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/obesity-prevention-
      source/obesity-trends/global-obesity-trends-in-
      children/. 

 7. U.S. Department of Agriculture. FACT SHEET: Healthy, Hunger-
      Free Kids Act School Meals Implementation. Retrieved
      from https://www.usda.gov/media/press-releases/2014/
      05/20/fact-sheet-healthy-hunger-free-kids-act-school-
      meals-implementation 

 8. Steinberg, L. (2013). Adolescence (10th ed.). New York, NY:
      McGraw-Hill. 

 9. Arnett, J. J. (2000). Emerging adulthood: A theory of
      development from the late teens through the twenties.
      American Psychologist, 55, 469-480. 

10. Herman-Giddens, M.E., Steffes, J., Harris, D., Slora, E., Hussey,

434 | References
      M., Dowshen, S.A, & Reiter, E.O. (2012). Secondary sexual
      characteristics in boys: Data from the pediatric research in
      office settings network. Pediatrics, 130(5), 1058-1068. 
 11. Mendle, J., Moore, S. R., Briley, D. A., & Harden, K. P. (2015).
      Puberty, socioeconomic status, and depression in girls:
      Evidence for gene x environment interactions. Clinical
      Psychological Science. Advance online publication. 
12. Rudolph, K. D., Troop-Gordon, W., Lambert, S. F., & Natsuaki,
      M. N. (2014). Long-term consequences of pubertal timing for
      youth depression: Identifying personal and contextual
      pathways of risk. Development and Psychopathology, 26,
      1423-1444. 
13. Graber, J. A. (2013). Pubertal timing and the development of
      psychopathology in adolescence and beyond. Hormones and
      Behavior, 64, 262-269. 
14. Romeo, R.D. (2013). The teenage brain: The stress response and
      the adolescent brain. Current Directions in Psychological
      Science, 22 (2), 140-145. 
15. Hartley, C.A. & Somerville, L.H. (2015). The neuroscience of
      adolescent decision-making. Current Opinion in Behavioral
      Sciences, 5, 108-115. 
16. Steinberg, L. (2013). Adolescence (10th ed.). New York, NY:
      McGraw-Hill. 
 17. Steinberg, L. (2008) A social neuroscience perspective on
      adolescent risk-taking. Developmental Review, 28:78-106. 
18. National Institute of Mental Health. The Teen Brain: 6 Things
      to Know. Retrieved from https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/
      publications/the-teen-brain-6-things-to-know/
      index.shtml#pub6. 
19. Christian P, Smith E, R: Adolescent Undernutrition: Global
      Burden, Physiology, and Nutritional Risks. Ann Nutr Metab
      2018;72:316-328. doi: 10.1159/000488865 
20. Markey, Charlotte (2019). "Teens, Body Image, and Social
      Media." Psychology Today. Retrieved
      from https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/smart-

                                                                                   References | 435
      people-don-t-diet/201902/teens-body-image-and-social-
      media. 
21. MMWR, (206, June 10). Youth risk behavior surveillance-
      United States, 2015: Morbidity Weekly Report, 65 (6). Altlanta,
      GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers
      for Disease Control and Prevention. 
22. van de Bongardt, D., Reitz, E., Sandfort, T. & Dekovic, J (2015). A
      meta-analysis of the relations between three types of peer
      norms and adolescent sexual behavior. Personality and Social
      Psychology Review, 19 (3), 203-234. 
23. Adolescent Sexuality Trisha Tulloch, Miriam Kaufman
      Pediatrics in Review Jan 2013, 34 (1) 29-38; DOI: 10.1542/
      pir.34-1-29 
24. Tolman, D.L. & McClelland, S.I. (2011). Normative sexuality
      development in adolescence; A decade in review, 2000-2009.
      Journal of Research on Adolescence, 21 (1), 242-255. 
25. Iannelli, V. (2018). What Parents Need to Know About Baby
      Weight Trends and Newborn Gaining. Retrieved
      from https://www.verywellfamily.com/baby-birth-weight-
      statistics-2633630 
26. Huelke D. F. (1998). An Overview of Anatomical Considerations
      of Infants and Children in the Adult World of Automobile
      Safety Design. Annual Proceedings / Association for the
      Advancement of Automotive Medicine, 42, 93-113. 
27. Rauh, Sherry (n.d.). Is Your Baby on Track? WebMD. Retrieved
      from https://www.webmd.com/parenting/baby/features/is-
      your-baby-on-track#1. 
28. Berk, L. (2007). Development Through the Lifespan (4th ed.) (pp
      137). Pearson Education. 
29. Circumcision Policy Statement. Pediatrics. Retrieved
      from https://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/130/3/
      585 
30. Stack, D. M. (2010). Touch and Physical Contact during Infancy:
      Discovering the Richness of the Forgotten Sense. The Wiley-
      Blackwell Handbook of Infant Development, 532-567 

 436 | References
31. Nelson, C. A., Fox, N. A., and Zeanah, C. H. (2014). Romania's
      abandoned children: Deprivation, brain development, and the
      struggle for recovery. Cambridge, MA, and London, England:
      Harvard University Press. 

32. Sullivan, R., Perry, R., Sloan, A., Kleinhaus, K., & Burtchen, N.
      (2011). Infant bonding and attachment to the caregiver: insights
      from basic and clinical science. Clinics in perinatology, 38(4),
      643-655. doi:10.1016/j.clp.2011.08.011 

33. What to Expect While Breastfeeding. CDC. Retrieved
      from https://www.cdc.gov/nutrition/
      InfantandToddlerNutrition/breastfeeding/what-to-
      expect.html. 

34. Anderson, J.W., Johnstone, B.M., & Remley, D.T. (1999). Breast-
      feeding and cognitive development: a meta-analysis. The
      American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 70, 4,
      525-535, https://doi.org/10.1093/ajcn/70.4.525 

35. Islami, F., Liu, Y., Jemal, A., Zhou, J., Weiderpass, E., Colditz, G.,
      Boffetta, P., & Weiss, M. (2015). Breastfeeding and breast cancer
      risks by receptor status- a systematic review and meta-
      analysis. Annals of Oncology, 26,12. 2398-2407. 

36. Titus-Ernstoff, Rees, L. Terry, R.R., & Cramer, D. W. (2010).
      Breast-feeding the last born child and risk of ovarian cancer.
      Cancer Causes Control. 21(2), 201-207. 

37. Gunderson, E.P., Hurston, S.R., Dewey, K.G., Faith, M.S.,
      Charvat-Aguilar, N., Khoury, V. C., Nguyen, V.T., & Quesenberry,
      C.P. (2015). The study of women, infant feeding and type 2
      diabetes after GDM pregnancy and growth of their offspring
      (SWIFT Offspring study): prospective design, methodology and
      baseline characteristics. BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth,
      15,150 https://doi.org/10.1186/s12884-015-0587-z 

38. Karlson, E.W., Mandl, L.A., Hankinson, S. E., & Grodstein, F.
      (2004). Do breast-feeding and other reproductive factors
      influence future risk of rheumatoid arthritis? Results from the
      Nurses' Health Study. Arthritis Rheum. 50,11, 3458-67. 

39. United States Department of Health and Human Services,

                                                                                   References | 437
      Office of Women's Health (2011). Your guide to breast feeding.
      Washington D.C. 
40. KAZAL, L.A. (2002). Navajo Health Foundation/Sage Memorial
      Hospital, Ganado, Arizona Am Fam Physician. 66(7):
      1217-1225. 
41. Marie-Hlne Pennestri, Christine Laganire, Andre-Anne
      Bouvette-Turcot, Irina Pokhvisneva, Meir Steiner, Michael J.
      Meaney, Hlne Gaudreau, on behalf of the Mavan Research
      Team (December 2018). Uninterrupted Infant Sleep,
      Development, and Maternal Mood. Pediatrics, Volume 142. 
42. David Richter, Michael D Krmer, Nicole K Y Tang, Hawley E
      Montgomery-Downs, Sakari Lemola, Long-term effects of
      pregnancy and childbirth on sleep satisfaction and duration of
      first-time and experienced mothers and fathers, Sleep, Volume
      42, Issue 4, April 2019, zsz015, https://doi.org/10.1093/sleep/
      zsz015 
43. Macall Gordon (October 2018). From Safe Sleep to Healthy
      Sleep: A Systemic Perspective on Sleep In the First Year.
      Northwest Bulletin: Family and Child Health. University of
      Washington. retrieved from https://depts.washington.edu/
      nwbfch/infant-safe-sleep-development. 
44. Esposito, G., Setoh, P., & Bornstein, M.H. (2015). Beyond
      practices and values: Toward a physio-bioecological analysis of
      sleep arrangements in early infancy. Frontiers in Psychology, 6,
      264. 
45. Colvin, J.D., Collie-Akers, V., Schunn, C., & Moon, RY (2014).
      Sleep environment risks for younger and older infants.
      Pediatrics. 134(2):e406-12. doi: 10.1542/peds.2014-0401. 
46. https://bmjopen.bmj.com/content/3/5/e002299.long 
47. Sears, W. & Sears, M. (2001). The attachment parenting book: A
      commonsense guide to understanding and nurturing your
      baby. Boston: MA: Little Brown. 
48. Colson, E.R., Willinger, M., Rybin, D., Heeren, T., Smith, L.A.,
      Lister, G. & Corwin, M.J. (2013). Trends and factors associated
      with infant bed sharing, 1993-2010: The National Sleep Position

438 | References
      study. JAMA Pediatrics, 167(11), 1032-1037. 
49. SIDS and Other Sleep-Related Infant Deaths: Updated 2016

      Recommendations for a Safe Infant Sleeping Environment.
      Task Force on Sudden Infant Death Syndrome. Pediatrics.
      Retrieved from https://pediatrics.aappublications.org/
      content/138/5/e20162938. 
50. Linn, P. (2016). Risky behaviors: Integrating adolescent
      egocentrism with the theory of planned behavior. Review of
      General Psychology, 20 (4), 392-398. 
51. Kuhn, D. (2013). Reasoning. In Philip D. Zelazo (Ed.), The Oxford
      handbook of developmental psychology (Vol. 1, pp. 744-764).
      New York: NY: Oxford University Press. 
52. Klaczynski, P.A. & Felmban, W.S. (2014). Heuristics and biases
      during adolescence: Developmental reversals and individual
      differences. In Henry Markovitz (Ed.), The developmental
      psychology of reasoning and decision making (pp. 84-111). New
      York, NY: Psychology Press. 
53. Crone, E.A., & Dahl, R.E. (2012). Understanding adolescence as a
      period of social-affective engagement and goal flexibility.
      Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 13 (9), 636-650. 
54. Rieff, M.I. (1998). Adolescent school failure: Failure to thrive in
      adolescence. Pediatrics in Review, 19 (6). 
55. Parker, A. K. (2013). Understanding and supporting young
      adolescents during the transition into middle school. In P. G.
      Andrews (Ed.), Research to guide practice in middle grades
      education (pp. 495-510). Westerville, OH: Association for
      Middle Level Education. 
56. McGill, R.K., Hughes, D., Alicea, S., & Way, N. (2012). Academic
      adjustment across middle school: The role of public regard and
      parenting. Developmental Psychology, 48 (4), 1003-1008. 
57. U.S. Department of Education Mentoring Resource Center
      (2008). Making the transition to middle school: How mentoring
      can help. MRC: Mentoring Resource Center Fact Sheet, No. 24.
      Retrieved from http://fbmentorcenter.squarespace.com/
      storage/MiddleSchoolTransition.pdf 

                                                                                   References | 439
58. Brighton, K. L. (2007). Coming of age: The education and
       development of young adolescents. Westerville, OH: National
       Middle School Association. 

59. Baly, M.W., Cornell, D.G., & Lovegrove, P. (2014). A longitudinal
       investigation of self and peer reports of bullying victimization
       across middle school. Psychology in the Schools, 51 (3),
       217-240. 

60. Meece, J.L. & Eccles, J.S. (Eds.). (2010). Handbook on research
       on schools, schooling, and human development. New York, NY:
       Routledge. 

61. Coyne, S.M., Padilla-Walker, L.M., & Holmgren, H.G. (2018). A
       six-year longitudinal study of texting trajectories during
       adolescence. Child Development, 89 (1), 58-65. 

62. Gewertz, C. (2017, May 3). Is the high school graduation rate
       inflated? No, study says (Web log post). Education Week. 

63. Kena, G., Hussar, W., McFarland, J., de Brey, C., Musu-Gillette,
       L., Wang, X., & Dunlop Velez, E. (2016). The condition of
       education 2016, Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
       Education, National Center for Education Statistics. 

64. Vera-Estay,E. Dooley, J.J. & Beauchamp, M.H. (2014). Cognitive
       underpinnings of moral reasoning in adolescence: The
       contribution of executive functions. Journal of Moral
       Education, 44 (1), 17-33. 

65. McDevitt, T.M. & Ormrod, J.E. (2004). Child development:
       Educating and working with children and adolescents. Upper
       Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall. 

66. Mareshcal, D. & Kauffman, J. (2012). Object Permanence in
       infancy: Revisiting Baillargeon's drawbridge study. In Alan M.
       Slaster & Paul C. Quinn (Eds.), Developmental Psychology:
       Revisiting the classic studies. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

67. Bauer PJ, Pathman T. Memory and Early Brain Development. In:
       Tremblay RE, Boivin M, Peters RDeV, eds. Paus T, topic ed.
       Encyclopedia on Early Childhood Development
       [online]. http://www.child-encyclopedia.com/brain/
       according-experts/memory-and-early-brain-development.

 440 | References
      Published December 2008. Accessed March 2, 2019. 
68. Schneider, Wolfgang. (2015). This belief came in part from

      findings that adults rarely recall personal events from before
      the age of 3 years (a phenomenon known
      as infantile or childhood amnesia). However, research with
      infants and young children has made it clear that they can and
      do form memories of events. Memory development from early
      childhood through emerging adulthood. Switzerland: Spring
      International. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-09611-7. 
69. Mullally, Sinead L. & Maguire, Eleanor. A. (2014). Learning to
      remember: The early ontogeny of episodic memory.
      Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience, 9(13), 12-29. doi:
      10.1016/j.dcn.2013.12.006 
70. Tomasello, M. & Hermann, E. (2010). Ape and human cognition.
      Current Directions in Psychological Science, 19(1), 3-8. 
71. The experimenters support these claims by citing the following
      studies: (1) DeBruine, L.M. Facial resemblance enhances trust:
      Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B, 2002, 269:
      1307-1312. (2) Brewer, M.B. In-group bias in the minimal
      intergroup situation: A cognitive-motivational analysis.
      Psychological Bulletin, 1979, 86: 307-324. (3) Doise, W., Cspely,
      G., Dann, and others. An experimental investigation into the
      formation of intergroup representation. European Journal of
      Social Psychology, 1972, 2: 202-204. 
72. Thiam, M.A., Flake, E.M. & Dickman, M.M. (2017). Infant and
      child mental health and perinatal illness. In Melinda A. Thiam
      (Ed.), Perinatal mental health and the military family:
      Identifying and treating mood and anxiety disorders. New
      York, NY: Routledge. 
73. Kopp, C.B. (2011). Development in the early years: Socialization,
      motor development; and consciousness. Annual Review of
      Psychology, 62, 165-187. 
74. Garthus-Niegel, S., Ayers, S., Martini, J., von Soest, T. &
      Eberhard-Gran, M. (2017). The impact of postpartum post-
      traumatic stress disorder symptoms on child development: A

                                                                                    References | 441
      population based, 2-year follow-up study. Psychological
      Medicine, 47(1), 161-170. 
75. Yu Junhong, Kam Chi-Ming, Lee Tatia M. C. (2016). Better
      Working Memory and Motor Inhibition in Children Who
      Delayed Gratification. Frontiers in Psychology. Retrieved
      from https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/
      fpsyg.2016.01098/full 
76. Tyler W. Watts, Greg J. Duncan, Haonan Quan (May 25,
      2018). Revisiting the Marshmallow Test: A Conceptual
      Replication Investigating Links Between Early Delay of
      Gratification and Later Outcomes. https://doi.org/10.1177/
      0956797618761661 
77. Salcuni Silvia, Di Riso Daniela, Mabilia Diana, Lis Adriana (2017).
      "Psychotherapy with a 3-Year-Old Child: The Role of Play in
      the Unfolding Process". Frontiers in Psychology. Retrieved
      from https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/
      fpsyg.2016.02021/full 
78. Strauss, Elissa (April 2018). "Why girls can be boyish but boys
      can't be girlish". CNN. Retrieved from https://www.cnn.com/
      2018/04/12/health/boys-girls-gender-norms-parenting-
      strauss/index.html. 
79. (April 2018) "Employment Characteristics of Families." Bureau
      of Labor Statistics. Retrieved from https://www.bls.gov/
      news.release/pdf/famee.pdf 
80. Geiger, A.W., Livingston, Gretchen, and Bialik, Kristen (May
      2019). "6 facts about U.S. moms." Pew Research Center.
      Retrieved from https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/
      2019/05/08/facts-about-u-s-mothers/ 
81. Highland Spring Group. "34 minutes: The amount of time the
      average family gets to spend together each day." Retrieved
      from http://www.highlandspringgroup.com/press-and-
      media/group-news/article/34-minutes-the-amount-of-
      time-the-average-family-gets-to-spend-together-each-
      day/. 
82. Coleman-Jensen, Alisha, Matthew Rabbitt, Christian Gregory,

 442 | References
       and Anita Singh (2018). "Household Food Security in the United
       States." United States Department of Agriculture Economic
       Research Service. Retrieved from https://www.ers.usda.gov/
       publications/pub-details/?pubid=90022 
83. No Kid Hungry. "Facts About Childhood Hunger." Retrieved
       from https://www.nokidhungry.org/who-we-are/hunger-
       facts. 
84. Diana F. Jyoti, Edward A. Frongillo,4 and Sonya J. Jones
       (2005)Food Insecurity Affects School Children's Academic
       Performance,Weight Gain, and Social Skills, American Society
       for Nutrition. 
85. Pearson, Bryan. My (Kid's) Generation: 5 Ways Today's Tweens
       Are Changing Retail. Forbes. Retrieved
       from https://www.forbes.com/sites/bryanpearson/2016/
       04/14/my-kids-generation-5-ways-todays-tweens-are-
       changing-retail/#1011b2dd42ef 
86. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Stop Bullying.
       Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/
       youthviolence/bullyingresearch/fastfact.html. 
87. Wolf, Jennifer. The Single Parent Statistics Based on Census
       Data. Verywell Family. Retrieved
       from https://www.verywellfamily.com/single-parent-
       census-data-2997668. 
88. Warshak, Richard (2017). After divorce, shared parenting is best
       for children's health and development. Stat. Retrieved
       from https://www.statnews.com/2017/05/26/divorce-
       shared-parenting-children-health/. 
89. Marcia, J. E. (1966). Development and validation of ego identity
       status. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 3,
       551-558. 
90. Kim-Spoon, J., Longo, G.S., & McCullough, M.E. (2012) Parent-
       adolescent relationship quality as a moderator for the
       influence of parents' religiousness on adolescents'
       religiousness and adjustment. Journal of Youth and
       Adolescence, 41(12), 1576-1587. 

                                                                                   References | 443
 91. Taylor, P. (2014). The next America: Boomers, millennials, and
        the looming generational showdown. New York, NY: Public
        Affairs. 

 92. Stattin, H., Hussein, O., Ozdemir, M., & Russo, S. (2017). Why do
        some adolescents encounter everyday events that increase
        their civil interest whereas others do not? Developmental
        Psychology, 53 (2), 306-318. 

 93. Phinney, J. (1989). Stages of ethnic identity in minority group
        adolescents. Journal of Early Adolescence, 9, 34-49. 

 94. Reisner, S.L., Katz-Wise, S.L., Gordon, A.R., Corliss, H.L., &
        Austin, S.B. (2016). Social epidemiology of depression and
        anxiety by gender identity. Journal of Adolescent Health, 59 (2),
        203-208. 

 95. Sinclair, S. & Carlsson, R. (2013). What will I be when I grow up?
        The impact of gender identity threat on adolescents'
        occupational preferences. Journal of Adolescence, 36(3),
        465-474. 

 96. Flores, A., J. Herman, G. Gates, and T. N.T. Brown. "How many
        adults identify as transgender." The Williams
        Institute. http://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/wp-content/
        uploads/How-Many-Adults-Identify-as-Transgender-in-the-
        United-States.pdf. 

 97. Salam, M. "For transgender Americans, the political gets even
        more personal" (2018). The New York
        Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/10/26/us/
        transgender-lgbt-rights-trump.html. 

 98. Strangio, C. 2018. "Deadly violence against transgender people."
        ACLU. https://www.aclu.org/blog/lgbt-rights/criminal-
        justice-reform-lgbt-people/deadly-violence-against-
        transgender-people-rise. 

 99. Stattin, H., & Kerr, M. (2000). Parental monitoring: A
        reinterpretation. Child Development, 71, 1072-1085. 

100. Barber, B. K. (1996). Parental psychological control: Revisiting a
        neglected construct. Child Development, 67, 3296-3319. 

101. Dishion, T. J., & Tipsord, J. M. (2011). Peer contagion in child and

  444 | References
        adolescent social and emotional development. Annual Review
        of Psychology, 62, 189-214. 
102. Brown, B. B., & Larson, J. (2009). Peer relationships in
        adolescence. In R. M. Lerner & L. Steinberg (Eds.), Handbook of
        adolescent psychology (pp. 74-103). New York, NY: Wiley. 
103. Livingston, Gretchen (February 2018). The way U.S. teens
        spend their time is changing, but differences between boys
        and girls persist. Pew Research Center. 
104. Connolly, J., Furman, W., & Konarski, R. (2000). The role of
        peers in the emergence of heterosexual romantic relationships
        in adolescence. Child Development, 71, 1395-1408. 
105. Furman, W., & Shaffer, L. (2003). The role of romantic
        relationships in adolescent development. In P. Florsheim (Ed.),
        Adolescent romantic relations and sexual behavior: Theory,
        research, and practical implications (pp. 3-22). Mahwah, NJ:
        Erlbaum. 
106. Russell, S. T., Clarke, T. J., & Clary, J. (2009). Are teens "post-
        gay"? Contemporary adolescents' sexual identity labels. Journal
        of Youth and Adolescence, 38, 884-890. 
107. Belsky, J., & Pluess, M. (2009). Beyond diathesis-stress:
        Differential susceptibility to environmental influences.
        Psychological Bulletin, 135, 885-908. 
108. Dick, D. M., Meyers, J. L., Latendresse, S. J., Creemers, H. E.,
        Lansford, J. E., ... Huizink, A. C. (2011). CHRM2, parental
        monitoring, and adolescent externalizing behavior: Evidence
        for gene-environment interaction. Psychological Science, 22,
        481-489. 
109. Patterson, G. R. (1982). Coercive family process. Eugene, OR:
        Castalia Press. 
110. Moffitt, T. E. (1993). Adolescence-limited and life course
        persistent antisocial behavior: Developmental taxonomy.
        Psychological Review, 100, 674-701. 
 111. Healy, Melissa (August 24, 2015). "Why the U.S. is No. 1 - in
        mass shootings". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved November 6,
        2017. 

                                                                                     References | 445
112. Grinberg, Emanuella (January 25, 2016). "The real mental health
        issue behind gun violence". CNN. Retrieved November 7, 2017. 

113. Campbell, Holly (December 2, 2015). "Inside the mind of a mass
        murderer". WANE-TV. Retrieved November 9, 2017. 

114. Christensen, Jen (October 5, 2017). "Why the US has the most
        mass shootings". CNN. Retrieved November 6, 2017. 

115. Peters, Justin (December 19, 2013). "Everything You Think You
        Know about Mass Murder Is Wrong". Slate. 

116. Ferguson, Christopher J.; Coulson, Mark; Barnett, Jane (January
        1, 2011). "Psychological Profiles of School Shooters: Positive
        Directions and One Big Wrong Turn". Journal of Police Crisis
        Negotiations. 11 (2): 141-158. doi:10.1080/
        15332586.2011.581523. 

 117. Burgess, Ann Wolbert; Garbarino, Christina; Carlson, Mary I.
        (2006). "Pathological teasing and bullying turned deadly:
        Shooters and suicide". Victims and Offenders. 1 (1): 1-14.
        doi:10.1080/15564880500498705. 

118. Rudolph, K. D. (2009). The interpersonal context of adolescent
        depression. In S. Nolen-Hoeksema & L. M. Hilt (Eds.),
        Handbook of depression in adolescents (pp. 377-418). New
        York, NY: Taylor and Francis. 

119. American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and
        statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, VA:
        American Psychiatric Publishing. 

120. Uddin, M., Koenen, K.C., de los Santos, R., Bakshis, E., Aielle,
        A.E., & Galea, S. (2010). Gender differences in the genetic and
        environmental determinants of adolescent depression.
        Depression and Anxiety, 27(7), 658-666. 

121. Berger, K.S. (2019). Invitation to the Lifespan (4th ed). Worth
        Publishers, NY. 

122. Rudolph, K. D. (2009). The interpersonal context of adolescent
        depression. In S. Nolen-Hoeksema & L. M. Hilt (Eds.),
        Handbook of depression in adolescents (pp. 377-418). New
        York, NY: Taylor and Francis. 

123. Case, R. (1991). The mind's staircase: Exploring the conceptual

  446 | References
        underpinnings of children's thought and knowledge. Hillsdale,
        NJ: Erlbaum.
124. Case, R. & Okamoto, Y. (1996). The role of central conceptual
        structures in children's thought. Chicago: Society for Research
        on Child Development.
125. Harris, J. (2006). No two alike: Human nature and human
        individuality. New York: Norton.
126. Lewis, M. (1997). Altering fate: Why the past does not predict the
        future. New York: Guilford Press.
127. Slavin, R. (2005). Educational psychology, 7th edition. Boston:
        Allyn & Bacon.
128. Woolfolk, A. (2006). Educational psychology, 10th edition.
        Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
129. Allender, J. (2005). Community health nursing, 6th edition.
        Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams, & Wilkins.
130. Center for Disease Control. (2004a). National survey on drug
        use and health. Bethesda, MD: Department of Health and
        Human Services.
131. Center for Disease Control (2004b). Trends in the prevalence of
        sexual behaviors, 1991-2003. Bethesda, MD: Author.
132. Eveleth, P. & Tanner, J. (1990). Worldwide variation in human
        growth (2nd edition). New York: Cambridge University Press.
133. Fagan, A. & Najman, J. (2005). The relative contribution of
        parental and sibling substance use to adolescent alcohol,
        tobacco, and other drug use. Journal of Drug Issues, 35,
        869-883.
134. Johnston, L., O'Malley, P., Bachman, J., & Schulenberg, J.
        (2006). Monitoring the future: National results on adolescent
        drug use: Overview of key findings, 2005. Bethesda, MD:
        National Institute on Drug Abuse.
135. Malina, R., Bouchard, C., & Bar-Or O. (2004). Growth,
        maturation, and physical activity. Champaign, IL: Human
        Kinetics Press.
136. McClintock, M. & Herdt, G. (1996). Rethinking puberty: The
        development of sexual attraction. Current Directions in

                                                                                     References | 447
        Psychological Science, 5, 178-183.
137. National Institute of Allergies and Infectious Diseases.

        (2005). The common cold. Bethesda, MD: Author. Also available
        at http://www.niaid.nih.gov/facts/cold.htm.
138. Petlichkoff, L. (1996). The drop-out dilemma in youth sports. In
        O. Bar-Or (Ed.), The child and adolescent athlete (pp. 418-432).
        Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
139. Richardson, J. (2005). The cost of being poor. Westport, CN:
        Praeger.
140. Rosenbaum, J. (2006). Reborn a Virgin: Adolescents' Retracting
        of Virginity Pledges and Sexual Histories. American Journal of
        Public Health, 96(6), xxx-yyy.
141. Sadker, M. (2004). Gender equity in the classroom: The
        unfinished agenda. In M. Kimmel (Ed.), The gendered society
        reader, 2nd edition. New York: Oxford University Press.
142. Spencer, N. (2000). Poverty and child health, 2nd edition.
        Abingdon, UK: Radcliffe Medical Press.
143. Tartamella, L., Herscher, E., Woolston, C. (2004). Generation
        extra large: Rescuing our children from the obesity epidemic.
        New York: Basic Books.
144. Taylor, J. & Gilligan, C., & Sullivan, A. (1995). Between voice and
        silence: Women and girls, race and relationship. Cambridge, MA:
        Harvard University Press.
145. Whelen, E., Lawson, C., Grajewski, B., Petersen, M., Pinkerton,
        L., Ward, E., & Schnorr, T. (2003). Prevalence of respiratory
        symptoms among female flight attendants and
        teachers. Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 60,
        929-934.
146. Ben Deen, Hilary Richardson, Daniel D. Dilks, Atsushi
        Takahashi, Boris Keil, Lawrence L. Wald, Nancy Kanwisher &
        Rebecca Saxe."Article | OPEN | Published: 10 January 2017
        Organization of high-level visual cortex in human infants".
        Image retrieved from https://www.quantamagazine.org/
        infant-brains-reveal-how-the-mind-gets-built-20170110/.
147. Bredekamp, S. & Copple, C. (1997). Developmentally appropriate

  448 | References
        practice, Revised edition. Washington, D.C.: National
        Association for the Education of Young Children.
148. Case, R. & Okamoto, Y. (1996). The role of central conceptual
        structures in children's thought. Chicago: Society for Research
        on Child Development.
149. Inhelder, B. & Piaget, J. (1958). The growth of logical thinking
        from childhood to adolescence: An essay on the growth of formal
        operational structures. New York: Basic Books.
150. Matthews, G. (1998). The philosophy of childhood. Cambridge,
        MA: Harvard University Press.
151. Paley, V. (2005). A child's work: The importance of fantasy play.
        Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
152. Piaget, J. (1952). The origins of intelligence in children. New
        York: International Universities Press.
153. Piaget, J. (2001). The psychology of intelligence. Oxford, UK:
        Routledge
154. Beidel, B. (2005). Childhood anxiety disorders. Oxford, UK:
        Brunner-Routledge.
155. Eyler, J. & Giles, D. (1999). Where's the learning in service
        learning? San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
156. Kay, C. (2003). The complete guide to service learning. New
        York: Free Spirit Publishing.
157. Maslow, A. (1987). Motivation and personality, 3rd edition. New
        York: Harper & Row.
158. Maslow, A. (1976). The Farther Reaches of Human Nature, 2nd
        edition. New York: Penguin Books.
159. Payne, R. (2005). A framework for understanding poverty.
        Highlands, TX: aha!Process, Inc.
160. Zimbardo, P. & Radl, S. (1999). The shy child: Overcoming and
        preventing shyness from birth to adulthood. Cambridge, MA:
        Malor Books.
161. Bodrova, E., & Leong, D. J. (2007). Tools of the mind: The
        Vygotskian approach to early childhood education (2nd ed.).
        Upper Saddle River,
        NJ: Pearson.

                                                                                    References | 449
162. Bruner, J. (1972). The nature and uses of immaturity. American

        Psychologist, 27, 687-708.

163. Johnson, J. E., Christie, J. F., & Wardle, F. (2005). Play,

        development, and early education. Upper Saddle River, NJ:

        Pearson.

164. Frost, Joe L. Play and Playscapes. Albany, NY:
      Delmar Publishers Inc. 1992. p.78-79.

165. Frost, Joe L., Pei-San Brown, John A. Sutterby,
      Candra D. Thornton. The Developmental
      Benefits of Playgrounds. Olney, MD:
      Association for Childhood Education
      International, 2004. p. 25.

166. Frost, Joe L., Sue Wortham, and Stuart Reifel.
      Play and Child Development. Upper Saddle
      Valley, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2001. p.48

167. "Types of Play." Child Development Institute. <
      http://www.childevelopmentinfo.com/
      development/p11.shtml > 27 Aug. 2010.

168. Drew, Walter F., James Christie, James E.
      Johnson, Alice M. Meckley, and Marcia L. Nell.
      "Constructive Play. A Value-Added Strategy for
      Meeting Early Learning Standards." Young
      Children. July 2008: 38-40.

169. Chaille, C. (2008). Constructivism across the
      curriculum in early childhood classrooms. Big
      ideas as inspiration. Upper Saddle River, NJ:
      Pearson.

170. Leong, D. L. & Bodrova, E. (2015). Assessing and
      scaffolding make-believe play. In Bohart, H.,
      Charner, K., & Koraleck, D. (Eds.), Spotlight on
      young children: Exploring play (pp 26-36).
      Washington, DC: NAEYC

171. Free to Learn( Why Unleashing the Instinct to

  450 | References
      Play Will Make Our Children Happier More
      Self-Reliant and Better Students for Life)
      Binding: Hardcover Author: GrayPeter
      Publisher: BasicBooks(AZ)
172. Vygotsky, Lev S. 1967. "Play and Its Role in the
      Mental Development of the Child." Soviet
      Psychology 5:6-18

173. Berkowitz, M. & Bier, M. (2006). What works in character
        education: A research-driven guide for educators. St. Louis, MO:
        Center for Character and Citizenship.

174. Brown, L. & Gilligan, C. (1992). Meeting at the crossroads:
        Women's psychology and girls' development. Cambridge, MA:
        Harvard University Press.

175. Elkind, D. & Sweet, F. (2006). How to do character education.
        Accessed February 1, 2011 at http://www.goodcharacter.com/
        Article_4.html.

176. Kohlberg, L., Levine, C., & Hewer, A. (1983). Moral stages: A
        current formulation and a response to critics. Basel: S. Karger.

177. Minow, M., Shweder, R., & Markus, H. (Eds.). (2008). Just
           schools: Pursuing equality in societies of difference. New York:
           Russell Sage Foundation.

178. Narvaez, D. (2010). Moral complexity: The fatal attraction of
           truthiness and the importance of mature moral
           functioning. Perspectives on psychological science, 5(2),
           162-181.

179. Taylor, J. & Gilligan, C., & Sullivan, A. (1995). Between voice and
           silence: Women and girls, race and relationship. Cambridge,
           MA: Harvard University Press.

180.

                                                                                     References | 451
THE LEARNING PROCESS

     Theme: How Students Learn

        Overview of Content:
          Behavioral Learning Theories
          Social Cognitive Theory
          Constructivism in the Classroom
          Information Processing Approach in the Classroom
        Learning Objectives:
          Explain classical conditioning
          Explain operant conditioning
          Describe social cognitive theory
          Describe how constructivism is used in the

             classroom
          Describe how information processing approach is

             used in the classroom
          Contrast the effectiveness of rehearsal and

             encoding

                                                                   The Learning Process | 453
Teacher's Perspectives on
Learning

For teachers, learning usually refers to things that happen in schools
or classrooms, even though every teacher can, of course, describe
examples of learning that happens outside of these places. Learning
has a more specific meaning than for many people less involved
in schools. In particular, teachers' perspectives on learning often
emphasize three ideas, and sometimes even take them for granted:
(1) curriculum content and academic achievement, (2) sequencing
and readiness, and (3) the importance of transferring learning to
new or future situations.

Viewing Learning as Dependent on Curriculum

When teachers speak of learning, they tend to emphasize whatever
is taught in schools deliberately, including both the official
curriculum and the various behaviors and routines that make
classrooms run smoothly. In practice, defining learning in this way
often means that teachers equate learning with the major forms of
academic achievement--especially language and mathematics--and
to a lesser extent musical skill, physical coordination, or social
sensitivity (Gardner, 1999, 2006). The imbalance occurs not because
the goals of public education make teachers responsible for certain
content and activities (like books and reading) and the skills which
these activities require (like answering teachers' questions and
writing essays). It does happen not (thankfully!) because teachers
are biased, insensitive, or unaware that students often learn a lot
outside of school.

   A side effect of thinking of learning as related only to curriculum

                                                                      Teacher's Perspectives on
                                                                                     Learning | 455
or academics is that classroom social interactions and behaviors
become issues for teachers--become things that they need to
manage. In particular, having dozens of students in one room makes
it more likely that I, as a teacher, think of "learning" as something
that either takes concentration (to avoid being distracted by others)
or that benefits from collaboration (to take advantage of their
presence). In the small space of a classroom, no other viewpoint
about social interaction makes sense. Yet in the wider world outside
of school, learning often does happen incidentally, "accidentally"
and without conscious interference or input from others: I "learn"
what a friend's personality is like, for example, without either of us
deliberately trying to make this happen. As teachers, we sometimes
see incidental learning in classrooms as well, and often welcome it;
but our responsibility for curriculum goals more often focuses our
efforts on what students can learn through conscious, deliberate
effort. In a classroom, unlike in many other human settings, it is
always necessary to ask whether classmates are helping or
hindering individual students' learning.

   Focusing learning on changes in classrooms has several other
effects. One, for example, is that it can tempt teachers to think that
what is taught is equivalent to what is learned--even though most
teachers know that doing so is a mistake, and that teaching and
learning can be quite different. If a teacher assigns a reading to
students about the Russian Revolution, it would be nice to assume
not only that they have read the same words, but also learned
the same content. But that assumption is not usually the reality.
Some students may have read and learned all of what was assigned;
others may have read everything but misunderstood the material
or remembered only some of it; and still others, unfortunately, may
have neither read nor learned much of anything. Chances are that
the students would confirm this picture, if asked confidentially.
There are ways, of course, to deal helpfully with such a diversity
of outcomes. But whatever instructional strategies we adopt, they
cannot include assuming that what we teach is the same as what
students understand or retain.

456 | Teacher's Perspectives on Learning
Viewing Learning as Dependent on Sequencing
and Readiness

The distinction between teaching and learning creates a secondary
issue for teachers, that of educational readiness. Traditionally the
concept referred to students' preparedness to cope with or profit
from the activities and expectations of school. A kindergarten child
was "ready" to start school, for example, if he or she was in good
health, showed moderately good social skills, could take care of
personal physical needs (like eating lunch or going to the bathroom
unsupervised), could use a pencil to make simple drawings, and so
on. The table below shows a similar set of criteria for determining
whether a child is "ready" to learn to read (Copple & Bredekamp,
2006). At older ages (such as in high school or university), the term
readiness is often replaced by a more specific term, prerequisites.
To take a course in physics, for example, a student must first have
certain prerequisite experiences, such as studying advanced algebra
or calculus. To begin work as a public school teacher, a person must
first engage in practice teaching for a period of time (not to mention
also studying educational psychology!).

                                                Teacher's Perspectives on Learning | 457
Table 4.1.1. Reading readiness in students vs in teachers

Signs of readiness in the       Signs of readiness to teach reading
child or student

productive (speaking)           teacher answers children's questions
vocabulary of 5,000- 8,000      when possible
words

child understands and uses      teacher encourages child to find out
complete sentences              more through other means in addition to
                                asking teacher

child's questions tend to be    teacher asks questions designed to
relevant to the task at hand    elaborate or expand child's thinking

child's correctly using most    teacher highlights letters and sounds in
common grammatical              the classroom
constructions

child can match some letters teacher provides lots of paper and

to some sounds                  marking tools

child can string a few letters  teacher assists child with initial writing of
together to make a few          letters
simple words

child can tell and retell       teacher encourages children to enact
stories, poems, and songs       stories, poems, and songs

Source: Copple & Bredekamp, 2006.

Note that this traditional meaning, of readiness as preparedness,
focuses attention on students' adjustment to school and away from
the reverse: the possibility that schools and teachers also have a
responsibility for adjusting to students. But the latter idea is, in fact,
a legitimate, second meaning for readiness: If 5-year-old children
normally need to play a lot and keep active, then it is fair to say that
their kindergarten teacher needs to be "ready" for this behavior by
planning for a program that allows a lot of play and physical activity.
If she cannot or will not do so (whatever the reason may be), then
in a very real sense this failure is not the children's responsibility.
Among older students, the second, teacher-oriented meaning of
readiness makes sense as well. If a teacher has a student with a
disability (for example, the student is visually impaired), then the
teacher has to adjust her approach in appropriate ways--not simply

458 | Teacher's Perspectives on Learning
expect a visually impaired child to "sink or swim." As you might
expect, this sense of readiness is very important for special
education, but the issue of readiness also figures importantly
whenever students are diverse (which is most of the time).

Viewing Transfer as a Crucial Outcome of
Learning

Still another result of focusing on the concept of learning in
classrooms is that it raises issues of usefulness or transfer, which is
the ability to use knowledge or skill in situations beyond the ones
in which they are acquired. Learning to read and learning to solve
arithmetic problems, for example, are major goals of the elementary
school curriculum because those skills are meant to be used not
only inside the classroom but outside as well. We, teachers, intend,
that is, for reading and arithmetic skills to "transfer," even though
we also do our best to make the skills enjoyable while they are still
being learned. In the world inhabited by teachers, even more than
in other worlds, making learning fun is certainly a good thing to do,
but making learning useful as well as fun is even better. Combining
enjoyment and usefulness, in fact, is a "gold standard" of teaching:
we generally seek it for students, even though we may not succeed
at providing it all of the time.

   Transfer of learning is usually described as the process and the
effective extent to which past experiences (also referred to as
the transfer source) affect learning and performance in a new

situation (the transfer target) (Ellis, Transfer occurs when
people apply information, strategies, and skills
they have learned to a new situation or context. It
is not a discrete activity, but is rather an integral
part of the learning process. Researchers attempt

                                                Teacher's Perspectives on Learning | 459
to identify when and how transfer occurs and to
offer strategies to improve transfer.

   People store propositions, or basic units of knowledge, in long-
term memory. When new information enters the working memory,
long-term memory is searched for associations that combine with
the new information in working memory. The associations reinforce
the new information and help assign meaning to it (Souza, 2016).
Learning that takes place in varying contexts can create more links
and encourage the generalization of the skill or knowledge (Schunk,
2004). Connections between past learning and new learning can
provide a context or framework for the new information, helping
students to determine sense and meaning, and encouraging
retention of the new information. These connections can build up a
framework of associative networks that students can call upon for
future problem-solving (Souza, 2016). Information stored in memory
is "flexible, interpretive, generically altered, and its recall and
transfer are largely context-dependent" (Helfenstein, 2005).

   Factors that can affect transfer include (Souza, 2016):

   Context and degree of original learning: how well the learner
      acquired the knowledge.

   Similarity: commonalities between original learning and new,
      such as environment and other memory cues.

   Critical attributes: characteristics that make something
      unique.

   Association: connections between multiple events, actions, bits
      of information, and so on; as well as the conditions and
      emotions connected to it by the learner.

Learners can increase transfer through effective practice and by
mindfully abstracting knowledge. Abstraction is the process of
examining our experiences for similarities. Methods for abstracting
knowledge include seeking the underlying principles in what is
learned, creating models, and identifying analogies and metaphors,

460 | Teacher's Perspectives on Learning
all of which assist with creating associations and encouraging
transfer.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=66#oembed-1

Video 4.1.1. What is `Transfer of Learning' and How Does It Help
Students? explains the difference between near (or low-road)
transfer and far (or high-road transfer), as well as strategies for
helping students transfer.

Transfer Taxonomies

The following table presents different types of transfer (Schhunk,
2004).

                                                 Teacher's Perspectives on Learning | 461
Table     Transfer taxonomies
4.1.2.

Type      Characteristics

Positive  Positive transfer occurs when prior learning assists new
          learning.

Negative Negative transfer occurs when prior learning hinders or interferes with new learning.

Zero      Zero transfer occurs when prior learning has no influence on
          new learning.

Near      Near transfer occurs when many elements overlap between
          the conditions in which the learner obtained the knowledge
          or skill and the new situation.

Far Far transfer occurs when the new situation is very different from that in which learning occurred.

Literal   Literal transfer occurs when performing the skill exactly as
          learned but in a new situation.

Figural   Figural transfer occurs when applying general knowledge to
          a new situation, often making use of analogies or metaphors.

Low road Low-road transfer occurs when well-established skills transfer spontaneously, even automatically.

High      High-road transfer occurs when the learner consciously and
road      deliberately ("mindfully") evaluates the new situation and
          applies previous learning to it.

Forward High-road transfer that is forward reaching occurs when
reaching learners think about possible other uses while learning.

Backward High-road transfer that is backward reaching occurs when learners in a new situation think about previous situations
reaching that might apply.

Teaching for Transfer

Transfer is less a deliberate activity by the learner than it is a result
of the environment at the time of learning. Teachers, being part of
the learning environment, can be an instrument of transfer (both
positive and negative) (Souza, 2016). Recommendations for teaching
for transfer include the hugging and bridging strategies; providing

462 | Teacher's Perspectives on Learning
an authentic environment and activities within a conceptual
framework; encouraging problem-based learning; community of
practice; cognitive apprenticeship; and game-based learning.

Hugging and Bridging

Hugging and bridging as techniques for positive transfer were
suggested by the research of Perkins and Salomon. Hugging is when
the teacher encourages transfer by incorporating similarities
between the learning situation and the future situations in which
the learning might be used. Some methods for hugging include
simulation games, mental practice, and contingency learning
(Souza, 2016).

   Bridging is when the teacher encourages transfer by helping
students to find connections between learning and to abstract their
existing knowledge to new concepts. Some methods for bridging
include brainstorming, developing analogies, and metacognition
(Souza, 2016).
CC licensed content, Original

   Teacher's Perspective on Learning. Authored by: Nicole
      Arduini-Van Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community
      College. Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      edpsy/chapter/teachers-perspective-on-learning/. License:
      CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Transfer of Learning. Provided by: Wikipedia. Retrieved from:
      https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transfer_of_learning. License:
      CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation .
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/

                                                Teacher's Perspectives on Learning | 463
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution
All rights reserved content

   What is 'Transfer of Learning' and How Does It Help Students?.
      Authored by: Larry Ferlazzo. Provided by: Education Week.
      Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/N8QfkT8L9lo. License: All
      Rights Reserved

464 | Teacher's Perspectives on Learning
Major Theoretical

Approaches of Learning

Several ideas and priorities, then, affect how we teachers think
about learning, including the curriculum, the difference between
teaching and learning, sequencing, readiness, and transfer. The
ideas form a "screen" through which to understand and evaluate
whatever psychology has to offer education. As it turns out, many
theories, concepts, and ideas from educational psychology do make
it through the "screen" of education, meaning that they are
consistent with the professional priorities of teachers and helpful
in solving important problems of classroom teaching. In the case
of issues about classroom learning, for example, educational
psychologists have developed a number of theories and concepts
that are relevant to classrooms, in that they describe at least some of
what usually happens there and offer guidance for assisting
learning.

   Various perspectives on learning are represented in the diverse
views and theories that form the four pillars for teaching:
behavioral, social cognitive, constructivist, and information
processing. It is helpful to group the theories according to whether
they focus on changes in behavior or in thinking. The distinction is
rough and inexact, but a good place to begin. Behaviorism considers
learning as changes in overt behavior and focuses on means of
influencing behavior without much consideration of the cognition
involved. Social cognitive theories are also interested in the
behavioral outcomes but do consider the cognitive processes
involved in behavior. Meanwhile, constructivism considers learning
as changes in thinking and can be further divided into psychological
constructivism (changes in thinking resulting from individual
experiences), and social constructivism, (changes in thinking due
to assistance from others). The last pillar, information processing,

                                                             Major Theoretical Approaches of
                                                                                     Learning | 465
considers the processes involved in thinking in learning. The rest
of this chapter discusses these four concepts as they apply to
education. Each perspective suggests things that you might do
in your classroom to make students' learning more productive.
CC licensed content, Original

   Major Theoretical Approaches to Learning. Authored by:
      Nicole Arduini-Van Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley
      Community College. Retrieved from:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/chapter/major-
      theoretical-approaches. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously
   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

466 | Major Theoretical Approaches of Learning
Behaviorism

Behaviorism is a perspective on learning that focuses on changes
in individuals' observable behaviors-- changes in what people say
or do. At some point we all use this perspective, whether we call it
"behaviorism" or something else. The first time that I drove a car, for
example, I was concerned primarily with whether I could actually
do the driving, not with whether I could describe or explain how to
drive. For another example: when I reached the point in life where
I began cooking meals for myself, I was more focused on whether I
could actually produce edible food in a kitchen than with whether
I could explain my recipes and cooking procedures to others. And
still another example--one often relevant to new teachers: when I
began my first year of teaching, I was more focused on doing the job
of teaching--on day-to-day survival--than on pausing to reflect on
what I was doing.

   Note that in all of these examples, focusing attention on behavior
instead of on "thoughts" may have been desirable at that moment,
but not necessarily desirable indefinitely or all of the time. Even as
a beginner, there are times when it is more important to be able to
describe how to drive or to cook than to actually do these things.
And there definitely are many times when reflecting on and thinking
about teaching can improve teaching itself. (As a teacher-friend
once said to me: "Don't just do something; stand there!") But neither
is focusing on behavior which is not necessarily less desirable than
focusing on students' "inner" changes, such as gains in their
knowledge or their personal attitudes. If you are teaching, you will
need to attend to all forms of learning in students, whether inner or
outward.

   In classrooms, behaviorism is most useful for identifying
relationships between specific actions by a student and the
immediate precursors and consequences of the actions. It is less
useful for understanding changes in students' thinking; for this

                                                                                 Behaviorism | 467
purpose, we need theories that are more cognitive (or thinking-
oriented) or social, like the ones described later in this chapter.
This fact is not a criticism of behaviorism as a perspective, but just
a clarification of its particular strength or usefulness, which is to
highlight observable relationships among actions, precursors, and
consequences. Behaviorists use particular terms (or "lingo," some
might say) for these relationships. One variety of behaviorism that
has proved especially useful to educators is operant conditioning,
described in the next section.

Classical Conditioning

Have you ever had the experience of taking a shower when suddenly
someone in the apartment above you, or in a nearby bathroom,
flushes the toilet? The shower's relaxing warmth turns to scalding
heat! You flinch, tense up, maybe even scream in pain. But soon
the water returns to its former temperature, and you relax once
again--but this time your ears are alert to the sound. When you
hear the flush again, you anticipate the burning water and jump
back even before the temperature changes. You have learned an
important lesson--that there is a predictable relationship or
association between two events, a sound and a change in
water temperature. It has learned this association through a process
called classical conditioning.

468 | Behaviorism
Pavlov's Experiment

                         Ivan Pavlov, a Russian

                         physiologist, discovered the

                         phenomenon     of

                         classical conditioning nearly a

                         century ago. He did this by

                         demonstrating that dogs

                         could "learn" to salivate at the

                         sound of a bell that was rung

                         before they were fed, even before

                         they could see or smell the food.

                                    Before a dog undergoes the

                         conditioning process, the bell is a

                         neutral stimulus (NS). In other

                         words, a bell does not

automatically elicit a physiological response from a dog. Food, on

the other hand, automatically causes a dog to salivate. The food,

therefore, is an unconditioned stimulus (UCS), meaning

"naturally conditioned" or "conditioned by nature." Salivation is an

unconditioned response (UCR), a reaction that automatically

follows an unconditioned stimulus.

Figure 4.3.1. Ivan Pavlov (1849-1936).

In Pavlov's experiments, the dogs salivated each time food was

presented to them. Before conditioning, think of the dogs' stimulus

and response like this:

                            Food (UCS)  Salivatin (UCR)
   In classical conditioning, a neutral stimulus is presented
immediately before an unconditioned stimulus. Pavlov would sound
a tone (like ringing a bell) and then give the dogs the food. The bell
was the neutral stimulus (NS), which is a stimulus that does not
naturally elicit a response. Prior to conditioning, the dogs did not

                                        Behaviorism | 469
salivate when they just heard the bell because the bell had no
association for the dogs.

                   Bell (UCS) + Food (CS)  Salivation (UCS)
   When Pavlov paired the tone with the meat powder over and
over again, the previously neutral stimulus (the tone) also began to
elicit salivation from the dogs. Thus, the neutral stimulus became
the conditioned stimulus (CS), which is a stimulus that elicits a
response after repeatedly being paired with an unconditioned
stimulus. Eventually, the dogs began to salivate to the tone alone,
just as they previously had salivated at the sound of the assistants'
footsteps. The behavior caused by the conditioned stimulus is
called the conditioned response (CR). In the case of Pavlov's dogs,
they had learned to associate the tone (CS) with being fed, and they
began to salivate (CR) in anticipation of food.

                              Bell (CS)  Salivation (CR)

470 | Behaviorism
Figure 4.3.2 Before conditioning, an unconditioned stimulus (food)
produces an unconditioned response (salivation), and a neutral
stimulus (bell) does not produce a response. During conditioning,
the unconditioned stimulus (food) is presented repeatedly just after
the presentation of the neutral stimulus (bell). After conditioning,
the neutral stimulus alone produces a conditioned response
(salivation), thus becoming a conditioned stimulus.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=68#oembed-2

Video 4.3.1. Classical Conditioning explains the process used in
creating an association between stimuli and response.

Many learning theorists use the classical conditioning paradigm to
explain how we learn relationships between environmental stimuli
and behavioral, cognitive, and emotional responses. For example,
how do we account for the following phenomena?

   The smell of a certain perfume reminds you of a close friend or
      loved one.

   You recoil at the sight of a snake when you've never
      encountered one before except in pictures or stories.

   As a first-grader, you became anxious at the sound of the
      school bell.

   Your professor utters the word "exam" and you get a funny
      feeling in your stomach.

   A familiar song on the radio creates mental images that change
      your mood.

What these events have in common is that a neutral stimulus (an

                                                                                 Behaviorism | 471
odor, the sight of an animal, a sound, a spoken word, a song) has
developed the power to evoke an emotional (affective), physiological
(a muscle contraction), behavioral (running away), psychological (a
shiver), or cognitive (an image) response. Thus, classical
conditioning theorists propose that many of our behavioral,
emotional, and cognitive responses to people, places, and things
have been acquired through a process of classical conditioning.

   For example, how might a learner develop a fear of math? Math,
in and of itself, is a neutral stimulus. There is no natural connection
between it and the emotional responses associated with fear
(increased adrenalin flow, constriction of blood vessels, increased
blood pressure, rapid breathing). However, there is a natural
(unconditioned) association between being reprimanded (UCS) by
a teacher or parent and the fear (UCR) that might immediately
follow answering a question incorrectly or receiving a failing test
grade. Such events, repeated over time, can condition a learner to
respond with intense fear at the sight of a math test--or even the
announcement that one is forthcoming.

Relevance for Teachers

As a teacher, you will want your learners to acquire positive
attitudes toward you and your subject. Initially, you and your
learning activities will be neutral stimuli, but over time you and
how you teach can become conditioned stimuli that elicit emotions
(or conditioned responses) of interest and joy, evoke approach
behaviors such as studying and asking questions, and even arouse
physiological responses of comfort and naturalness.

   Learning theorists remind us that classical conditioning
processes go on in classrooms all the time. Your role is to be aware
of the classical conditioning paradigm and use it to build positive
associations between your teaching activities and learning. We will
offer some specific recommendations to help you achieve this goal.

472 | Behaviorism
   While the classical conditioning paradigm can explain how
children learn certain emotional, behavioral, and cognitive
responses to neutral stimuli, it is not as successful in explaining how
children learn to be successful in the classroom: to read and solve
problems, follow directions, and work productively with others.
Let's look at a second learning paradigm, which can explain
how learners develop these skills in their learners.

Operant Conditioning

Operant conditioning focuses on how the consequences of a
behavior affect the behavior over time. It begins with the idea that
certain consequences tend to make certain behaviors happen more
frequently. If I compliment a student for a good comment made
during discussion, there is more of a chance that I will hear further
comments from the student in the future. If a student tells a joke to
classmates and they laugh at it, then the student is likely to tell more
jokes in the future and so on.

   Psychologist B. F. Skinner saw that classical conditioning is
limited to existing behaviors that are reflexively elicited, and it
doesn't account for new behaviors such as riding a bike. He
proposed a theory about how such behaviors come about. Skinner
believed that behavior is motivated by the consequences we receive
for the behavior: the reinforcements and punishments. His idea
that learning is the result of consequences is based on the law of
effect, which was first proposed by psychologist Edward Thorndike.
According to the law of effect, behaviors that are followed by
consequences that are satisfying to the organism are more likely
to be repeated, and behaviors that are followed by unpleasant
consequences are less likely to be repeated (Thorndike, 1911).
Essentially, if an organism does something that brings about a
desired result, the organism is more likely to do it again. If an
organism does something that does not bring about the desired

                                                                                 Behaviorism | 473
result, the organism is less likely to do it again. An example of the
law of effect is in employment. One of the reasons (and often the
main reason) we show up for work is because we get paid to do so. If
we stop getting paid, we will likely stop showing up--even if we love
our job.

   Working with Thorndike's law of effect as his foundation, Skinner
began conducting scientific experiments on animals (mainly rats
and pigeons) to determine how organisms learn through operant
conditioning (Skinner, 1938). He placed these animals inside an
operant conditioning chamber, which has come to be known as a
"Skinner box." A Skinner box contains a lever (for rats) or disk (for
pigeons) that the animal can press or peck for a food reward via
the dispenser. Speakers and lights can be associated with certain
behaviors. A recorder counts the number of responses made by the
animal.

 Figure 4.3.3. (a) B. F. Skinner developed operant conditioning for
     the systematic study of how behaviors are strengthened or

weakened according to their consequences. (b) In a Skinner box, a
rat presses a lever in an operant conditioning chamber to receive a

          food reward. (credit a: modification of work by "Silly
                         rabbit"/Wikimedia Commons)

In discussing operant conditioning, we use several

everyday           words--positive,  negative,

reinforcement, and punishment--in a specialized

manner. In operant conditioning, positive and

negative do not mean good and bad. Instead,

474 | Behaviorism
positive means you are adding something,
and negative means you are taking something
away. Reinforcement means you are increasing a
behavior, and punishment means you are
decreasing a behavior. Reinforcement can be
positive or negative, and punishment can also be
positive or negative. All reinforcers (positive or
negative) increase the likelihood of a behavioral
response. All punishers (positive or
negative) decrease the likelihood of a behavioral
response. Now let's combine these four terms:
positive reinforcement, negative reinforcement,
positive punishment, and negative punishment.

Table 4.3.1. Positive and Negative Reinforcement and Punishment

          Reinforcement                   Punishment

Positive  Something                       Something
          is added to increase the        is added to decrease the
          likelihood of a behavior.       likelihood of a behavior.

               Something                  Something
Negative is removed to increase the       is removed to decrease the
                                          likelihood of a behavior.
               likelihood of a behavior.

Reinforcement

The most effective way to teach a person or animal a new behavior
is with positive reinforcement. In positive reinforcement, a
desirable stimulus is added to increase a behavior.

   For example, you tell your five-year-old son, Jerome, that if he
cleans his room, he will get a toy. Jerome quickly cleans his room
because he wants a new art set. Let's pause for a moment. Some
people might say, "Why should I reward my child for doing what is
expected?" But in fact we are constantly and consistently rewarded

                                                                                 Behaviorism | 475
in our lives. Our paychecks are rewards, as are high grades and
acceptance into our preferred school. Being praised for doing a
good job and for passing a driver's test is also a reward. Positive
reinforcement as a learning tool is extremely effective. It has been
found that one of the most effective ways to increase achievement
in school districts with below-average reading scores was to pay
the children to read. Specifically, second-grade students in Dallas
were paid $2 each time they read a book and passed a short quiz
about the book. The result was a significant increase in reading
comprehension (Fryer, 2010). What do you think about this
program? If Skinner were alive today, he would probably think this
was a great idea. He was a strong proponent of using operant
conditioning principles to influence students' behavior at school. In
fact, in addition to the Skinner box, he also invented what he called
a teaching machine that was designed to reward small steps in
learning (Skinner, 1961)--an early forerunner of computer-assisted
learning. His teaching machine tested students' knowledge as they
worked through various school subjects. If students answered
questions correctly, they received immediate positive
reinforcement and could continue; if they answered incorrectly,
they did not receive any reinforcement. The idea was that students
would spend additional time studying the material to increase their
chance of being reinforced the next time (Skinner, 1961).

   In negative reinforcement, an undesirable stimulus is removed
to increase a behavior. For example, car manufacturers use the
principles of negative reinforcement in their seatbelt systems,
which go "beep, beep, beep" until you fasten your seatbelt. The
annoying sound stops when you exhibit the desired behavior,
increasing the likelihood that you will buckle up in the future.
Negative reinforcement is also used frequently in horse training.
Riders apply pressure--by pulling the reins or squeezing their
legs--and then remove the pressure when the horse performs the
desired behavior, such as turning or speeding up. The pressure is
the negative stimulus that the horse wants to remove.

476 | Behaviorism
Punishment

Many people confuse negative reinforcement with punishment in
operant conditioning, but they are two very different mechanisms.
Remember that reinforcement, even when it is negative, always
increases a behavior. In contrast, punishment always decreases a
behavior. In positive punishment, you add an undesirable stimulus
to decrease a behavior. An example of positive punishment is
scolding a student to get the student to stop texting in class. In this
case, a stimulus (the reprimand) is added in order to decrease the
behavior (texting in class). In negative punishment, you remove a
pleasant stimulus to decrease behavior. For example, when a child
misbehaves, a parent can take away a favorite toy. In this case, a
stimulus (the toy) is removed in order to decrease the behavior.

   Punishment, especially when it is immediate, is one way to
decrease undesirable behavior. For example, imagine your four-
year-old son, Brandon, hitting his younger brother. You have
Brandon write 100 times "I will not hit my brother" (positive
punishment). Chances are he won't repeat this behavior. While
strategies like this are common today, in the past children were
often subject to physical punishment, such as spanking. It's
important to be aware of some of the drawbacks in using physical
punishment on children. First, punishment may teach fear. Brandon
may become fearful of the street, but he also may become fearful
of the person who delivered the punishment--you, his parent.
Similarly, children who are punished by teachers may come to fear
the teacher and try to avoid school (Gershoff et al., 2010).
Consequently, most schools in the United States have banned
corporal punishment. Second, punishment may cause children to
become more aggressive and prone to antisocial behavior and
delinquency (Gershoff, 2002). They see their parents resort to
spanking when they become angry and frustrated, so, in turn, they
may act out this same behavior when they become angry and
frustrated. For example, because you spank Brenda when you are

                                                                                 Behaviorism | 477
angry with her for her misbehavior, she might start hitting her
friends when they won't share their toys.

   While positive punishment can be effective in some cases, Skinner
suggested that the use of punishment should be weighed against
the possible negative effects. Today's psychologists and parenting
experts favor reinforcement over punishment--they recommend
that you catch your child doing something good and reward her for
it.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=68#oembed-1

Video 4.3.2. Operant Conditioning explains the processes of positive
and negative reinforcement and punishment.

Key Concepts of Conditioning

Operant conditioning is made more complicated, but also more
realistic, by several additional ideas. They can be confusing because
the ideas have names that sound rather ordinary, but that have
special meanings within the framework of operant theory. Among
the most important concepts to understand are the following:

   shaping
   extinction
   generalization
   discrimination
   intermittent schedules

478 | Behaviorism
   cues

The paragraphs below explain each of these briefly, as well as their
relevance to classroom teaching and learning.

Shaping

In his operant conditioning experiments, Skinner often used an
approach called shaping. Instead of rewarding only the target
behavior, in shaping, we reward successive approximations of a
target behavior. Why is shaping needed? Remember that in order for
reinforcement to work, the organism must first display the behavior.
Shaping is needed because it is extremely unlikely that an organism
will display anything but the simplest of behaviors spontaneously.
In shaping, behaviors are broken down into many small, achievable
steps. The specific steps used in the process are the following:

 1. Reinforce any response that resembles the desired behavior.
2. Then reinforce the response that more closely resembles the

      desired behavior. You will no longer reinforce the previously
      reinforced response.
3. Next, begin to reinforce the response that even more closely
      resembles the desired behavior.
4. Continue to reinforce closer and closer approximations of the
      desired behavior.
5. Finally, only reinforce the desired behavior.

Shaping is often used in teaching a complex behavior or chain of
behaviors. Skinner used shaping to teach pigeons not only such
relatively simple behaviors as pecking a disk in a Skinner box, but
also many unusual and entertaining behaviors, such as turning in
circles, walking in figure eights, and even playing ping pong; the
technique is commonly used by animal trainers today. An important
part of shaping is stimulus discrimination. Recall Pavlov's dogs--he

                                                                                 Behaviorism | 479
trained them to respond to the tone of a bell, and not to similar
tones or sounds. This discrimination is also important in operant
conditioning and in shaping behavior.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=68#oembed-3

Video 4.3.3. Shaping explains the process of using shaping to help
condition more complex behaviors.

It's easy to see how shaping is effective in teaching behaviors to
animals, but how does shaping work with humans? Let's consider
parents whose goal is to have their child learn to clean his room.
They use shaping to help him master steps toward the goal. Instead
of performing the entire task, they set up these steps and reinforce
each step. First, he cleans up one toy. Second, he cleans up five
toys. Third, he chooses whether to pick up ten toys or put his books
and clothes away. Fourth, he cleans up everything except two toys.
Finally, he cleans his entire room.

Extinction

Extinction refers to the disappearance of an operant behavior
because of a lack of reinforcement. A student who stops receiving
gold stars or compliments for prolific reading of library books, for
example, may extinguish (i.e. decrease or stop) book-reading
behavior. A student who used to be reinforced for acting like a clown
in class may stop clowning once classmates stop paying attention to
the antics.

480 | Behaviorism
Generalization and Discrimination

Generalization refers to the incidental conditioning of behaviors
similar to an original operant. If a student gets gold stars for reading
library books, then we may find her reading more other material as
well--newspapers, comics, etc.-even if the activity is not reinforced
directly. The "spread" of the new behavior to similar behaviors is
called generalization. Generalization is a lot like the concept of
transfer discussed early in this chapter, in that it is about extending
prior learning to new situations or contexts. From the perspective
of operant conditioning, though, what is being extended (or
"transferred" or generalized) is a behavior, not knowledge or skill.

   Discrimination means learning not to generalize. In operant
conditioning, what is not overgeneralized (i.e. what is discriminated
against) is the operant behavior. If I am a student who is being
complimented (reinforced) for contributing to discussions, I must
also learn to discriminate when to make verbal contributions from
when not to make them--such as when classmates or the teacher
are busy with other tasks. Discrimination learning usually results
from the combined effects of reinforcement of the target behavior
and extinction of similar generalized behaviors. In a classroom, for
example, a teacher might praise a student for speaking during
discussion, but ignore him for making very similar remarks out of
turn. In operant conditioning, the schedule of reinforcement refers
to the pattern or frequency by which reinforcement is linked with
the operant. If a teacher praises me for my work, does she do it
every time, or only sometimes? Frequently or only once in a while?
In respondent conditioning, however, the schedule in question is
the pattern by which the conditioned stimulus is paired with the
unconditioned stimulus. If I am a student with Mr. Horrible as my
teacher, does he scowl every time he is in the classroom, or only
sometimes? Frequently or rarely?

                                                                                 Behaviorism | 481
Intermittent Schedules

Behavioral psychologists have studied intermittent schedules
extensively (for example, Ferster, et al., 1997; Mazur, 2005), and
found a number of interesting effects of different schedules. For
teachers, however, the most important finding may be this: partial
or intermittent schedules of reinforcement generally cause learning
to take longer, but also cause the extinction of learning to take
longer. This dual principle is important for teachers because so
much of the reinforcement we give is partial or intermittent.
Typically, if I am teaching, I can compliment a student a lot of the
time, for example, but there will inevitably be occasions when I
cannot do so because I am busy elsewhere in the classroom. For
teachers concerned both about motivating students and minimizing
inappropriate behaviors, this is both good news and bad. The good
news is that the benefits of my praising students' constructive
behavior will be more lasting because they will not extinguish their
constructive behaviors immediately if I fail to support them every
single time they happen. The bad news is that students' negative
behaviors may take longer to extinguish as well, because those too
may have developed through partial reinforcement. A student who
clowns around inappropriately in class, for example, may not be
"supported" by classmates' laughter every time it happens, but only
some of the time. Once the inappropriate behavior is learned,
though, it will take somewhat longer to disappear even if
everyone--both teacher and classmates--makes a concerted effort
to ignore (or extinguish) it.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=68#oembed-4

482 | Behaviorism
Video 4.3.4. Schedules of Reinforcement explains the various
intermittent schedules.

Cues

Finally, behavioral psychologists have studied the effects of cues. In
operant conditioning, a cue is a stimulus that happens just prior to
the operant behavior and that signals that performing the behavior
may lead to reinforcement. In the original conditioning
experiments, Skinner's rats were sometimes cued by the presence
or absence of a small electric light in their cage. Reinforcement
was associated with pressing a lever when, and only when, the light
was on. In classrooms, cues are sometimes provided by the teacher
deliberately, and sometimes simply by the established routines of
the class. Calling on a student to speak, for example, can be a
cue that if the student does say something at that moment, then he
or she may be reinforced with praise or acknowledgment. But if
that cue does not occur--if the student is not called on--speaking
may not be rewarded. In more every day, non-behaviorist terms, the
cue allows the student to learn when it is acceptable to speak, and
when it is not.

Primary and Secondary Reinforcers

Rewards such as stickers, praise, money, toys, and more can be used
to reinforce learning. Let's go back to Skinner's rats again. How did
the rats learn to press the lever in the Skinner box? They were
rewarded with food each time they pressed the lever. For animals,
food would be an obvious reinforcer.

   What would be a good reinforcer for humans? For your child
Chris, it was the promise of a toy when they cleaned their room.
How about Sydney, the soccer player? If you gave Sydney a piece

                                                                                Behaviorism | 483
of candy every time Sydney scored a goal, you would be using
a primary reinforcer. Primary reinforcers are reinforcers that have
innate reinforcing qualities. These kinds of reinforcers are not
learned. Water, food, sleep, shelter, sex, and touch, among others,
are primary reinforcers. Pleasure is also a primary reinforcer.
Organisms do not lose their drive for these things. For most people,
jumping in a cool lake on a very hot day would be reinforcing and
the cool lake would be innately reinforcing--the water would cool
the person off (a physical need), as well as provide pleasure.

   A secondary reinforcer has no inherent value and only has
reinforcing qualities when linked with a primary reinforcer. Praise,
linked to affection, is one example of a secondary reinforcer, as
when you called out "Great shot!" every time Sydney made a goal.
Another example, money, is only worth something when you can
use it to buy other things--either things that satisfy basic needs
(food, water, shelter--all primary reinforcers) or other secondary
reinforcers. If you were on a remote island in the middle of the
Pacific Ocean and you had stacks of money, the money would not
be useful if you could not spend it. What about the stickers on the
behavior chart? They also are secondary reinforcers.

   Sometimes, instead of stickers on a sticker chart, a token is used.
Tokens, which are also secondary reinforcers, can then be traded
in for rewards and prizes. Entire behavior management systems,
known as token economies, are built around the use of these kinds
of token reinforcers. Token economies have been found to be very
effective at modifying behavior in a variety of settings such as
schools, prisons, and mental hospitals. For example, a study by
Cangi and Daly (2013) found that the use of a token economy
increased appropriate social behaviors and reduced inappropriate
behaviors in a group of autistic school children. Autistic children
tend to exhibit disruptive behaviors such as pinching and hitting.
When the children in the study exhibited appropriate behavior (not
hitting or pinching), they received a "quiet hands" token. When they
hit or pinched, they lost a token. The children could then exchange
specified amounts of tokens for minutes of playtime.

484 | Behaviorism
Skinner and other behavioral psychologists experimented with
using various reinforcers and operants. They also experimented
with various patterns of intermittent reinforcement, as well as with
various cues or signals to the animal about when reinforcement
was available. It turned out that all of these factors--the operant,
the reinforcement, the schedule, and the cues--affected how easily
and thoroughly operant conditioning occurred. For example,
reinforcement was more effective if it came immediately after the
crucial operant behavior, rather than being delayed, and
reinforcements that happened intermittently (only part of the time)
caused learning to take longer, but also caused it to last longer.

Relevance for Teaching

Since the original research about operant conditioning used
animals, it is important to ask whether operant conditioning also
describes learning in human beings, especially in students in
classrooms. On this point, the answer seems to be clearly "yes."
There are countless classroom examples of consequences affecting
students' behavior in ways that resemble operant conditioning,
although the process certainly does not account for all forms of
student learning (Alberto & Troutman, 2005). Consider the following
examples. In most of them the operant behavior tends to become
more frequent on repeated occasions:

   A seventh-grade boy makes a silly face (the operant) at the girl
      sitting next to him. Classmates sitting around them giggle in
      response (the reinforcement).

   A kindergarten child raises her hand in response to the
      teacher's question about a story (the operant). The teacher
      calls on her and she makes her comment (the reinforcement).

   Another kindergarten child blurts out her comment without
      being called on (the operant). The teacher frowns, and ignores

                                                                                Behaviorism | 485
      this behavior, but before the teacher calls on a different
      student, classmates are listening attentively (the
      reinforcement) to the student even though he did not raise his
      hand as he should have.
   A twelfth-grade student--a member of the track team--runs
      one mile during practice (the operant). He notes the time it
      takes him as well as his increase in speed since joining the
      team (the reinforcement).
   A child who is usually very restless sits for five minutes doing
      an assignment (the operant). The teaching assistant
      compliments him for working hard (the reinforcement).
   A sixth-grader takes home a book from the classroom library
      to read overnight (the operant). When she returns the book the
      next morning, her teacher puts a gold star by her name on a
      chart posted in the room (the reinforcement).

These examples are enough to make several points about operant
conditioning. First, the process is widespread in
classrooms--probably more widespread than teachers realize. This
fact makes sense, given the nature of public education: to a large
extent, teaching is about making certain consequences (like praise
or marks) depend on students' engaging in certain activities (like
reading certain material or doing assignments). Second, learning by
operant conditioning is not confined to any particular grade, subject
area, or style of teaching, but by nature happens in every imaginable
classroom. Third, teachers are not the only persons controlling
reinforcements. Sometimes they are controlled by the activity itself
(as in the track team example), or by classmates (as in the "giggling"
example). This leads to the fourth point: multiple examples of
operant conditioning often happen at the same time.

   Because operant conditioning happens so widely, its effects on
motivation are a bit complex. Operant conditioning can
encourage intrinsic motivation, to the extent that the
reinforcement for an activity is the activity itself. When a student
reads a book for the sheer enjoyment of reading, for example, he is

486 | Behaviorism
reinforced by the reading itself, and we can say that his reading is
"intrinsically motivated." More often, however, operant conditioning
stimulates both intrinsic and extrinsic motivation at the same time.
The combining of both is noticeable in the examples in the previous
paragraph. In each example, it is reasonable to assume that the
student felt intrinsically motivated to some partial extent, even
when the reward came from outside the student as well. This was
because part of what reinforced their behavior was the behavior
itself--whether it was making faces, running a mile, or contributing
to a discussion. At the same time, though, note that each student
probably was also extrinsically motivated, meaning that another
part of the reinforcement came from consequences or
experiences not inherently part of the activity or behavior itself. The
boy who made a face was reinforced not only by the pleasure of
making a face, for example, but also by the giggles of classmates.
The track student was reinforced not only by the pleasure of
running itself but also by knowledge of his improved times and
speeds. Even the usually restless child sitting still for five minutes
may have been reinforced partly by this brief experience of
unusually focused activity, even if he was also reinforced by the
teacher aide's compliment. Note that the extrinsic part of the
reinforcement may sometimes be more easily observed or noticed
than the intrinsic part, which by definition may sometimes only be
experienced within the individual and not also displayed outwardly.
This latter fact may contribute to an impression that sometimes
occurs, that operant conditioning is really just "bribery in disguise,"
and that only the external reinforcements operate on students'
behavior. It is true that external reinforcement may sometimes alter
the nature or strength of internal (or intrinsic) reinforcement, but
this is not the same as saying that it destroys or replaces intrinsic
reinforcement. But more about this issue later!

                                                                                 Behaviorism | 487
     Behavior Modification in Children

        Parents and teachers often use behavior modification to
     change a child's behavior. Behavior modification uses the
     principles of operant conditioning to accomplish behavior
     change so that undesirable behaviors are switched to more
     socially acceptable ones. Some teachers and parents create
     a sticker chart, in which several behaviors are listed. Sticker
     charts are a form of token economies, as described in the
     text. Each time children perform the behavior, they get a
     sticker, and after a certain number of stickers, they get a
     prize, or reinforcer. The goal is to increase acceptable
     behaviors and decrease misbehavior. Remember, it is best
     to reinforce desired behaviors, rather than to use
     punishment. In the classroom, the teacher can reinforce a
     wide range of behaviors, from students raising their hands,
     to walking quietly in the hall, to turning in their homework.
     At home, parents might create a behavior chart that
     rewards children for things such as putting away toys,
     brushing their teeth, and helping with dinner. In order for
     behavior modification to be effective, the reinforcement
     needs to be connected with the behavior; the
     reinforcement must matter to the child and be done
     consistently.

488 | Behaviorism
         Figure 4.3.4. Sticker charts are a form of positive
 reinforcement and a tool for behavior modification. Once

        this child earns a certain number of stickers for
 demonstrating the desired behavior, she will be rewarded

       with a trip to the ice cream parlor. (credit: Abigail
                                  Batchelder)

  Time-out is another popular technique
used in behavior modification with children.
It operates on the principle of negative
punishment. When a child demonstrates an
undesirable behavior, she is removed from
the desirable activity at hand. For example,
say that Sophia and her brother Mario are
playing with building blocks. Sophia throws

                                                                          Behaviorism | 489
    some blocks at her brother, so you give her a
    warning that she will go to time-out if she
    does it again. A few minutes later, she
    throws more blocks at Mario. You remove
    Sophia from the room for a few minutes.
    When she comes back, she doesn't throw
    blocks.

        There are several important points that you should know
     if you plan to implement time-out as a behavior
     modification technique. First, make sure the child is being
     removed from a desirable activity and placed in a less
     desirable location. If the activity is something undesirable
     for the child, this technique will backfire because it is more
     enjoyable for the child to be removed from the activity.
     Second, the length of the time-out is important. The
     general rule of thumb is one minute for each year of the
     child's age. Sophia is five; therefore, she sits in a time-out
     for five minutes. Setting a timer helps children know how
     long they have to sit in time-out. Finally, as a caregiver,
     keep several guidelines in mind over the course of a time-
     out: remain calm when directing your child to time-out;
     ignore your child during time-out (because caregiver
     attention may reinforce misbehavior); and give the child a
     hug or a kind word when time-out is over.

490 | Behaviorism
            Figure 4.3.5. Time-out is a popular form of negative
      punishment used by caregivers. When a child misbehaves,
     he or she is removed from a desirable activity in an effort to
      decrease unwanted behavior. For example, (a) a child might
     be playing on the playground with friends and push another
     child; (b) the child who misbehaved would then be removed

          from the activity for a short period of time. (credit a:
            modification of work by Simone Ramella; credit b:
               modification of work by "Spring Dew"/Flickr)

CC licensed content, Original

   Behaviorism. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van Hoose.
      Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College. License: CC
      BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

   Psychology 2e. Authored by: Rose M. Spielman, William J.
      Jenkins, Marilyn D. Lovett. Provided by: Open Stax. Retrieved

                                                                                 Behaviorism | 491
      from: https://openstax.org/books/psychology-2e/. License:
      CC BY: Attribution
   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Bohlin. License: CC BY:
      Attribution
CC licensed content, Specific attribution
   Operant Conditioning . Authored by: Jeffrey Walsh. Provided
      by: Khan Academy . Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/
      ut1zmfolM9E. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike
   Operant Conditioning: Shaping. Authored by: Jeffrey Walsh.
      Provided by: Khan Academy. Retrieved from:
      https://youtu.be/kexFINXbJo4. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
   Operant Conditioning: Schedules of Reinforcement. Authored
      by: Jeffrey Walsh. Provided by: Khan Academy. Retrieved from:
      https://youtu.be/6Of bt16AJgg. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
   Classical Conditioning. Authored by: Jeffrey Walsh. Provided
      by: Khan Academy. Retrieved from:
      https://youtu.be/-6KzZKuQ1lk. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

492 | Behaviorism
Behaviorism in the Classroom

"What does a classroom teacher need to know about learning?"
According to the behavioral science approach, the teacher must be
able to:

 1. Focus instruction on observable learner performance.
2. Assure that learners can perform the skills that are

      prerequisites to that
      performance.
3. Elicit a rapidly paced, correct performance.
4. Use appropriate consequences following performance.

Focus on Learner Performance

Behavioral scientists have traditionally defined learning as a stable
change in behavior brought about by the environment. Cognitive
theorists have expanded this traditional definition of learning to
include such topics as cognitive changes in memory capacity,
thinking, and mental processing. Behavioral scientists are opposed
to this definition. Their opposition stems less from a denial that
changes in cognitive (mental) activity occur than from a concern
about the difficulty of measuring them.

   Behaviorists believe that in order to establish a true science of
instruction we must be able to explain how what teachers do affects
what learners do--not what or how they think. Cognitive activity is
something we cannot measure directly. We can only infer it from
observing performance--and inferences about cognitive activity can
be wrong. Behaviorists believe that a focus on
observable performance avoids incorrect inferences about learning
and allows us to build a science of instruction on a firm foundation.

   Distinctions between learning and performance and between

                                                        Behaviorism in the Classroom | 493
cognitive and observable changes are important for teaching. By
their strong advocacy of observable outcomes and performance
objectives, behavioral scientists challenge teachers not to take
learning for granted. This means that you should plan lessons with
a clear vision of the important outcomes you want learners to
achieve, and end your instruction with an assessment of
those outcomes. Both of these recommendations are consistent
with the behavioral science approach to learning. This premise of
behavioral science--that the only valid measure of learning
is observable performance--has been criticized by some educators
and psychologists (Pasch, Sparks-Langer, Gardner, Starks, & Moody,
1991), who believe that this emphasis encourages teachers to write
only those objectives that are easy to measure and thus to ignore
educational outcomes involving complex intellectual skills.

   Behavioral scientists, on the other hand, believe that a concern
for performance will have the opposite effect--that it will persuade
teachers to give more serious thought to what they want their
learners to accomplish. This, in turn, will help teachers devise
authentic ways to assess learning in terms of performance
and thinking skills, not just the acquisition of facts. As we will
discuss in later chapters, you can write clear, detailed instructional
goals and objectives that can be measured reliably in the context of
classroom performance and performance on real-world assessment
tasks.

Ensure the Learning of Prerequisite Skills

You may be wondering how someone's intelligence, abilities,
aptitudes, or learning style enters into a behavioral scientist's
theory of learning. After all, if someone lacks an aptitude for math
or writing, or possesses little musical or painting ability, doesn't that
affect his or her learning?

   What characteristics of learners should classroom teachers be

494 | Behaviorism in the Classroom
concerned about when planning their lessons? Behavioral scientists
have a straightforward and (given their concern for observable
performance) predictable answer to these questions: Other than
a learner's physical capabilities to perform the learning task, the
only characteristic that is relevant to a student's learning a skill
is whether the learner possesses the prerequisites for it. In other
words, if you expect your students to learn how to write a
paragraph, you must first ask yourself whether they can write a
complete sentence, a topic sentence, and transitions
between sentences. At an even more basic level, can they spell
words and form letters correctly? If some of your learners cannot
learn to write a paragraph skillfully and effortlessly, behavioral
scientists would attribute this to a lack of prerequisite skills (or
poorly designed instruction)--not to a lack of ability, aptitude,
or intelligence.

   Behavioral scientists believe that the source of almost all learning
failures can be identified if teachers analyze both the internal
conditions (prerequisite skills) and the external conditions
(instructional events) of learning. For example, if one of your
learners can't seem to master long division, is it because he hasn't
learned how to subtract? If he is having difficulty learning
subtraction skills, has he learned how to regroup? If he hasn't
learned to regroup, can he identify which of two numbers is larger?
At no point would the behavioral scientist conclude that the learner
lacks ability or intelligence. If the teacher analyzes and probes
deeply enough, eventually she can identify the source of the
problem and teach or reteach the skills necessary for learning to
continue.

   The idea of breaking complex behaviors into smaller component
behaviors originated with Skinner (1954). As we saw earlier,
Skinner's experiments on shaping the behavior of rats demonstrated
the usefulness of this method. Gagn (1970), however, more so than
any other behavioral scientist, demonstrated the importance of
classroom learning of such an analysis.

                                                        Behaviorism in the Classroom | 495
Task Analysis

The process of analyzing the internal conditions necessary
for learning is called task analysis. The outcome of a task analysis is
an arrangement of prerequisite skills into a learning hierarchy. You
begin a task analysis by identifying what task you want your learners
to perform at the end of a lesson or unit of instruction. Then ask, "In
order to perform this task, what prerequisite skills must my learners
already have mastered?" The answer should be the most complex,
highest-level prerequisite skills.

   Next, for each of these skills, identify further prerequisites.
Eventually, a learning hierarchy emerges. The questioning process
you might follow for an individual learner is illustrated in this figure.

   If you have trouble conducting a task analysis using the logical
questioning process described above, do the task yourself and write
down what you did, or observe someone doing the task and write
down what you saw. Some curriculum guides are sufficiently
detailed to provide a task analysis for you.

Sequencing

Constructing a learning hierarchy is dependent on identifying
the prerequisite skills in the correct sequence: you can't teach
subtraction with regrouping before you teach place value.
Behavioral scientists consider the sequence in which skills are
taught to be especially important. They place a premium on correct
responses, rapid responding, and efficiency. Therefore, incorrectly
sequenced instruction results in errors, frustration, and
inefficiency. Englemann (1991) cautions that the sequence of skills
presented in the published curriculum you use may create problems
for your learners. Thus, it will be worth your while to examine this
sequence and adjust it when necessary.

496 | Behaviorism in the Classroom
   Also, solving complex problems in math, writing compositions,
and interpreting difficult reading passages are all tasks that require
learners to perform prerequisite skills automatically and effortlessly
(Mayer, 1987). Imagine the difficulty your learners would have
writing an essay if they could not form letters, spell, punctuate, and
construct grammatical sentences. Learners who cannot perform
prerequisite skills effortlessly and with minimal errors find it
difficult to transfer new learning to unfamiliar problem contexts.
One of the key ingredients for transfer of new learning is the
mastery of prerequisite skills.

Elicit Rapidly Paced, Correct Performance

As we saw in our study of operant conditioning, Skinner was able to
elicit rapid correct performance by the skilled use of reinforcement
and stimulus control. As you will recall, the basic elements of
operant conditioning are (a) a response or behavior that you want
to teach or shape, (b) an effective reinforcer, and (c) the delivery
of that reinforcer immediately after the performance of the desired
response. The challenge--both to psychologists in the lab and to
teachers in the classroom--is to elicit a correct response. Let's
analyze this challenge and explore further the topic of rapidly-
paced, correct performance.

   The skilled teacher gets learners to respond correctly by bringing
correct responses under stimulus control. Exactly how is this done?
How does a teacher deliver instruction in a manner that minimizes
the likelihood that learners will make mistakes? Four important
factors are involved.

 1. Assure the learning of prerequisite skills.
2. Present instructional material effectively.
3. Use prompts.
4. Use reinforcement.

                                                        Behaviorism in the Classroom | 497
We have already discussed the first of these factors. In this section,
we explain the remaining three.

Effective Presentation

Behavioral scientists point out three areas for you to consider as
you decide how to present instructional material: specific
directions, opportunities for learner responses, and the pacing of
response opportunities (Cooper, Heron, & Heward, 1987;
Englemann, 1991).

Specific Directions

Let's say that you want to teach some sight words to your learners.
You want them to look at a word and pronounce it correctly. Here
are two examples of possible directions:

   Example 1: This is the word "rabbit." Say "rabbit" and point to
      the word.

   Example 2: This is the word "rabbit." A rabbit is a small, furry
      animal with big ears. It likes to eat carrots. Point to the word
      "rabbit" and say it.

Example 1 is a better set of directions if your objective is to bring
the response "saying and pointing to the word `rabbit'" under the
stimulus control of the word "rabbit." Example 2 contains
information that may distract the learner from making the correct
response.

   Whether you are teaching word recognition to first-graders,
subtraction to second-graders, paragraph construction to sixth-
graders, or problem-solving in physics to eleventh-graders,

498 | Behaviorism in the Classroom
instructional directions should be specific to the behavior you want
your learners to acquire. So think carefully about what you want
learners to do and how you will direct them to do it. Discard
information and explanations that are extraneous and serve only to
distract the learner.

Opportunities for Learner Response

Behavioral scientists have conducted extensive research on the idea
of the opportunity to respond (Delguardi, Greenwood, & Hall, 1979;
Hall, Delguardi, Greenwood, & Thurston, 1982; Lindsley, 1992b). They
make a useful distinction between active and passive responding.
Active responding requires the learner to do something: write
sentences, calculate answers, focus a microscope, balance a scale,
weigh rocks, and record observations. Passive responding, on the
other hand, includes such activities as listening to lectures, paying
attention to peers while they are reading, watching television, and
waiting for teacher assistance.

   Greenwood, Delguardi, and Hall (1984) report that nearly half of a
learner's day is involved in passive responding. This is unfortunate
because their research also demonstrates a strong relationship
between learner achievement and active responding. Behavioral
scientists, therefore, urge you to plan your lessons so that learners
spend at least 75 percent of their time engaged in active responding.

   Research on the opportunity to respond has also found that
correct responses are more likely to come under stimulus control
when you design your practice material (worksheets, seatwork
drills, homework assignments, and so forth) to elicit correct
responses 70 to 90 percent of the time (Borich, 1996; Stephens,
1976). Many teachers purposely design materials for learner practice
to be challenging--in other words, they design it so there is a strong
likelihood that the learners will make mistakes. Behavioral scientists
have demonstrated that learners acquire basic facts and skills faster

                                                        Behaviorism in the Classroom | 499
when their opportunities for practice result in success most of the
time.

The Pacing of Response Opportunities

Recall Ogden Lindsley's description of the ideal classroom from the
beginning of this chapter. In it, Lindsley drew our attention to the
rapidity with which the learners were responding--they
were "shouting correct answers as fast as they can at 200 words per
minute." It is a cardinal principle of behavioral science that when
instruction is focused on basic academic skills, stimulus control of
correct responses is more likely to occur when learners are
encouraged to respond rapidly.

   Although you might predict that more errors would result from
fast-paced lessons, research indicates just the opposite for the
acquisition of facts and action sequences. In a series of studies
on the pace of reading instruction, Carnine found that rapid
presentations by teachers produced greater achievement, fewer
errors, and more sustained attention by learners during letter and
word identification tasks than did slower presentations (Carnine,
1976; Carnine & Fink, 1978).

   In summary, the behavioral science approach to learning suggests
that you deliver instruction in the following ways:

   Give directions that focus only on the response you want
      learners to make.

   Allow learners to engage in active responding during the
      majority of class time.

   Design instructional material for both initial learning and
      practice so that learners can produce correct answers 70 to 90
      percent of the time.

500 | Behaviorism in the Classroom
Use of Prompts

During instruction teachers often provide prompts--hints
and other types of supplementary instructional stimuli to help
learners make the correct responses. Because, as we have seen,
the behavioral science approach is concerned with minimizing
mistakes, it places a high value on the use of prompts that increase
the likelihood that learners will respond correctly.

   Behavioral scientists identify three categories of prompts used by
teachers to shape the correct performance of their learners: verbal
prompts, gestural prompts, and physical prompts. We will discuss
the use of all three kinds in the following sections.

Verbal Prompts

Verbal prompts can be cues, reminders, or instructions to learners
that help them perform correctly the skill you are teaching. For
example, saying "Leave a space between words" to a first-grader as
he is writing reminds him of what you previously said about neat
handwriting. Or saying "First adjust the object lens" to a learner as
she is looking at a microscope slide prompts her as she is learning
how to use a microscope. Verbal prompts help guide the learner to
correct performance and prevent mistakes and frustration.

Gestural Prompts

Gestural prompts model or demonstrate for learners a particular
skill you want them to perform. For example, if you were to point
to the fine adjustment knob on the microscope and make a turning
gesture with your hand, you would be prompting the student to
perform this step of the process. Gestural prompts are particularly
helpful when you anticipate that the learner may make a mistake.

                                                        Behaviorism in the Classroom | 501
Teachers use gestural prompts routinely to remind learners how to
fold a piece of paper, grasp a pair of scissors, raise a hand before
asking a question, or hold a pen properly when writing.

Physical Prompts

Some learners lack the fine muscle control needed to follow a
demonstration and imitate the action that is being modeled. For
example, the teacher might verbally describe how to form the letter
"A" and demonstrate this to the learner, and the learner may still
be unable to write "A" correctly. In such a case, the teacher might
use her hand to guide the learner's hand as he writes. This is called
a physical prompt. With a physical prompt, you use hand-over-
hand assistance to guide the learner to the correct performance.
Teachers routinely use physical prompts to assist learners with
handwriting, cutting out shapes, tying shoelaces, correctly holding
a dissecting tool, or performing a complex dance routine.

Least-to-Most Prompting

Behavioral scientists generally recommend that you use the least
intrusive prompt first when guiding a learner's performance. This
is referred to as least-to-most prompting. Verbal prompts are
considered the least intrusive, while physical prompts are
considered the most intrusive (Cooper et al., 1987). Thus it would
be more appropriate to first say to a learner "Don't forget the fine
adjustment!" when guiding her in the use of a microscope than
to take her hand and physically assist her. The reasoning behind
using a least-to-most order of prompts to assist learners is that
verbal prompts are easier to remove or fade than physical prompts.
Learners who are dependent on physical prompts to perform

502 | Behaviorism in the Classroom
correctly will find it more difficult to demonstrate a skill
independently of the teacher.

   At this point, let's summarize what we've learned about stimulus
control and its relationship to correct responses. So far, we have
learned that behavioral scientists view the eliciting of a correct
response as one of the four basic elements of learning. Correct
responses followed by reinforcement result in more permanent
learning than correct responses intermixed with incorrect
responses. Mistakes slow down the learning process and often lead
to frustration and attempts by learners to avoid, or passively
respond to, a learning activity.

   Establishing stimulus control over learner performance is the key
to errorless learning. In order to elicit rapidly paced, correct
performance, you must pay particular attention to four important
factors when planning your lessons:

 1. Make sure your learners have mastered prerequisite skills.
2. Present your lessons in a way that will give learners

      frequent opportunities to make correct responses.
3. Use prompts to ensure a correct response.
4. Reinforce correct responses immediately.

Let's turn now to the fourth basic element of the behavioral science
approach, which tells us how to deliver consequences to learners
following their performance.

Use Appropriate Consequences Following
Performance

Picture the following situation: You have just begun a unit on
converting fractions to decimals with your fifth-graders. After
demonstrating how to perform this skill, you pass out a worksheet
with 20 problems. You give your learners 10 minutes to complete

                                                        Behaviorism in the Classroom | 503
the task. As the students work, you move from desk to
desk checking on their answers. You notice several students getting
answers wrong. What should you do? Here are some alternatives.

 1. Circle the incorrect answers, show them what they did wrong,
      and encourage them to do better.

2. Circle just the correct answers, point out what they did right,
      and encourage them to do better.

3. Circle the correct answers, and praise the students for their
      good work.

4. Circle the incorrect answers, admonish the students, and have
      them do the problems again.

5. 1 and 4.
6. 2 and 3.
 7. All of the above.

Educational psychologists using the behavioral science approach
have researched the issue of how best to respond to the correct and
incorrect responses of learners. They have arranged the possible
consequences into three general categories: (1) informational
feedback, (2) positive consequences, and (3) negative
consequences. Let's examine each and see what behavioral
scientists have learned about their effectiveness in promoting
learning.

Informational Feedback

Correct Responses

If a learner correctly recalls the major historical events leading up to
the Civil War, legibly forms a lowercase cursive letter, or accurately
solves an algebra equation with two unknowns showing her work,

504 | Behaviorism in the Classroom
you should do two things immediately: (1) tell the learner the answer
is correct, and (2) briefly describe what she did to obtain the
correct answer. For example:

   "That's right. You listed the five major events."
   "Those letters are slanted correctly and you wrote them on the

      line."
   "The answer is right and you showed all the required steps."

Behavioral scientists remind us that better learning results when
you tell learners not only what they got right, but also why they got
it right (Cooper et al., 1987).

Incorrect Answers

Learners give incorrect answers for several different reasons:
carelessness, lack of knowledge, or lack of understanding. In the
first case, some teachers scold or use some form of
verbal punishment. Behavioral scientists and many educators
strongly advise against these consequences for careless
performance. Instead, they recommend that you use the following
types of feedback whenever students give incorrect answers,
regardless of the reason:

 1. If the problem involves only knowledge of factual information,
      simply give the correct response.

2. If the problem involves more complex intellectual skills, point
      out the rules, procedures, or steps to follow.

3. Ask the learner to correct the answer.
4. Ask the learner to practice some extra problems.

Here is an example of each:

   "The correct spelling is t-h-e-i-r."

                                                        Behaviorism in the Classroom | 505
   "End every sentence with a period, question mark, or
      exclamation point."

   "First draw the base. Then, draw the altitude. Now, retrace
      your steps."

   "Ask yourself: `Who are the more talked-about people in this
      story?' Then
      answer the next set of questions."

Note that these examples do not include preaching, scolding, or
focusing extensively on the student's error--even if the learner was
being careless. Such responses often create feelings of anxiety and
distaste for schoolwork, which encourage disengagement from the
learning activity. Learning will occur more quickly if you simply
tell your students what to do, have them try again, and provide
practice with additional problems when an incorrect response is
given (Rodgers & Iwata, 1991).

Cautions for Correcting Mistakes

Research on feedback and error correction has shown that the
recommendations given above improve learning for most
students. However, there are two groups of learners for whom these
procedures may not be beneficial: (1) those who make a lot of
mistakes and (2) those who are excessively dependent on adult
guidance.

   When given material that is too difficult, low-achieving learners
make many errors. Such learners experience low rates of positive
consequences and high rates of negative ones. Consequently, they
are likely to ignore corrective feedback and simply stop working.
Research on low achievers affirms that when error rates are high,
little is learned from informational feedback (Kulik & Kulik,
1988; McKeachie, 1990). This finding underscores the importance of
designing your instruction to produce as few errors as possible in
all learners.

506 | Behaviorism in the Classroom
   In the second case, learners who depend greatly on adult
guidance may involve attention-seeking behavior. In other words,
some learners may persist in making mistakes because of the
attention they receive after doing so. Hasazi and Hasazi (1972) and
Stromer (1975) speculated that when a teacher's response focuses
on the mistake itself rather than on the correct answer (for example,
circling reversals of letters when the learner writes b for d, or
circling digits when the learner writes 32 for 23), it may
inadvertently reinforce incorrect responses.

   These researchers carried out experiments in which teachers
circled only correct responses and drew no attention to those that
were incorrect. They found dramatic improvements in the learners'
ability to write digits and letters correctly after teachers made this
change alone. This surprising finding reminds us that focusing on
mistakes may actually reinforce the wrong response. This may
be especially true in classrooms where teachers pay more attention
to children who are misbehaving (talking out of turn, not following
instructions) than to those who routinely follow class rules.

Positive Consequences Following Performance

Behavioral scientists have conclusively demonstrated the crucial
role played by positive consequences in promoting and
strengthening learning in animals. They have shown that
positive consequences play an equally critical part in the classroom
learning of children (Sulzer-Azaroff & Mayer, 1986). Thus, for the
classroom teacher today, the important question is not whether
to use positive consequences in the classroom, but what type of
consequence to use and how.

   Behavioral scientists make a distinction between positive
consequences and positive reinforcers. Positive consequences, such
as smiles, praise, happy faces, "happy-grams," and prizes are
enjoyable or pleasurable things that teachers (or parents) do for

                                                        Behaviorism in the Classroom | 507
children to encourage their good efforts and motivate them to do
better. They may or may not serve as positive reinforcers.

   Something can be called a positive reinforcer only when it can
be conclusively shown that it increases the frequency of a target
behavior. When you praise a learner's correct punctuation with the
intention of increasing the likelihood that she will continue her
progress, you are using a positive consequence. In order to classify
this consequence as a positive reinforcer, you must show that the
learner continues to make progress and that your praise was the
causal factor. Some teachers develop elaborate systems of positive
rewards, hoping that they will energize their learners to achieve
increasingly higher levels of both social and academic skills (Canter,
1989). However, the teachers believe they are using positive
reinforcers when they are simply using positive consequences.

   We will now extend our discussion of positive consequences
following learning to address two additional issues: (1) how to use
positive consequences to promote and maintain learning and (2)
how to establish natural reinforcers (i.e., intrinsic motivators) for
learners who require extrinsic ones.

The Expert Practice of Positive Reinforcement

Recall from our discussion of operant conditioning that positive
reinforcement is the process of strengthening behavior by the
presentation of a desired stimulus or reward. While this definition
appears simple, reinforcement is nevertheless easily misunderstood
and misused. Before we expand on the use of positive reinforcement
in the classroom, let's see some examples of what it is not. These will
help you grasp the complexity of positive reinforcement.

   Mr. Russo has snack time at 10:15 and 10:30 for his first-grade
      class. He gives his learners juice, cookies, fruit bits, and other
      types of reinforcers.

   Mr. Baker, the principal, decided to start a positive

508 | Behaviorism in the Classroom
      reinforcement program. At the end of the week, each teacher
      would nominate his or her "best student" to receive the
      "Principal's Pride Award" at a ceremony each Monday morning.
      Parents would be invited to attend.
   Mrs. Knipper allows students who finish assignments early to
      use the computer in the back of the room.
   Mr. French has a popcorn party every Friday if the class has
      not broken more than five major rules the entire week.
   Mrs. Reimer has a basketful of inexpensive trinkets and school
      supplies. She lets learners who have been particularly helpful
      on a given day select a prize from the basket.

Learners who read more than five books a year are treated to a
special roller skating party at the end of the school year, hosted by
the principal.

   There is nothing wrong or inappropriate about these activities.
Learners, their teachers, and parents generally like and support
them. They even may have some beneficial outcomes on learning,
but they are not necessarily examples of positive reinforcement.
Positive reinforcement is a complex process that demands
a substantial commitment of the teacher's time and effort, as we will
now see.

The Process of Positive Reinforcement

When behavioral scientists speak of positive reinforcement they
refer to a sequence of actions by a teacher, trainer, or behavioral
specialist that has a beginning, middle, and end. When you decide
to use positive reinforcement you commit yourself to this specific
sequence of steps. Note that very few of these steps were followed
in the examples given earlier. Reread the examples now, and ask
yourself how many included: baseline measurement of specific
behaviors; assessment of reinforcer preferences; immediate,
continuous reinforcement for the performance of specific

                                                        Behaviorism in the Classroom | 509
behaviors; and a gradual fading of the use of extrinsic reinforcers to
natural reinforcers.

   The point is that the expert practice of positive reinforcement is
a demanding intellectual and physical challenge. When you decide
to use it, you are committing yourself to a process that involves
measurement, consistent delivery of reinforcers, and the
responsibility to fade them. Because of this commitment, there may
be few examples in regular school classrooms today where the
science of reinforcement, as developed by behavioral scientists, is
consistently and appropriately applied.

   Therefore, it is important to recognize that most reward,
recognition, and incentive systems used in today's schools do not
constitute positive reinforcement as behavioral scientists use the
term. In either case, users of positive reinforcement should be
aware of the ethical issues involved in the use of extrinsic rewards,
such as paying students for reading books or for staying off drugs.

Natural Reinforcers: Alternatives to Extrinsic Reinforcers

Behavioral scientists have often been criticized for creating a
generation of learners who are hooked on artificial or extrinsic
consequences in order to learn and behave in the classroom (see,
for example, de Charms, 1968, 1976). However, an analysis of the
writings of early behaviorists like B. F. Skinner (1953, 1974), or other
behavioral scientists like Ogden Lindsley (1991, 1992a, 1992b) and
Baer, Wolf, and Risley (1968), challenges this criticism.
Such behavioral scientists have advocated the use of natural
reinforcers, those that are naturally present in the setting where
the behavior occurs. Thus, there are natural reinforcers for
classrooms (grades), ballfields (the applause of fans), the workplace
(money), and the home (story hour, parent attention). Examples
of unnatural reinforcers are paying children or giving them treats
for achievement in schools, or buying toys for children who behave
well at home.

510 | Behaviorism in the Classroom
   Skinner makes a further distinction in his definition of a natural
reinforcer: he sees it as a change in stimulation resulting from the
behavior itself. In other words, natural reinforcers occur when the
behavior itself produces an environmental change that gives the
person pleasure. For example, the natural reinforcer for hitting the
correct keys on a piano is the pleasurable sound that the behavior
brings. Similarly, the natural reinforcer for writing correct letters
is the satisfaction the first-grader experiences when she sees the
letters forming on the page. Thus to Skinner, a natural reinforcer is a
consequence that results from the very performance of the behavior
we want the child to learn; that consequence, in turn, motivates the
child to want to perform these behaviors again.

   Children who enjoy solving puzzles are receiving natural
reinforcement for doing so. Likewise, learners who write poetry,
play the guitar, study history, read novels, or compete in gymnastics
are receiving natural reinforcement. What these examples have in
common is that children are engaging in the behaviors again
and again without the need for external praise or other reinforcers
delivered by another person.

   Some learners are naturally reinforced by learning to write, read,
color, answer questions, play sports, solve equations, answer
textbook questions, and write essays, but others are not. Many
learners require external reinforcers to engage in certain classroom
activities that they do not find naturally reinforcing. For
such children, external reinforcers have an important role to play.
They can accomplish two things. They enable you to (1) shape and
improve the behaviors you desire
through the use of positive reinforcement and (2) transfer their
control over the learner's behavior to natural reinforcers. Behavioral
scientists refer to this process as conditioning (Horcones, 1992).

   Conditioning a Natural Reinforcer. Over the past decade, the
Communidad Los Horcones (Horcones, 1985, 1987, 1991, 1992) has
developed a strategy for transferring the control of extrinsic
reinforcers to that of natural, or intrinsic reinforcers. This process
as a whole is referred to as intrinsic reinforcement. Note how the

                                                         Behaviorism in the Classroom | 511
use of natural reinforcers relies on the learner's intrinsic motivation
and thus allows you to transfer control of the behavior to
the learner herself.

   Positive Consequences: A Final Comment. Behavioral scientists
emphasize that there is nothing wrong with extrinsic reinforcers,
particularly when they are used as a means to get learning started
and to condition natural reinforcers. But there are drawbacks to
their use. Some learners stop studying when they are
removed (Emmer, Evertson, Clements, & Worsham, 1994). They are
not always available for all learners at the same time nor available
for individual learners when they are needed. This is not the case
with natural reinforcers.

   Moreover, extrinsic reinforcers can be effective only when they
are consistently delivered by another person. It is impractical to
expect teachers to reinforce the most important behaviors of all
learners at the right moment. Natural reinforcers allow for this
possibility.

   We will return to the subject of reinforcement when we study
motivational theories in future chapters. Let's turn now to a
discussion of the third type of consequence that teachers can use
following learner performance: negative consequences.

The Use of Negative Consequences

We will end our discussion of the use of the behavioral science
approach with the final type of consequence teachers can use
negative consequences. Here are some examples of negative
consequences:

   Mr. Holt's fourth-period math class was just before lunch. His
      students often failed to complete their seatwork during this
      period. He decided to delay the lunch period for any learners
      who did not finish their work.

512 | Behaviorism in the Classroom
   Ms. Tolbert wanted to help her learners spell more accurately.
      She made them write each misspelled word 25 times in their
      notebooks.

   Mr. Blandon was a stickler for correct punctuation. Any
      student who failed to capitalize a sentence or place a period at
      the end received a firm lecture on carelessness.

   Mr. Thomas decided to do something about students who
      weren't doing homework--students who didn't turn in
      homework assignments were required to do them after school.

   Mr. Altman sent "sad-grams" home to the parents of students
      who were doing poorly in his math class.

These are all examples of negative consequences, things that
teachers (or other adults) do to learners after inappropriate
behaviors in the hope that such behaviors will not occur again.
Types of negative consequences typically used in schools are these:

   Verbal reprimands: Speaking harshly to the student: "That work
is sloppy and careless, and you should be ashamed of yourself for
doing it."

   Overcorrection: The learner not only corrects what he did wrong
but engages in repetitive, boring practice on the same skill: "After
you correct all the spelling mistakes, write each misspelled word
correctly 50 times."

   Response cost: The teacher takes away some right or privilege:
"Whoever fails to complete the assignment loses the first 15 minutes
of recess."

   Exclusion: The learner is removed from one setting and placed
in another, often called "time out": "If you don't cooperate in your
groups, you will be removed and put in the back of the room for the
rest of the period."

Negative Consequences Versus Punishers

Negative consequences may or may not be punishers. As we have

                                                        Behaviorism in the Classroom | 513
seen, to a behavioral scientist, a punisher is something you do
following a behavior to reduce the frequency of that behavior for as
long as the punisher is used. In other words, your overcorrection
of spelling mistakes is a punisher only if you keep good records
that show that spelling mistakes have been substantially reduced.
If not, then overcorrection is not a punisher--it is simply a negative
consequence, which has no real effect on mistakes and may or may
not cause the learner discomfort.

   Behavioral scientists are very particular about what they call a
punisher (just as they are very particular about what they call a
reinforcer). Something is a punisher only if you have demonstrated
that it reduces the behavior you targeted. Scolding, overcorrection,
sending someone to the principal's office (exclusion), taking away
recess (response cost), and even corporal punishment are all
negative consequences, but they may not be punishers.

   The distinction between a negative consequence and a punisher
is significant for two reasons. First, some teachers persist in the
use of negative consequences in the belief that they are helping
their learners in some way. However, after a scolding, a learner
may appear chastened and remorseful. He may even stop the
inappropriate behavior for the next hour or day. But the same
behavior soon reappears; the teacher, in frustration, scolds or
reprimands again; and the cycle repeats itself.

   Scolding, in this case, does not reduce the target behavior. It
is not a punisher. It is simply a negative consequence, which the
teacher uses to relieve frustration with the learner and which gives
the illusion of effectiveness. By distinguishing between negative
consequences and punishers, behavioral scientists remind us of the
importance of gathering evidence that behavior is changing before
we persist in the use of any technique. They highlight an important
ethical question: What is the justification for the continued use of
negative consequences in the absence of proof of
their effectiveness?

   Second, the distinction between negative consequences and

514 | Behaviorism in the Classroom
punishers is also significant because it raises the question of what is
required to turn a negative consequence into an effective punisher.

The Use of Punishment

As often as you hear the lament "I tried positive reinforcement
and it didn't work," you will hear the assertion "Punishment isn't
effective." And just as we can attribute the failure of positive
reinforcement to ineffective practice, so we can attribute the failure
of punishment to ineffective application.

   Many myths have arisen over the past two decades concerning
the use of punishment in schools. These myths pertain to both
the effectiveness and the ineffectiveness of punishment in reducing
undesirable behavior. In the former case, we often hear statements
like these: Punishment stops unwanted behavior. When all else fails,
use punishment! Children must experience negative consequences
for misbehavior! Spare the rod and spoil the child! In the latter case,
punishment is frequently criticized because it makes children hate
school or teachers create emotional problems, only temporarily
suppresses behavior, or deals only with the symptom of the problem
and not the cause.

   In response to these beliefs, behavioral scientists cite hundreds
of studies, carried out with both animal and human subjects over
the past half-century, that have led to a set of tested conclusions
about punishment and its use (Cooper et al., 1987; Sulzer-Azaroff
et al., 1988). Here is what these studies tell us about the use
of punishment:

   Punishment can result in the long-term elimination of
      undesirable behavior, but so can techniques that involve the
      exclusive use of positive reinforcement to strengthen
      appropriate behavior.

   Some individuals engage in severe, chronic, life-threatening
      behaviors that cannot be eliminated by positive reinforcement

                                                        Behaviorism in the Classroom | 515
      alone.
   When punishment to eliminate inappropriate behaviors is used

      in conjunction with positive reinforcement to teach alternative
      behaviors, emotional side effects such as fear and dislike of
      teachers' attempt to escape or avoid school or schoolwork, or
      anxiety are less likely to occur.
   The failure of some nonaversive and positive reinforcement
      techniques to suppress undesirable behavior does not
      automatically justify the use of punishment. Usually, this failure
      is due to the ineffective use of positive reinforcement.
   The failure of less intense punishment to suppress behavior
      does not necessarily justify the use of more intense
      punishment. In fact, increasing the ratio of positive
      reinforcement to create a contrast with punishment usually
      precludes the need for increased punishment.

From their studies on the effective use of punishment, behavioral
scientists have identified several conditions as essential for the
suppression and eventual elimination of undesirable behavior. Not
surprisingly, these conditions are similar to those we identified for
the successful use of positive reinforcement earlier in this chapter.
They include the following:

 1. Precise identification and baseline measurement of the target
      behavior.

2. Precise identification of an alternative, positive behavior.
3. An assessment of the most effective potential punisher for the

      target behavior prior to its use.
4. Consistent, immediate reinforcement and punishment on a

      continuous schedule until changes in both the target behavior
      and the alternative behavior are evident.
5. Fading of both reinforcers and punishers.

516 | Behaviorism in the Classroom
     PRINCIPLES OF BEHAVIOR ANALYSIS
   AND MODIFICATION

             For a more detailed review of behavior analysis and
                            modification, the OER book

        Principles of Behavior Analysis and Modification provides
                                  more information.

CC licensed content, Original
   Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van Hoose. Provided by: Hudson
      Valley Community College. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously
   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Gary D. Borich and
      Martin L. Tombari. License: CC BY: Attribution

                                                         Behaviorism in the Classroom | 517
Social Cognitive Learning
Theory

Albert Bandura disagreed with Skinner's strict behaviorist approach
to learning and development because he felt that thinking and
reasoning are important components of learning. He presented
a social-cognitive theory that emphasizes that the environment and
cognitive factors influence behavior. In social-cognitive theory, the
concepts of reciprocal determinism, observational learning, and
self-efficacy all play a part in learning and development.

Reciprocal Determinism

In contrast to Skinner's idea that the environment alone determines
behavior, Bandura (1990) proposed the concept of reciprocal
determinism, in which cognitive processes, behavior, and context all
interact, each factor influencing and being influenced by the others
simultaneously. Cognitive processes refer to all characteristics
previously learned, including beliefs, expectations, and personality
characteristics. Behavior refers to anything that we do that may be
rewarded or punished. Finally, the context in which the behavior
occurs refers to the environment or situation, which includes
rewarding/punishing stimuli.

518 | Social Cognitive Learning
Theory
Figure 4.4.1. Bandura proposed the idea of reciprocal determinism:
    Our behavior, cognitive processes, and situational context all
                                influence each other.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=70#oembed-2

Video 4.4.1. Reciprocal Determinism explains the interactions
between behavior, cognition, and the environment.

   Consider, for example, that you're at a festival and one of the
attractions is bungee jumping from a bridge. Do you do it? In this
example, the behavior is bungee jumping. Cognitive factors that
might influence this behavior include your beliefs and values, and
your past experiences with similar behaviors. Finally, context refers
to the reward structure for the behavior. According to reciprocal
determinism, all of these factors are in play.

                                                   Social Cognitive Learning Theory | 519
Observational Learning

Bandura's key contribution to learning theory was the idea that
much learning is vicarious. We learn by observing someone else's
behavior and its consequences, which Bandura called observational
learning. Just as we learn individual behaviors, we learn new
behavior patterns when we see them performed by other people
or models. Drawing on the behaviorists' ideas about reinforcement,
Bandura suggested that whether we choose to imitate a model's
behavior depends on whether we see the model reinforced or
punished. Through observational learning, we come to learn what
behaviors are acceptable and rewarded in our culture, and we also
learn to inhibit deviant or socially unacceptable behaviors by seeing
what behaviors are punished.

   We can see the principles of reciprocal determinism at work in
observational learning. For example, personal factors determine
which behaviors in the environment a person chooses to imitate,
and those environmental events in turn are processed cognitively
according to other personal factors. One person may experience
receiving attention as reinforcing, and that person may be more
inclined to imitate behaviors such as boasting when a model has
been reinforced. For others, boasting may be viewed negatively,
despite the attention that might result--or receiving heightened
attention may be perceived as being scrutinized. In either case, the
person may be less likely to imitate those behaviors even though the
reasons for not doing so would be different.

Humans and other animals are capable of observational learning. As
you will see, the phrase "monkey see, monkey do" really is accurate.
The same could be said about other animals. For example, in a study
of social learning in chimpanzees, researchers gave juice boxes with
straws to two groups of captive chimpanzees. The first group
dipped the straw into the juice box, and then sucked on the small
amount of juice at the end of the straw. The second group sucked
through the straw directly, getting much more juice. When the

520 | Social Cognitive Learning Theory
first group, the "dippers," observed the second group, "the suckers,"

what do you think happened? All of the "dippers" in the first group

switched to sucking through the straws directly. By simply

observing the other chimps and modeling their behavior, they

learned that this was a more efficient method of getting juice

(Yamamoto, Humle, and Tanaka, 2013).

                                       Imitation is much more

                                       obvious in humans, but

                                       is imitation really the sincerest

                                       form of flattery? Consider

                                       Claire's experience with

                                       observational learning. Claire's

Figure 4.4.2. This spider monkey       nine-year-old son, Jay, was
learned to drink water from a plastic  getting into trouble at school
bottle by seeing the behavior modeled  and was defiant at home. Claire
by a human. (credit: U.S. Air Force,   feared that Jay would end up
Senior Airman Kasey Close)

                                       like her brothers, two of whom

were in prison. One day, after yet another bad day at school and

another negative note from the teacher, Claire, at her wit's end, beat

her son with a belt to get him to behave. Later that night, as she put

her children to bed, Claire witnessed her four-year-old daughter,

Anna, take a belt to her teddy bear and whip it. Claire was horrified,

realizing that Anna was imitating her mother. It was then that Claire

knew she wanted to discipline her children in a different manner.

Like Tolman, whose experiments with rats suggested a cognitive

component to learning, psychologist Albert Bandura's ideas about

learning were different from those of strict behaviorists. Bandura

and other researchers proposed a brand of behaviorism called social

learning theory, which took cognitive processes into account.

According to Bandura, pure behaviorism could not explain why

learning can take place in the absence of external reinforcement.

He felt that internal mental states must also have a role in learning

and that observational learning involves much more than imitation.

In imitation, a person simply copies what the model does.

Observational learning is much more complex. According to

                                       Social Cognitive Learning Theory | 521
Lefranois (2012), there are several ways that observational learning
can occur:

 1. You learn a new response. After watching your coworker get
      chewed out by your boss for coming in late, you start leaving
      home 10 minutes earlier so that you won't be late.

2. You choose whether or not to imitate the model depending on
      what you saw happen to the model. Remember Julian and his
      father? When learning to surf, Julian might watch how his
      father pops up successfully on his surf board and then attempt
      to do the same thing. On the other hand, Julian might learn not
      to touch a hot stove after watching his father get burned on a
      stove.

3. You learn a general rule that you can apply to other situations.

Bandura identified three kinds of models: live, verbal, and symbolic.
A live model demonstrates a behavior in person, as when Ben stood
up on his surf board so that Julian could see how he did it. A verbal
instructional model does not perform the behavior, but instead
explains or describes the behavior, as when a soccer coach tells his
young players to kick the ball with the side of the foot, not with the
toe. A symbolic model can be fictional characters or real people who
demonstrate behaviors in books, movies, television shows, video
games, or Internet sources.

  Figure 4.4.3. (a) Yoga students learn by observation as their yoga

522 | Social Cognitive Learning Theory
instructor demonstrates the correct stance and movement for her
     students (live model). (b) Models don't have to be present for

learning to occur: through symbolic modeling, this child can learn a
behavior by watching someone demonstrate it on television. (credit

  a: modification of work by Tony Cecala; credit b: modification of
                               work by Andrew Hyde)

Steps in the Modeling Process

Of course, we don't learn a behavior simply by observing a model.
Bandura described specific steps in the process of modeling that
must be followed if learning is to be successful: attention, retention,
reproduction, and motivation. First, you must be focused on what
the model is doing--you have to pay attention. Next, you must be
able to retain, or remember, what you observed; this is retention.
Then, you must be able to perform the behavior that you observed
and committed to memory; this is reproduction. Finally, you must
have motivation. You need to want to copy the behavior, and
whether or not you are motivated depends on what happened to the
model. If you saw that the model was reinforced for her behavior,
you will be more motivated to copy her. This is known as vicarious
reinforcement. On the other hand, if you observed the model being
punished, you would be less motivated to copy her. This is
called vicarious punishment. For example, imagine that four-year-
old Allison watched her older sister Kaitlyn playing in their mother's
makeup, and then saw Kaitlyn get a time out when their mother
came in. After their mother left the room, Allison was tempted to
play in the make-up, but she did not want to get a time-out from her
mother. What do you think she did? Once you actually demonstrate
the new behavior, the reinforcement you receive plays a part in
whether or not you will repeat the behavior.

                                                   Social Cognitive Learning Theory | 523
                  Figure 4.4.4. Observational learning model.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=70#oembed-3

Video 4.4.2. Observational Learning explains the steps in the
modeling process for observational learning to occur.

   Bandura researched modeling behavior, particularly children's
modeling of adults' aggressive and violent behaviors (Bandura, Ross,
& Ross, 1961). He conducted an experiment with a five-foot
inflatable doll that he called a Bobo doll. In the experiment,
children's aggressive behavior was influenced by whether the

524 | Social Cognitive Learning Theory
teacher was punished for her behavior. In one scenario, a teacher
acted aggressively with the doll, hitting, throwing, and even
punching the doll, while a child watched. There were two types
of responses by the children to the teacher's behavior. When the
teacher was punished for her bad behavior, the children decreased
their tendency to act as she had. When the teacher was praised or
ignored (and not punished for her behavior), the children imitated
what she did, and even what she said. They punched, kicked, and
yelled at the doll.

What are the implications of this study? Bandura
concluded that we watch and learn, and that this
learning can have both prosocial and antisocial
effects. Prosocial (positive) models can be used to
encourage socially acceptable behavior. Parents,
in particular, should take note of this finding. If
you want your children to read, then read to them.
Let them see you reading. Keep books in your
home. Talk about your favorite books. If you want
your children to be healthy, then let them see you
eat right and exercise, and spend time engaging in
physical fitness activities together. The same
holds true for qualities like kindness, courtesy,
and honesty. The main idea is that children
observe and learn from their parents, even their
parents' morals, so be consistent and toss out the
old adage "Do as I say, not as I do," because
children tend to copy what you do instead of what
you say. Besides parents, many public figures,
such as Martin Luther King, Jr. and Mahatma
Gandhi, are viewed as prosocial models who are
able to inspire global social change. Can you think
of someone who has been a prosocial model in
your life?

                                                   Social Cognitive Learning Theory | 525
The antisocial effects of observational learning are also worth
mentioning. As you saw from the example of Claire at the beginning
of this section, her daughter viewed Claire's aggressive behavior
and copied it. Research suggests that this may help to explain why
abused children often grow up to be abusers themselves (Murrell,
Christoff, & Henning, 2007). In fact, about 30% of abused children
become abusive parents (U.S. Department of Health & Human
Services, 2013). We tend to do what we know. Abused children, who
grow up witnessing their parents deal with anger and frustration
through violent and aggressive acts, often learn to behave in that
manner themselves. Sadly, it's a vicious cycle that's difficult to break.

     Bandura's Bobo doll Experiment

                          One or more interactive elements has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You can
              view them online here:
              https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=70#oe
              mbed-4

        Video 4.4.3. Albert Bandura Bobo Doll Experiment is
     explained by Dr. Bandura.

Self-Efficacy

Bandura (1977, 1995) has studied a number of cognitive and personal

526 | Social Cognitive Learning Theory
factors that affect learning and personality development and most
recently has focused on the concept of self-efficacy. Self-efficacy is
our level of confidence in our own abilities, developed through
our social experiences. Self-efficacy affects how we approach
challenges and reach goals. In observational learning, self-efficacy is
a cognitive factor that affects which behaviors we choose to imitate
as well as our success in performing those behaviors.

   People who have high self-efficacy believe that their goals are
within reach, have a positive view of challenges see them as tasks to
be mastered, develop a deep interest in and a strong commitment
to the activities in which they are involved, and quickly recover
from setbacks. Conversely, people with low self-efficacy avoid
challenging tasks because they doubt their ability to be successful,
tend to focus on failure and negative outcomes, and lose confidence
in their abilities if they experience setbacks. Feelings of self-efficacy
can be specific to certain situations. For instance, a student might
feel confident in her ability in English class but much less so in math
class.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=70#oembed-5

Video 4.4.4. Self-Esteem, Self-Efficacy, and Locus of Control explains
these three psychological phenomena and how they are related.

Locus of Control

Julian Rotter (1966) proposed the concept of locus of control,

                                                   Social Cognitive Learning Theory | 527
another cognitive factor that affects learning and personality
development. Distinct from self-efficacy, which involves our belief
in our own abilities, locus of control refers to our beliefs about the
power we have over our lives. In Rotter's view, people possess either
an internal or an external locus of control. Those of us with an
internal locus of control ("internals") tend to believe that most of
our outcomes are the direct result of our efforts. Those of us with
an external locus of control ("externals") tend to believe that our
outcomes are outside of our control. Externals see their lives as
being controlled by other people, luck, or chance. For example, say
you didn't spend much time studying for your psychology test and
went out to dinner with friends instead. When you receive your
test score, you see that you earned a D. If you possess an internal
locus of control, you would most likely admit that you failed because
you didn't spend enough time studying and decide to study more
for the next test. On the other hand, if you possess an external
locus of control, you might conclude that the test was too hard and
not bother studying for the next test because you figure you will
fail it anyway. Researchers have found that people with an internal
locus of control perform better academically, achieve more in their
careers, are more independent, are healthier, are better able to
cope, and are less depressed than people who have an external
locus of control (Benassi, Sweeney, & Durfour, 1988; Lefcourt, 1982;
Maltby, Day, & Macaskill, 2007; Whyte, 1977, 1978, 1980).

Figure 4.4.5. Locus of control occurs on a continuum from internal
                                       to external.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online

528 | Social Cognitive Learning Theory
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=70#oembed-1

Video 4.4.5. Locus of Control, Learned Helplessness, and Tyranny of
Choice are explained.

     Exercises

        Take the Locus of Control Questionnaire to learn more.
     Scores range from 0 to 13. A low score on this questionnaire
     indicates an internal locus of control, and a high score
     indicates an external locus of control.

Self-Regulation

"Self-regulation is the process of identifying a goal or set of goals
and, in pursuing these goals, using both internal (e.g., thoughts
and affect) and external (e.g., responses of anything or anyone in
the environment) feedback to maximize goal attainment.". Self-
regulation is also known as willpower. When we talk about
willpower, we tend to think of it as the ability to delay gratification.
For example, Bettina's teenage daughter made strawberry cupcakes,
and they looked delicious. However, Bettina forfeited the pleasure
of eating one, because she is training for a 5K race and wants to
be fit and do well in the race. Would you be able to resist getting a

                                                   Social Cognitive Learning Theory | 529
small reward now in order to get a larger reward later? This is the
question investigated in his now-classic marshmallow test.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=70#oembed-6

Video 4.4.6. Self-Control explains self-regulation's influence on one's
ability to delay gratification and control desires.

   The marshmallow test is a well-known study to assess self-
regulation in young children. In the marshmallow study, Mischel
and his colleagues placed a preschool child in a room with one
marshmallow on the table. The children were told they could either
eat the marshmallow now, or wait until the researcher returned to
the room, and then they could have two marshmallows (Mischel,
Ebbesen & Raskoff, 1972). This was repeated with hundreds of
preschoolers. What Mischel and his team found was that young
children differ in their degree of self-control. Mischel and his
colleagues continued to follow this group of preschoolers through
high school, and what do you think they discovered? The children
who had more self-control in preschool (the ones who waited for
the bigger reward) were more successful in high school. They had
higher SAT scores, had positive peer relationships, and were less
likely to have substance abuse issues; as adults, they also had more
stable marriages (Mischel, Shoda, & Rodriguez, 1989; Mischel et al.,
2010). On the other hand, those children who had poor self-control
in preschool (the ones who grabbed the one marshmallow) were not
as successful in high school, and they were found to have academic
and behavioral problems. A more recent study using a larger and
more representative sample found associations between early delay
of gratification (Watts, Duncan, & Quan, 2018) and measures of

530 | Social Cognitive Learning Theory
achievement in adolescence. However, researchers also found that
the associations were not as strong as those reported during
Mischel's initial experiment and were quite sensitive to situational
factors such as early measures of cognitive capacity, family
background, and home environment. This research suggests that
consideration of situational factors is important to better
understand behavior.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=70#oembed-7

Video 4.4.7. Resisting the Marshmellow and the Success of Self-

Control explains the implications of self-regulation,
as demonstrated by the marshmallow test.

     Self-Regulation and School Success

           Read more about Self-Regulation and School Success
      including how self-regulation impacts academic outcomes
       and how schools can promote self-regulation in students

                           (Duckworth & Carlson, 2013).

                                                   Social Cognitive Learning Theory | 531
     Self-Regulation Questionnaire (SRQ)

        The Self-Regulation Questionnaire (SRQ) Self-regulation
     is the ability to develop, implement, and flexibly maintain
     planned behavior in order to achieve one's goals. Building
     on the foundational work of Frederick Kanfer (Kanfer,
     1970a, 1970b), Miller and Brown formulated a seven-step
     model of self-regulation (Brown, 1998) (Miller & Brown,
     1991). In this model, behavioral self-regulation may falter
     because of failure or deficits at any of these seven steps:

         1. Receiving relevant information
        2. Evaluating the information and comparing it to

             norms
        3. Triggering change
        4. Searching for options
        5. Formulating a plan
        6. Implementing the plan
         7. Assessing the plan's effectiveness (which recycles

             to steps 1 and 2)

532 | Social Cognitive Learning Theory
Item                Stron  Disag      Uns     Ag     Stron
                 gly               ure     ree    gly
                 Disagree ree                     Agree
                                      3       4
I usually                                            5
                                      3       4
keep track of                         3       4      5
                                      3       4
my progress      1         2          3       4      5
                                      3       4      5
toward my                             3       4
                                                     5
goals                                 3       4
                                                     5
My
                                                     5
behavior is
                                                     5
not that         1         2

different from

other people's.

   Others tell
me that I keep on with things 1 2
too long.

   I doubt I
could change even if I 1 2
wanted to.

I have

trouble

making up my 1             2

mind about

things.

   I get easily
distracted from my 1 2
plans.

I reward

myself for

progress         1         2

toward my

goals.

I don't

notice the

effects of my    1         2

actions until

it's too late.

                           Social Cognitive Learning Theory | 533
   My
behavior is similar to that 1 2 3 4 5
of my friends.

   It's hard for
me to see
anything helpful about 1 2 3 4 5
changing my
ways.

   I am able to
accomplish goals I set for 1 2 3 4 5
myself.

I put off

making         1  2                     3  4  5

decisions.

   I have so
many plans
that it's hard for me to 1 2 3 4 5
focus on any
one of them.

I change

the way I do

things when I

see a problem 1   2                     3  4  5

with how

things are

going.

   It's hard for
me to notice
when I've "had enough" 1 2 3 4 5
(alcohol, food,
sweets).

   I think a lot
about what other people 1 2 3 4 5
think of me.

534 | Social Cognitive Learning Theory
   I am willing
to consider other ways of 1 2 3 4 5
doing things.

     If I wanted

to change, I

am confident       1  2  3  4  5

that I could do

it.

   When it
comes to
deciding
about a change, I feel 1 2 3 4 5
overwhelmed
by the
choices.

   I have
trouble
following
through with things once 1 2 3 4 5
I've made up
my mind to do
something.

     I don't seem

to learn from      1  2  3  4  5

my mistakes.

     I'm usually

careful not to

overdo it

when               1  2  3  4  5

working,

eating,

drinking.

   I tend to
compare myself with 1 2 3 4 5
other people.

   I enjoy a
routine, and like things to 1 2 3 4 5
stay the same.

                      Social Cognitive Learning Theory | 535
   I have
sought out
advice or information 1 2 3 4 5
about
changing.

   I can come
up with lots of
ways to
change, but it's hard for 1 2 3 4 5
me to decide
which one to
use.

     I can stick

to a plan that's 1     2                3  4  5

working well.

     I usually

only have to

make a

mistake one         1  2                3  4  5

time in order

to learn from

it.

     I don't learn

well from           1  2                3  4  5

punishment.

     I have

personal

standards, and 1       2                3  4  5

try to live up

to them.

I am set in my ways. 1 2 3 4 5

   As soon as I
see a problem
or challenge, I start looking 1 2 3 4 5
for possible
solutions.

536 | Social Cognitive Learning Theory
   I have a
hard time setting goals 1 2 3 4 5
for myself.

I have a lot of willpower. 1 2 3 4 5

When I'm

trying to

change

something, I    1  2  3  4  5

pay a lot of

attention to

how I'm doing.

I usually

judge what I'm

doing by the    1  2  3  4  5

consequences

of my actions.

   I don't care
if I'm different from most 1 2 3 4 5
people.

   As soon as I
see things
aren't going right I want to 1 2 3 4 5
do something
about it.

There is

usually more

than one way    1  2  3  4  5

to accomplish

something.

   I have
trouble
making plans to help me 1 2 3 4 5
reach my
goals.

I am able to

resist          1  2  3  4  5

temptation.

                   Social Cognitive Learning Theory | 537
   I set goals
for myself and keep track of 1 2 3 4 5
my progress.

     Most of the

time I don't

pay attention     1  2                  3  4  5

to what I'm

doing.

     I try to be

like people       1  2                  3  4  5

around me.

   I tend to
keep doing
the same thing, even 1 2 3 4 5
when it
doesn't work.

   I can
usually find
several
different possibilities 1 2 3 4 5
when I want
to change
something.

     Once I have

a goal, I can

usually plan      1  2                  3  4  5

how to reach

it.

   I have rules
that I stick by
no matter
what.

     If I make a  1  2                  3  4  5

resolution to

change

something, I

pay a lot of

attention to

how I'm doing.

538 | Social Cognitive Learning Theory
Often I

don't notice

what I'm

doing until     1  2  3  4  5

someone calls

it to my

attention.

I think a lot

about how I'm 1    2  3  4  5

doing.

Usually I

see the need

to change       1  2  3  4  5

before others

do.

I'm good at

finding

different ways 1   2  3  4  5

to get what I

want.

I usually

think before I  1  2  3  4  5

act.

Little

problems or

distractions    1  2  3  4  5

throw me off

course.

   I feel bad
when I don't meet my 1 2 3 4 5
goals.

I learn from my mistakes. 1 2 3 4 5

I know how I want to be. 1 2 3 4 5

                   Social Cognitive Learning Theory | 539
It bothers

me when

things aren't

the way I want

them.           1  2                    3  4  5

   I call in
others for
help when I
need it.

   Before
making a
decision, I
consider what is likely to 1 2 3 4 5
happen if I do
one thing or
another.

I give up quickly. 1 2 3 4 5

I usually

decide to

change and      1  2                    3  4  5

hope for the

best.

   TOTAL
YOUR SCORE:

   > 239 High (intact) self-regulation capacity (top quartile)

   214-238 Intermediate (moderate) self-regulation capacity
(middle quartiles)

   < 213 Low (impaired) self-regulation capacity (bottom
quartile)

   Sourse: Adapted from Brown, Miller, & Lawendowski,
1999.

CC licensed content, Original
540 | Social Cognitive Learning Theory
   Social Cognitive Learning Theory. Authored by: Nicole
      Arduini-Van Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community
      College. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-
      ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Psychology 2e. Authored by: Rose M. Spielman, William J.
      Jenkins, Marilyn D. Lovett. Provided by: Open Stax. Retrieved
      from: https://openstax.org/books/psychology-2e. License:
      CC BY: Attribution

CC licensed content, Specific attribution

   Self-Control. Authored by: Brooke Miller. Provided by: Khan
      Academy . Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/uXdIdIjllEI.
      License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

   Observational Learning: Bobo Doll Experiment and Social
      Cognitive Theory . Authored by: Jeffrey Walsh. Provided by:
      Khan Academy. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/HsQqb1E-
      bAU. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-
      ShareAlike

   Reciprocal Determinism . Authored by: Brooke Miller. Provided
      by: Khan Academy. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/
      oyPNjYlboaw. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike

All rights reserved content

   Resisting the Marshmallow and the Success of Self-Control.
      Provided by: PBS NewsHour. Retrieved from:
      https://youtu.be/BLtQaRrDsC4. License: All Rights Reserved

   The Brain: A Secret History - Emotions; Bandura Bobo Doll
      Experiment. Authored by: kpharden. Retrieved from:
      https://youtu.be/Z0iWpSNu3NU. License: All Rights Reserved

                                                   Social Cognitive Learning Theory | 541
Constructivism in the

Classroom

Behaviorist models of learning may be helpful in understanding and
influencing what students do, but teachers usually also want to
know what students are thinking, and how to enrich what students
are thinking. For this goal of teaching, some of the best help comes
from constructivism, which is a perspective on learning focused
on how students actively create (or "construct") knowledge out of
experiences. As discussed in the previous chapter, constructivist
models of learning differ in how much a learner constructs
knowledge independently, psychological constructivism, compared
to how much he or she takes cues from people who may be more of
an expert and who help the learner's efforts, social constructivism.

   For many educators, the social context of learning is critical. Ideas
are tested not just on the teacher, but by fellow students, friends,
and colleagues. Furthermore, knowledge is mainly acquired through
social processes or institutions that are socially constructed:
schools, universities, and increasingly these days, online
communities. Thus what is taken to be `valued' knowledge is also
socially constructed.

   Constructivists believe that learning is a constantly dynamic
process. Understanding of concepts or principles develops and
becomes deeper over time. For instance, as very young children,
we understand the concept of heat through touch. As we get older
we realize that it can be quantified, such as minus 20 centigrade
being very cold (unless you live in Manitoba, where -20C would be
considered normal). As we study science, we begin to understand
heat differently, for instance, as a form of energy transfer, then as a
form of energy associated with the motion of atoms or molecules.
Each `new' component needs to be integrated with prior

542 | Constructivism in the
Classroom
understandings and also integrated with other related concepts,
including other components of molecular physics and chemistry.

   Thus `constructivist' teachers place a strong emphasis on learners
developing personal meaning through reflection, analysis, and the
gradual building of layers or depths of knowledge through
conscious and ongoing mental processing. Reflection, seminars,
discussion forums, small group work, and projects are key methods
used to support constructivist learning.

   Although problem-solving can be approached in an objectivist
way, by pre-determining a set of steps or processes to go through
pre-determined by `experts', it can also be approached in a
constructivist manner. The level of teacher guidance can vary in
a constructivist approach to problem-solving, from none at all, to
providing some guidelines on how to solve the problem, to directing
students to possible sources of information that may be relevant to
solving that problem, to getting students to brainstorm particular
solutions. Students will probably work in groups, help each other
and compare solutions to the problem. There may not be
considered one `correct' solution to the problem, but the group
may consider some solutions better than others, depending on the
agreed criteria of success for solving the problem.

   It can be seen that there can be `degrees' of constructivism, since
in practice the teacher may well act as first among equals, and
help direct the process so that `suitable' outcomes are achieved.
The fundamental difference is that students have to work towards
constructing their own meaning, testing it against `reality', and
further constructing meaning as a result.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=71#oembed-1

                                                    Constructivism in the Classroom | 543
Video 4.6.1. Constructivist Teaching Strategies discusses the practice
of constructivism in the classroom.

   Both types of constructivism focus on individuals' thinking rather
than their behavior, but they have distinctly different implications
for teaching related to three ideas in particular: the relationship
between learning and long-term development, the role or meaning
of generalizations and abstractions during development, and the
mechanism by which development occurs.

The Relationship Between Learning and
Long-Term Development of the Learner

In general psychological constructivism such as Piaget emphasize
the ways that long-term development determines a child's ability
to learn, rather than the other way around. The earliest stages
of a child's life are thought to be rather self-centered and to be
dependent on the child's sensory and motor interactions with the
environment. When acting or reacting to his or her surroundings,
the child has relatively few language skills initially. This
circumstance limits the child's ability to learn in the usual, school-
like sense of the term. As development proceeds, of course,
language skills improve, and hence the child becomes progressively
more "teachable" and in this sense more able to learn. But whatever
the child's age, the ability to learn waits or depends upon the child's
stage of development. From this point of view, therefore, a primary
responsibility of teachers is to provide a very rich classroom
environment, so that children can interact with it independently
and gradually make themselves ready for verbal learning that is
increasingly sophisticated.

   Social constructivists such as Vygotsky, on the other hand,
emphasize the importance of social interaction in stimulating the
development of the child. Language and dialogue, therefore, are
primary, and development is seen as happening as a result--the

544 | Constructivism in the Classroom
converse of the sequence pictured by Piaget. Obviously, a child does
not begin life with a lot of initial language skills, but this fact is why
interactions need to be scaffolded with more experienced experts--
people capable of creating a zone of proximal development in their
conversations and other interactions. In the preschool years, the
experts are usually parents; after the school years begin, the experts
broaden to include teachers. A teacher's primary responsibility is
therefore to provide very rich opportunities for dialogue, both
among children and between individual children and the teacher.

The Role of Generalizations and Abstractions
During Development

Consistent with the ideas above, psychological constructivism tends
to see a relatively limited role for abstract or hypothetical reasoning
in the life of children--and even in the reasoning of youth and
many adults. Such reasoning is regarded as an outgrowth of years
of interacting with the environment very concretely. As explained
more fully in the next chapter ("Student development"), elementary-
age students can reason, but they are thought to reason only about
immediate, concrete objects and events. Even older youth are
thought to reason in this way much, or even all of the time. From
this perspective, a teacher should limit the amount of thinking
about abstract ideas that she expects from students. The idea of
"democracy," for example, may be experienced simply as an empty
concept. At most it might be misconstrued as an oversimplified,
overly concrete idea--as "just" about taking votes in class, for
instance. Abstract thinking is possible, according to psychological
constructivism, but it emerges relatively slowly and relatively late
in development after a person accumulates considerable concrete
experience.

   Social constructivism sees abstract thinking emerging from a
dialogue between a relative novice (a child or youth) and a more

                                                    Constructivism in the Classroom | 545
experienced expert (a parent or teacher). From this point of view,
the more such dialogue occurs, then the more the child can acquire
facility with it. The dialogue must, of course, honor a child's need
for intellectual scaffolding or a zone of proximal development. A
teacher's responsibility can, therefore, include engaging the child
in dialogue that uses potentially abstract reasoning but without
expecting the child to understand the abstractions fully at first.
Young children, for example, can not only engage in science
experiments like creating a "volcano" out of baking soda and water
but also discuss and speculate about their observations of the
experiment. They may not understand the experiment as an adult
would, but the discussion can begin moving them toward adult-like
understandings.

How Development Occurs

In psychological constructivism, as explained earlier, development
is thought to happen because of the interplay
between assimilation and accommodation--between when a child or
youth can already understand or conceive of, and the change
required of that understanding by new experiences. Acting
together, assimilation and accommodation continually create new
states of cognitive equilibrium. A teacher can, therefore, stimulate
development by provoking cognitive dissonance deliberately: by
confronting a student with sights, actions, or ideas that do not fit
with the student's existing experiences and ideas. In practice, the
dissonance is often communicated verbally, by posing questions or
ideas that are new or that students may have misunderstood in the
past. But it can also be provoked through pictures or activities that
are unfamiliar to students--by engaging students in a community
service project, for example, that brings them in contact with people
who they had previously considered "strange" or different from
themselves.

546 | Constructivism in the Classroom
   In social constructivism, as also explained earlier, development
is thought to happen largely because of scaffolded dialogue in a
zone of proximal development. Such dialogue is by implication less
like "disturbing" students' thinking than "stretching" it beyond its
former limits. The image of the teacher, therefore, is more one
of collaborating with students' ideas rather than challenging their
ideas or experiences. In practice, however, the actual behavior of
teachers and students may be quite similar in both forms of
constructivism. Any significant new learning requires setting aside,
giving up, or revising former learning, and this step inevitably,
therefore "disturbs" thinking, if only in the short term and only in a
relatively minor way.

Implications of Constructivism for Teaching

Whether you think of yourself as a psychological constructivist or a
social constructivist, there are strategies for helping students help
in develop their thinking--in fact, the strategies constitute a major
portion of this book, and are a major theme throughout the entire
preservice teacher education programs. For now, look briefly at just
two. One strategy that teachers often find helpful is to organize
the content to be learned as systematically as possible because
doing this allows the teacher to select and devise learning activities
that are better tailored to students' cognitive abilities, that promote
better dialogue, or both. The second strategy is self-assessment and
self-direction of learning.

Bloom's Taxonomy

One of the most widely used frameworks for organizing content is
a classification scheme proposed by the educator Benjamin Bloom,

                                                    Constructivism in the Classroom | 547
published under the somewhat imposing title of Taxonomy of
Educational Objectives: Handbook #1: Cognitive Domain (Bloom, et
al., 1956; Anderson & Krathwohl, 2001). Bloom's taxonomy, as it is
usually called, describes six kinds of learning goals that teachers
can in principle expect from students, ranging from simple recall
of knowledge to complex evaluation of knowledge. (The levels are
defined briefly in Error: Reference source not found with examples
from Goldilocks and the Three Bears.)

   Bloom's taxonomy makes useful distinctions among possible kinds
of knowledge needed by students, and therefore potentially helps
in selecting activities that truly target students' zones of proximal
development in the sense meant by Vygotsky. A student who knows
few terms for the species studied in a biology unit (a problem at
Bloom's knowledge and comprehension levels), for example, may
initially need support in remembering and defining the terms before
he or she can make useful comparisons among species
(Bloom's analysis level). Pinpointing the most appropriate learning
activities to accomplish this objective remains the job of the
teacher-expert (that's you), but the learning itself has to be
accomplished by the student. Put in more social constructivist
terms, the teacher arranges a zone of proximal development that
allows the student to compare species successfully, but the student
still has to construct or appropriate the comparisons for him or
herself.

548 | Constructivism in the Classroom
Table 4.6.1. Bloom's Taxonomy of Educational Objectives

Category or type of thinking Definition                      Example

             Remembering or recalling List three things

Knowledge    facts, information, or                          Goldilocks did in the three

             procedures                                      bears' house.

Comprehension Understanding facts, interpreting information  Explain why Goldilocks
                                                             liked the little bear's chair
                                                             the best.

Application  Using concepts in new                           Predict some of the things
             situations, solving                             that Goldilocks might have
             particular problems                             used if she had entered
                                                             your house.

Analysis     Distinguish parts of                            Select the part of the story
             information, a concept,                         where Goldilocks seemed
             or a procedure                                  most comfortable.

Synthesis    Combining elements or                           Tell how the story would
             parts into a new object,                        have been different if it
             idea, or procedure                              had been about three
                                                             fishes.

Evaluation   Assessing and judging the                       Decide whether Goldilocks
             value or ideas, objects, or                     was a bad girl, and justify
             materials in a particular                       your position.
             situation

           One or more interactive elements has been excluded
           from this version of the text. You can view them online
here:
https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=71#oembed-2

Video 4.6.2. Bloom's Taxonomy: Structuring the Learning Journey
explains the various levels and applications of this model.

                                         Constructivism in the Classroom | 549
Metacognition

A second strategy may be coupled with the first. As students gain
experience as students, they become able to think about how
they themselves learn best, and you (as the teacher) can encourage
such self-reflection as one of your goals for their learning. These
changes allow you to transfer some of your responsibilities
for arranging learning to the students themselves. For the biology
student mentioned above, for example, you may be able not only
to plan activities that support comparing species but also to devise
ways for the student to think about how he or she might learn
the same information independently. The resulting self-assessment
and self-direction of learning often go by the name
of metacognition--an ability to think about and regulate one's own
thinking (Israel, 2005). Metacognition can sometimes be difficult
for students to achieve, but it is an important goal for social
constructivist learning because it gradually frees learners from
dependence on expert teachers to guide their learning. Reflective
learners, you might say, become their own expert guides. Like with
using Bloom's taxonomy, though, promoting metacognition and
self-directed learning is important enough that I will come back
to it later in more detail (in the chapter on "Facilitating complex
thinking").

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=71#oembed-3

Video 4.6.3. What is Metacognition? explains the process of
metacognition.

   By assigning a more active role to expert helpers--which by

550 | Constructivism in the Classroom
implication includes teachers--than does the psychological
constructivism, social constructivism may be more complete as a
description of what teachers usually do when actually busy in
classrooms, and of what they usually hope students will experience
there. As we will see in the next chapter, however, there are more
uses for a theory than its description of moment-to-moment
interactions between teachers and students. As explained there,
some theories can be helpful for planning instruction rather than
for doing it. It turns out that this is the case for psychological
constructivism, which offers important ideas about the appropriate
sequencing of learning and development. This fact makes
psychological constructivism valuable in its own way, even though
it (and a few other learning theories as well) may seem to omit to
mention teachers, parents, or experts in detail. So do not make up
your mind about the relative merits of different learning theories
yet!

Five "E" Model

A popular model for implementing constructivism in the classroom
has been defined by the Biological Science Curriculum Study (BSCS).
This model suggests that constructivist lessons should engage
students, allow them to explore, aid them in explaining their
experience, learning is elaborated, and the lesson includes
evaluation.

Engage

In the Engage stage, students have their first encounter with the
lesson topic. Through questions, thinking, and discussion, students
begin to make connections between previous knowledge and the

                                                    Constructivism in the Classroom | 551
present learning experiences. This process of engagement helps

assess  current     understanding,  establishes  the

organizational groundwork for the lesson ahead, and stimulates

student involvement in the anticipation of learning. This is the

opportunity to grab the students' attention and get them excited

about what they will be learning. Teachers might ask questions,

present a problem, or facilitate some discussion to engage and

motivate students.

Explore

In the Exploration stage, the students directly explore the topic of
the lesson and related materials. These activities are experiences
that ground students in the lesson. Students can work
independently, but working in groups allows students to learn from
others and build a common understanding of the topic of the lesson.
Group work also encourages communication about the topic, which
may assist them with sharing what they are learning in subsequent
stages. During this stage, the teacher is a facilitator. They provide
materials and guidance but allow the students to guide their inquiry.
The teacher may ask questions to stimulate students' thinking or
give support, but exploration is about students' discovery. Direct
instruction should be minimal, if at all.

Explain

The third stage, Explain, is the point at which the learner begins
to put the experience of the activity into a communicable form.
Students may need to articulate the process they used, the
sequence of events, their thought processes, and results.
Communication may occur within the learner, with peers, or with

552 | Constructivism in the Classroom
the teacher. Sometimes even all three. Again, working in groups,
learners support each other's understanding as they articulate their
observations, ideas, questions, and hypotheses. Explanations from
the teacher, an expert, can aid novices with acquiring and using
language to articulate their learning. For example, a student,
through exploration, may report that magnets "stick" to metallic
objects. The teacher, in their discussion with the student, can
introduce terminology to replace the novice term "stick" by
referring to "an attracting force". Introducing terminology after the
student has had the experience is more meaningful because the
learner now has context to which to attach that term. Establishing
a common language for concepts enhances the communication
between teachers and students and aids the teacher in determining
the students' understanding and possible misconceptions.

Elaborate

In the fourth stage, Elaborate, students expand on the concepts
learned, make connections to other related concepts, and apply
their understandings to their world. For example, while exploring
light phenomena, a learner constructs an understanding of the path
light travels through space. Examining a lamppost, she may notice
that the shadow of the post changes its location as the day grows
later. This observation can lead to further inquiry as to possible
connections between the shadow's changing location and the
changes in direction of the light source, the Sun. Applications to
real-world events, such as where to plant flowers so that they
receive sunlight most of the day, or how to prop up a beach umbrella
for shade from the Sun, are both extensions and applications of
the concept that light travels in a straight path. These connections
often lead to further inquiry and new understandings.

                                                    Constructivism in the Classroom | 553
Evaluate

Evaluate, the final stage, is actually an ongoing process of assessing
students' understanding and knowledge of concepts. Assessment
can occur at all stages instructional process, but a more formal
assessment is typically done to determine whether learning
objectives have been met. Evaluation and assessment might be
informal, like posing questions for students to answer in class or
listening in on conversations that groups are having during the
activity. Evaluation can also be formal, such as a test, report, or
prepared presentation. Tools such as rubrics and checklists can be
helpful in evaluating outcomes. Concrete evidence of the learning
process is most valuable in communications between students,
teachers, parents, and administrators.

   Evaluation does not need to be the end. The results of the
evaluation might guide the development of future lessons and
activities. The evaluation might reveal gaps in learning that need
further enrichment. They also provide useful feedback so the
teacher can make modifications and improvements to the lesson for
next time. The evaluation process is a continuous one that gives the
constructivist philosophy a cyclical structure where questions lead
to answers that lead to more questions and instruction is driven by
both the planned lesson and the inquiry process.

     The Five "E" Model Demonstrated

                          One or more interactive elements has been

554 | Constructivism in the Classroom
                          excluded from this version of the text. You can
              view them online here:
              https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=71#oe
              mbed-4

        Video 4.6.4. Constructivism demonstrates the Five "E"
     model.

CC licensed content, Original

   Constructivism in the Classroom. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-
      Van Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/
      chapter/constructivism-in-the-clasroom/. License: CC BY-
      NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Teaching in a Digital Age. Authored by: A.W. Bates. Provided
      by: BC Campus. Retrieved from: https://opentextbc.ca/
      teachinginadigitalage/chapter/section-3-4-constructivism/.
      License: CC BY-NC: Attribution-NonCommercial

CC licensed content, Specific attribution

   Bloom's Taxonomy: Structuring The Learning Journey.
      Provided by: Sprout. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/
      ayefSTAnCR8. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright

   Constructivist Teaching Strategies. Provided by: Education

                                                    Constructivism in the Classroom | 555
      Global Action Program. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/
      7Zhv9ELy3hU. License: All Rights Reserved
All rights reserved content
   Constructivism. Authored by: John Wilkinson. Retrieved from:
      https://youtu.be/yoTdojKImb4. License: All Rights Reserved
   What is Metacognition?. Authored by: John Spencer. Retrieved
      from: https://youtu.be/HZrUWvfU6VU. License: All Rights
      Reserved

556 | Constructivism in the Classroom
Information Processing
Approach in the Classroom

We previously reviewed the Information Processing Approach to
cognition, but how do teachers apply this approach to teaching and
learning?

Cognitive Load Theory

The information-processing model has given rise to a theory of
instructional design called cognitive load theory (Sweller & Chandler,
1994; van Merrinboer & Sweller, 2005). Because working memory
is the principal player in the process of learning new information,
cognitive load theory focuses exclusively on working memory. The
gist of this theory is that there are distinct types of demands
imposed upon working memory during learning: intrinsic,
extraneous, and germane. We now examine each of these.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=72#oembed-1

Video 4.7.1. Cognitive Load Theory explained.

                                                        Information Processing Approach in
                                                                              the Classroom | 557
Intrinsic Cognitive Load

Intrinsic cognitive load represents the burden imposed on working
memory by the inherent nature of the material. In other words,
simple topics require very little processing capacity in working
memory, and complex topics demand a large amount of space. For
example, it requires considerably more focus to safely drive a semi-
truck through a rainstorm than to sign your name with a pen on
paper. Driving the semi requires attention to many different
information inputs (e.g., gauges, mirrors, windshield) and
coordinating the requisite motor skills in response; all of this
processing is conducted in working memory. Signing one's name
takes barely any attention at all (for adults) because it has been done
thousands of times before. Thus, the effect of having practiced the
skill reduces its intrinsic cognitive load.

   But practice alone cannot reduce the intrinsic cognitive load of
all tasks. The element interactivity (i.e., coordination among multiple
aspects) inherent in some tasks cannot ultimately reduce the task
to a trivial activity, even with extensive practice. If that were the
case, we should all be capable of becoming skilled airline pilots or
successful politicians.

   For beginners learning an essential skill, element interactivity
becomes problematic and must be temporarily reduced. When
learning a language, one first learns the alphabet and then proceeds
to acquire simple words or phrases--not complex prose. But one
cannot be considered proficient in a language unless one can
understand its complex prose. This is an example of element
interactivity because understanding prose depends upon not only
understanding its nouns, verbs, adverbs, etc., but also how each
of them modifies or alters the meaning of other words nearby.
Topics or skills that contain element interactivity must at first be
oversimplified and then gradually built up to their full complexity
before one can successfully deal with the intrinsic cognitive load.

558 | Information Processing Approach in the Classroom
Extraneous Cognitive Load

Extraneous cognitive load is the set of mental demands that are
irrelevant to the current task, consuming precious cognitive
resources yet not providing any real benefit to the task of
understanding. It is critical to realize that various forms of cognitive
load are additive--that is, they each increase the amount of
processing space that is active in working memory. For example, if
the intrinsic load is already high, there is not much room for any
extraneous load unless the learner decides (like Pierre) to reduce
the processing of the intrinsic load and focus more on the
extraneous load. Teachers should strive to reduce extraneous
cognitive load in their classrooms because students are likely to
sacrifice attention to important material and distract themselves
with extraneous stimuli.

   Extraneous cognitive load is, for the most part, under the direct
control of the teacher. Have you ever seen presentations that were
decorated with graphics that were only tangentially related to the
content? You probably found yourself sidelined by the images and
not paying sufficient attention to the material itself. Because
working memory has such a limited capacity, we cannot afford to
"clutter up" this valuable space with unproductive ideas that divert
attention from more important content. As a teacher, you should
make earnest efforts to avoid exposing students to extra "fluff"
during learning activities.

                          Information Processing Approach in the Classroom | 559
     How To Reduce Extraneous Cognitive Load

                          One or more interactive elements has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You can
              view them online here:
              https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=72#oe
              mbed-2

        Video 4.7.2. Cognitive Load Theory, How Do I Apply
     It? provides some suggestions for how to reduce
     extraneous cognitive load in the presentation of
     information.

Germane Cognitive Load

Germane cognitive load has been explained in various ways. The
explanation I prefer is the more traditional characterization that
germane load represents increased demand upon working memory
in the service of the learning goal. This can be explained more
easily through an example. Most (if not all) languages have forms of
expression that are not appropriate for all audiences. For example,
in English one would not address the President of the United States
in the same informal way as one would address a close friend ("How
is your day going, Mr. President?" versus "Hey dude, whazzup?"). The
meaning of the utterance expressed to these two individuals may
be the same, but the words and intonation are somewhat different.

560 | Information Processing Approach in the Classroom
If an international student were learning English, it would be
important for the language teacher to communicate not only the
meaning of the words (intrinsic load) but also the contexts in which
those words are appropriate (germane load). Learning the situations
in which certain phrases are most appropriately used goes beyond
intrinsic load but could hardly be considered extraneous if one's
purpose is to learn the language well.

   It goes without saying that beginning learners should not be
exposed to germane cognitive load; the intrinsic load for many tasks
is of sufficient complexity that beginners cannot handle any
additional processing burdens. However, as learning proceeds and
the intrinsic load becomes more and more automatized, teachers
can add aspects of additional complexity that enhance students'
understanding of the material in a germane way.

Principles of Effective Learning

We now turn to a few empirical principles, derived from decades
of research, that are known to improve learning. These principles
will not all apply to every learning situation; however, each of them
has been sufficiently demonstrated through carefully controlled
scientific studies to merit mentioning them here.

   The overarching goal here is to select processing strategies that
will increase the likelihood of a learner recalling new information at
a later point in time.

Activate Prior Knowledge

One of the most important cognitive principles for a teacher to
keep in mind is the importance of relating information from long-
term memory to information newly entering the system. Recall our

                          Information Processing Approach in the Classroom | 561
discussion of elaborative rehearsal earlier, in which I indicated that
making a connection to prior knowledge is a superior learning
method to simply repeating information over and over without
altering it.

   Any good lesson-plan format begins the class with some form of
prior-knowledge activation. It might be a reminder or a brief review
of what was studied in the previous day's lesson, or it could be
a question similar to, "Have you ever had a problem you couldn't
solve?" The purpose of this phase of the lesson is to activate prior
knowledge-i.e., bring long-term memories back into working
memory-so that new knowledge can be mingled with old with the
result of a more solid understanding of the new (and perhaps even
the old) information.

Organization

This is one principle that applies to a rather restricted set of
instructional situations, but it is so powerful that it deserves
mention here. In contexts where there is a list of items to commit
to memory, the task of memorizing the list will be much easier if
the items are grouped together (i.e., organized) in a meaningful way.
This also works as a basic memory strategy in everyday life--think
about your latest visit to the grocery store and imagine
remembering a rather random assortment of items versus grouping
the dairy items together, the produce items together, etc.

Deep Processing

It is easy to become convinced that if a student spends, say, twenty
hours reviewing for an exam, that student should be expected to
excel on the exam. However, cognitive studies show that it is not

562 | Information Processing Approach in the Classroom
specifically the time one spends studying that matters most; what
one does during that time matters even more.

   Consider, for example, the all-too-common exam-preparation
strategy of using flashcards. Students often take terms from the
textbook or class discussions, write them down on flashcards, and
then rehearse what is written down until the flashcards are
memorized. Such a student will walk into the exam confident that
the material has been thoroughly mastered. The problem with this
approach to studying is that the student has only done "surface-
level processing" of the material, rather than "deep" processing.
It is surface-level because the student has memorized terms and
definitions rather than truly understanding the meaning and
applications of those concepts.

   Deep processing happens when one uses elaborative rehearsal to
connect a concept to other concepts that are already known or
are being learned. For example, one could write a summary of a
concept in one's own words to check for comprehension. Another
approach to facilitate deep processing is to think of examples of the
newly learned concept from one's own life. One could even make
up fictitious examples of the concept if no examples come to mind
from one's past experience.

   The point is, learning that comes from surface-level processing is
not durable. One does not remember the content of flashcards for
very long after the exam. But spending the same amount of time (or
even less time) meaningfully engaged with the to-be-learned ideas
can result in learning that could last for a lifetime.

Distributed Practice

There is one final principle for effective learning that must be
mentioned here. To be the most effective learner, one should
"space" or "distribute" one's studying over a period of time.
Attempting to cram a lot of learning into one or two concentrated

                          Information Processing Approach in the Classroom | 563
study sessions rarely works. Research cannot prescribe the specific
number or length of study sessions required to maximize
learning--there are too many variables to account for (e.g., one's
prior knowledge of the topic, one's knowledge of related topics,
the quality of one's study strategies, etc.). But the benefits of
distributing one's study sessions over a period of time are well
documented in the research literature.
CC licensed content, Original

   Information Processing Approach in the Classroom. Authored
      by: Nicole Arduini-Van Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley
      Community College. Retrieved from:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/chapter/
      information-processing-approach-in-the-classroom/.
      License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Information-Processing Theory for Classroom Teachers.
      Authored by: Brian Beitzel. Provided by: OpenStax. Retrieved
      from: https://cnx.org/contents/dqtUp6xW@1/Information-
      Processing-Theory-for-Classroom-Teachers. License: CC BY:
      Attribution

CC licensed content, Specific attribution

   Cognitive Load Theory. Provided by: 3 Minute Ed Theory.
      Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/IkH0EGYqWO0. License: All
      Rights Reserved

564 | Information Processing Approach in the Classroom
Chapter Summary: The

Learning Process

Although the term learning has many possible meanings, the term
as used by teachers emphasizes its relationship to curriculum, to
teaching, and to the issues of sequencing, readiness, and transfer.
Viewed in this light, the major psychological perspectives of
learning--behaviorism, social cognitive theory, constructivism, and
information processing--have important ideas to offer educators.
Within the behaviorist perspective, classical conditioning and
operant conditioning attempt to explain why students behave as
they do, but they offer less help in understanding how they think.

   Social cognitive theory also focuses on behavior but also
considered the mental processes involved in learning and behavior.
Reciprocal determinism emphasizes the interaction between
personal factors, the environment, and behavior. Observational
learning explains the process steps of learning, through attention,
retention, reproduction, and motivation. Finally, self-efficacy and
self-regulation were discussed as factors that influence student
behavior and success.

   Meanwhile, constructivism describes how individuals build or
"construct" knowledge by engaging actively with their experiences.
Psychological constructivism emphasizes the learners' individual
responses to experience--their tendency both to assimilate it and
to accommodate it. Social constructivism (or sociocultural theory)
emphasizes how other, more expert individuals can create
opportunities for the learner to construct new knowledge. Social
constructivism suggests that a teacher's role must include
deliberate, scaffolded dialogue. It also needs to include deliberate
instructional planning, such as facilitated by Bloom's taxonomy of
learning objectives. Both of these strategies can promote students'
metacognition, or the ability to monitor their own learning.

                                                             Chapter Summary: The Learning
                                                                                       Process | 565
Psychological emphasizes the teacher's responsibility for arranging
a rich learning environment and for emphasizing rich sensory,
motor, and concrete experiences wherever possible.

   Finally, the information processing approach describes various
aspects of cognition that influence learning. Attention and memory,
including cognitive loads and processing, can help or hinder the
learning process.
CC licensed content, Original

   Chapter Summary: The Learning Process. Authored by: Nicole
      Arduini-Van Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community
      College. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-
      ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously
   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. Project:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/chapter/
      summary-4/. License: CC BY: Attribution

566 | Chapter Summary: The Learning Process
Glossary

                                                                                      Glossary | 567
References

Alberto, P. & Troutman, A. (2005). Applied behavior analysis for
   teachers, 7th edition. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Anderson, L. & Krathwohl, D. (Eds.). (2001). A taxonomy for learning,
   teaching, and assessing: A revision of Bloom's taxonomy of
   educational objectives. New York: Longman.

Bruner, J. (1960). The process of education. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
   University Press.

Bruner, J. (1966). Toward a theory of instruction. Cambridge, MA:
   Harvard University Press.

Bruner, J. (1996). The culture of education. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
   University Press.

Copple, C. & Bredekamp, S. (2006). Basics of developmentally
   appropriate practice. Washington, D.C.: National Association for
   the Education of Young Children.

Dewey, J. (1938/1998). How we think. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
   Ellis, H. C. (1969). The Transfer of Learning. The Macmillan

Company.
Ferster, C., Skinner, B. F., Cheney, C., Morse, W., & Dews,

   D. Schedules of reinforcement. New York: Copley Publishing
   Group.
Fosnot, C. (Ed.). (2005). Constructivism: Theory, perspectives, and
   practice, 2nd edition. New York: Teachers College Press.
Gardner, H. (1999). Intelligence reframed: Multiple intelligences for
   the 21st century. New York: Basic Books.
Gardner, H. (2006). The development and education of the mind. New
   York: Routledge.
Gruber, H. & Voneche, J. (Eds.). (1995). The essential Piaget. New
   York: Basic Books.
   Helfenstein, Sacha (2005). Transfer: review, reconstruction, and
resolution (Thesis). University of Jyvskyl. ISBN951392386X.

568 | References
Israel, S. (Ed.). (2005). Metacognition in literacy learning. Mahwah,
   NJ: Erlbaum.

Mazur, J. (2005). Learning and behavior, 6th edition. Upper Saddle
   River, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Piaget, J. (2001). The psychology of intelligence. London, UK:
   Routledge.

Rockmore, T. (2005). On constructivist epistemology. Lanham, MD:
   Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.

Salkind, N. (2004). An introduction to theories of human development.
   Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
   Schunk, Dale H. (2004). Learning theories: an educational

perspective (4th ed.). Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Pearson/Merrill/
Prentice Hall. pp. 20, 45, 57, 165, 217-224. ISBN0-13-038496-8.
Skinner, B. F. (1938). The behavior of organisms. New York: Appleton-

   Century-Crofts.
Skinner, B. F. (1948). Walden Two. New York: Macmillan.
Skinner, B. F. (1988). The selection of behavior: The operant

   behaviorism of B. F. Skinner. New York: Cambridge University
   Press.
   Sousa, David A. (2016-12-02). How the brain learns (Fifth ed.).
Thousand Oaks, California. pp. 154-186. ISBN978-1-5063-4630-4.
Tharp, R. & Gallimore, R. (1991). Rousing minds to life: Teaching,
   learning, and schooling in social context. Cambridge, UK:
   Cambridge University Press.
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher
   psychological processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

                                                                                  References | 569
FACILITATING COMPLEX
THINKING

     Theme: How Students Think

        Overview of Content:
          Thinking Skills: Critical Thinking, Creative Thinking,

             and Problem Solving
        Learning Objectives:
          Explain critical thinking and how to foster it
          Define problem-solving and the differences in well-

             defined and ill-defined problems
          Discuss the roles of algorithms, heuristics and the

             IDEAL approach

                                                        Facilitating Complex Thinking | 571
Complex Thinking

As we will indicate in this chapter repeatedly, forms of thinking
require choices among instructional strategies. To support this idea,
we begin the chapter by discussing three kinds of complex thinking
in turn: critical thinking, creativity, and problem-solving. We
consider how each can be facilitated by appropriate teaching
strategies. Then we discuss several broad strategies for encouraging
complex thinking, including some that are teacher-directed and
others that rely more heavily on students' initiative.

   Although instructional strategies differ in their details, they each
encourage particular forms of learning and thinking. The forms
have distinctive educational purposes, even though they sometimes
overlap, in the sense that one form may contribute to success with
another form. Consider three somewhat complex forms of thinking
that are commonly pursued in classroom learning: (1) critical
thinking, (2) creative thinking, and (3) problem-solving
CC licensed content, Original

   Complex Thinking. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van Hoose.
      Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College. License: CC
      BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

                                                                        Complex Thinking | 573
Critical Thinking

Critical thinking requires skill at analyzing the reliability and
validity of information, as well as the attitude or disposition to do so.
The skill and attitude may be displayed with regard to a particular
subject matter or topic, but in principle, it can occur in any realm
of knowledge (Halpern, 2003; Williams, Oliver, & Stockade, 2004).
A critical thinker does not necessarily have a negative attitude in
the everyday sense of constantly criticizing someone or something.
Instead, he or she can be thought of as astute: the critical thinker
asks key questions, evaluates the evidence for ideas, reasons for
problems both logically and objectively, and expresses ideas and
conclusions clearly and precisely. Last (but not least), the critical
thinker can apply these habits of mind in more than one realm of life
or knowledge.

574 | Critical Thinking
                      Figure 5.2.1. Model of critical thinking.
   With such a broad definition, it is not surprising that educators
have suggested a variety of specific cognitive skills as contributing
to critical thinking. In one study, for example, the researcher found
how critical thinking can be reflected in regard to a published article
that was stimulated by annotation--writing questions and
comments in the margins of the article (Liu, 2006). In this study,
students were initially instructed in ways of annotating reading
materials. Later, when the students completed additional readings
for assignments, it was found that some students in fact used their
annotation skills much more than others--some simply underlined
passages, for example, with a highlighting pen. When essays written
about the readings were later analyzed, the ones written by the
annotators were found to be better reasoned--more critically
astute--than the essays written by the other students.
   In another study, on the other hand, a researcher found that
critical thinking can also involve oral discussion of personal issues
or dilemmas (Hawkins, 2006). In this study, students were asked to
verbally describe a recent, personal incident that disturbed them.
Classmates then discussed the incident together in order to identify
the precise reasons why the incident was disturbing, as well as the
assumptions that the student made in describing the incident. The
original student--the one who had first told the story--then used
the results of the group discussion to frame a topic for a research
essay. In one story of a troubling incident, a student told of a time
when a store clerk has snubbed or rejected the student during a
recent shopping errand. Through discussion, classmates decided
that an assumption underlying the student's disturbance was her
suspicion that she had been a victim of racial profiling based on
her skin color. The student then used this idea as the basis for a
research essay on the topic of "racial profiling in retail stores." The
oral discussion thus stimulated critical thinking in the student and
the classmates, but it also relied on their prior critical thinking skills
at the same time.
   Notice that in both of these research studies, as in others like

                                                                          Critical Thinking | 575
them, what made the thinking "critical" was students' use
of metacognition--strategies for thinking about thinking and for
monitoring the success and quality of one's own thinking. This
concept was discussed in the chapter, "The learning process," as
a feature of constructivist views about learning. There we pointed
out that when students acquire experience in building their own
knowledge, they also become skilled both at knowing how they
learn, and at knowing whether they have learned something well.
These are two defining qualities of metacognition, but they are part
of critical thinking as well. In fostering critical thinking, a teacher is
really fostering a student's ability to construct or control his or her
own thinking and to avoid being controlled by ideas unreflectively.

   How best to teach critical thinking remains a matter of debate.
One issue is whether to infuse critical skills into existing courses
or to teach them through separate, free-standing units or courses.
The first approach has the potential advantage of integrating critical
thinking into students' entire educations. But it risks diluting
students' understanding and use of critical thinking simply because
critical thinking takes on a different form in each learning context.
Its details and appearance vary among courses and teachers. The
free-standing approach has the opposite qualities: it stands a better
chance of being understood clearly and coherently but at the cost
of obscuring how it is related to other courses, tasks, and activities.
This dilemma is the issue--again--of transfer. Unfortunately,
research to compare the different strategies for teaching critical
thinking does not settle the matter. The research suggests simply
that either infusion or free-standing approaches can work as long
as it is implemented thoroughly and teachers are committed to the
value of critical thinking (Halpern, 2003).

   A related issue about teaching critical thinking is about deciding
who needs to learn critical thinking skills the most. Should it be all
students or only some of them? Teaching all students seems the
more democratic alternative and thus appropriate for educators.
Surveys have found, however, that teachers sometimes favor the
teaching of critical thinking only to high-advantage students--the

576 | Critical Thinking
ones who already achieve well, who come from relatively high-
income families, or (for high school students) who take courses
intended for university entrance (Warburton & Torff, 2005).
Presumably, the rationale for this bias is that high-advantage
students can benefit and/or understand and use critical thinking
better than other students. Yet, there is little research evidence to
support this idea, even if it were not ethically questionable. The
study by Hawkins (2006) described above, for example, is that
critical thinking was fostered even with students considered low-
advantage.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=78#oembed-1

Video 5.2.1. Challenging Students to Think Critically suggests was to
encourage critical thinking.

     Teaching Critical Thinking

        For suggestions on teaching and fostering critical
     thinking skills at all academic levels, visit the library at The
     Foundation for Critical Thinking.

CC licensed content, Original

   Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van Hoose. Provided by: Hudson
                                                                           Critical Thinking | 577
      Valley Community College. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike
CC licensed content, Shared previously
   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Specific attribution
   Teach Like a Champion - Challenging Students to Think
      Critically. Provided by: Kaizan Teaching. Retrieved from:
      https://youtu.be/Cd_zyrRyPyc?t=24. License: All Rights
      Reserved

578 | Critical Thinking
Creative Thinking

Creativity is the ability to make or do something new that is also
useful or valued by others (Gardner, 1993). The "something" can
be an object (like an essay or painting), a skill (like playing an
instrument), or an action (like using a familiar tool in a new way). To
be creative, the object, skill, or action cannot simply be bizarre or
strange; it cannot be new without also being useful or valued, and
not simply be the result of an accident. If a person types letters at
random that form a poem by chance, the result may be beautiful, but
it would not be creative by the definition above. Viewed this way,
creativity includes a wide range of human experiences that many
people, if not everyone, have had at some time or other (Kaufman &
Baer, 2006). The experience is not restricted to a few geniuses, nor
exclusive to specific fields or activities like art or the composing of
music.

   Especially important for teachers are two facts. The first is that
an important form of creativity is creative thinking, the generation
of ideas that are new as well as useful, productive, and appropriate.
The second is that creative thinking can be stimulated by teachers'
efforts. Teachers can, for example, encourage students' divergent
thinking--ideas that are open-ended and that lead in many
directions (Torrance, 1992; Kim, 2006). Divergent thinking is
stimulated by open-ended questions--questions with many possible
answers, such as the following:

   How many uses can you think of for a cup?
   Draw a picture that somehow incorporates all of these words:

      cat, fire engine, and banana.
   What is the most unusual use you can think of for a shoe?

Note that answering these questions creatively depends partly on
having already acquired knowledge about the objects to which the
questions refer. In this sense, divergent thinking depends partly

                                                                         Creative Thinking | 579
on its converse, convergent thinking, which is focused, logical
reasoning about ideas and experiences that lead to specific answers.
Up to a point, then, developing students' convergent thinking--as
schoolwork often does by emphasizing mastery of
content--facilitates students' divergent thinking indirectly, and
hence also their creativity (Sternberg, 2003; Runco, 2004; Cropley,
2006). But carried to extremes, excessive emphasis on convergent
thinking may discourage creativity.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=79#oembed-1

Video 5.3.1. Convergent Thinking Versus Divergent Thinking explains
the difference between these different approaches to thinking.

   Whether in school or out, creativity seems to flourish best when
the creative activity is its own intrinsic reward, and a person is
relatively unconcerned with what others think of the results.
Whatever the activity--composing a song, writing an essay,
organizing a party, or whatever--it is more likely to be creative if
the creator focuses on and enjoys the activity in itself, and thinks
relatively little about how others may evaluate the activity (Brophy,
2004). Unfortunately, encouraging students to ignore others'
responses can sometimes pose a challenge for teachers. Not only is
it the teachers' job to evaluate students' learning of particular ideas
or skills, but also they have to do so within restricted time limits
of a course or a school year. In spite of these constraints, though,
creativity still can be encouraged in classrooms at least some of the
time (Claxton, Edwards, & Scale-Constantinou, 2006). Suppose, for
example, that students have to be assessed on their understanding
and use of particular vocabulary. Testing their understanding may

580 | Creative Thinking
limit creative thinking; students will understandably focus their
energies on learning "right" answers for the tests. But assessment
does not have to happen constantly. There can also be times to
encourage experimentation with vocabulary through writing
poems, making word games, or in other thought-provoking ways.
These activities are all potentially creative. To some extent,
therefore, learning content and experimenting or playing with
content can both find a place--in fact one of these activities can
often support the other. We return to this point later in this chapter,
when we discuss student-centered strategies of instruction, such as
cooperative learning and play as a learning medium
CC licensed content, Original

   Creative Thinking. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van Hoose.
      Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College. License: CC
      BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

All rights reserved content

   Convergent Thinking Versus Divergent Thinking. Authored by:
      John Spencer. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/
      cmBf1fBRXms. License: All Rights Reserved

                                                                         Creative Thinking | 581
Problem-Solving

Somewhat less open-ended than creative thinking is problem-
solving, the analysis and solution of tasks or situations that are
complex or ambiguous and that pose difficulties or obstacles of
some kind (Mayer & Wittrock, 2006). Problem-solving is needed, for
example, when a physician analyzes a chest X-ray: a photograph
of the chest is far from clear and requires skill, experience, and
resourcefulness to decide which foggy-looking blobs to ignore, and
which to interpret as real physical structures (and therefore real
medical concerns). Problem-solving is also needed when a grocery
store manager has to decide how to improve the sales of a product:
should she put it on sale at a lower price, or increase publicity for it,
or both? Will these actions actually increase sales enough to pay for
their costs?

     PROBLEM-SOLVING IN THE CLASSROOM

        Problem-solving happens in classrooms when teachers
     present tasks or challenges that are deliberately complex
     and for which finding a solution is not straightforward or
     obvious. The responses of students to such problems, as
     well as the strategies for assisting them, show the key
     features of problem-solving. Consider this example and
     students' responses to it. We have numbered and named
     the paragraphs to make it easier to comment about them
     individually:

582 | Problem-Solving
  Scene #1: A problem to be solved

   A teacher gave these instructions: "Can you connect all of
the dots below using only four straight lines?" She drew the
following display on the chalkboard:

   The problem itself and the procedure for solving it
seemed very clear: simply experiment with different
arrangements of four lines. But two volunteers tried doing
it at the board, but were unsuccessful. Several others
worked at it at their seats, but also without success.

  Scene #2: Coaxing students to re-frame the problem

   When no one seemed to be getting it, the teacher asked,
"Think about how you've set up the problem in your
mind--about what you believe the problem is about. For

                                                                    Problem-Solving | 583
     instance, have you made any assumptions about how long
     the lines ought to be? Don't stay stuck on one approach if
     it's not working!"

     Scene #3: Alicia abandons a fixed response

        After the teacher said this, Alicia indeed continued to
     think about how she saw the problem. "The lines need to be
     no longer than the distance across the square," she said to
     herself. So she tried several more solutions, but none of
     them worked either.

        The teacher walked by Alicia's desk and saw what Alicia
     was doing. She repeated her earlier comment: "Have you
     assumed anything about how long the lines ought to be?"

        Alicia stared at the teacher blankly, but then smiled and
     said, "Hmm! You didn't actually say that the lines could be
     no longer than the matrix! Why not make them longer?" So
     she experimented again using oversized lines and soon
     discovered a solution:

584 | Problem-Solving
  Scene #4: Willem's and Rachel's alternative strategies

   Meanwhile, Willem worked on the problem. As it
happened, Willem loved puzzles of all kinds and had ample
experience with them. He had not, however, seen this
particular problem. "It must be a trick," he said to himself
because he knew from experience that problems posed in
this way often were not what they first appeared to be. He
mused to himself: "Think outside the box, they always tell
you. . ." And that was just the hint he needed: he drew lines
outside the box by making them longer than the matrix and
soon came up with this solution:

                                                                    Problem-Solving | 585
        When Rachel went to work, she took one look at the
     problem and knew the answer immediately: she had seen
     this problem before, though she could not remember
     where. She had also seen other drawing-related puzzles
     and knew that their solution always depended on making
     the lines longer, shorter, or differently angled than first
     expected. After staring at the dots briefly, she drew a
     solution faster than Alicia or even Willem. Her solution
     looked exactly like Willem's.

        This story illustrates two common features of problem-
     solving: the effect of degree of structure or constraint on
     problem-solving, and the effect of mental obstacles to
     solving problems. The next sections discuss each of these
     features and then look at common techniques for solving
     problems.

586 | Problem-Solving
The Effect of Constraints: Well-Structured
Versus Ill-Structured Problems

Problems vary in how much information they provide for solving a
problem, as well as in how many rules or procedures are needed
for a solution. A well-structured problem provides much of the
information needed and can in principle be solved using relatively
few clearly understood rules. Classic examples are the word
problems often taught in math lessons or classes: everything you
need to know is contained within the stated problem and the
solution procedures are relatively clear and precise. An ill-
structured problem has the converse qualities: the information is
not necessarily within the problem, solution procedures are
potentially quite numerous, and multiple solutions are likely (Voss,
2006). Extreme examples are problems like "How can the world
achieve lasting peace?" or "How can teachers ensure that students
learn?"

   By these definitions, the nine-dot problem is relatively well-
structured--though not completely. Most of the information needed
for a solution is provided in Scene #1: there are nine dots shown
and instructions given to draw four lines. But not all necessary
information was given: students needed to consider lines that were
longer than implied in the original statement of the problem.
Students had to "think outside the box," as Willem said--in this case,
literally.

   When a problem is well-structured, so are its solution procedures
likely to be as well. A well-defined procedure for solving a particular
kind of problem is often called an algorithm; examples are the
procedures for multiplying or dividing two numbers or the
instructions for using a computer (Leiserson, et al., 2001).
Algorithms are only effective when a problem is very well-
structured and there is no question about whether the algorithm is
an appropriate choice for the problem. In that situation, it pretty
much guarantees a correct solution. They do not work well,

                                                                          Problem-Solving | 587
however, with ill-structured problems, where they are ambiguities
and questions about how to proceed or even about
precisely what the problem is about. In those cases, it is more
effective to use heuristics, which are general strategies--"rules of
thumb," so to speak--that do not always work but often do, or that
provide at least partial solutions. When beginning research for a
term paper, for example, a useful heuristic is to scan the library
catalog for titles that look relevant. There is no guarantee that this
strategy will yield the books most needed for the paper, but the
strategy works enough of the time to make it worth trying.

   In the nine-dot problem, most students began in Scene #1 with
a simple algorithm that can be stated like this: "Draw one line, then
draw another, and another, and another." Unfortunately, this simple
procedure did not produce a solution, so they had to find other
strategies for a solution. Three alternatives are described in Scenes
#3 (for Alicia) and 4 (for Willem and Rachel). Of these, Willem's
response resembled a heuristic the most: he knew from experience
that a good general strategy that often worked for such problems
was to suspect deception or trick in how the problem was originally
stated. So he set out to question what the teacher had meant by the
word line and came up with an acceptable solution as a result.

Common Obstacles to Solving Problems

The example also illustrates two common problems that sometimes
happen during problem-solving. One of these is functional
fixedness: a tendency to regard the functions of objects and ideas
as fixed (German & Barrett, 2005). Over time, we get so used to one
particular purpose for an object that we overlook other uses. We
may think of a dictionary, for example, as necessarily something
to verify spellings and definitions, but it also can function as a
gift, a doorstop, or a footstool. For students working on the nine-
dot matrix described in the last section, the notion of "drawing"

588 | Problem-Solving
a line was also initially fixed; they assumed it to be connecting
dots but not extending lines beyond the dots. Functional fixedness
sometimes is also called response set, the tendency for a person to
frame or think about each problem in a series in the same way as the
previous problem, even when doing so is not appropriate for later
problems. In the example of the nine-dot matrix described above,
students often tried one solution after another, but each solution
was constrained by a set response not to extend any line beyond the
matrix.

   Functional fixedness and the response set are obstacles
in problem representation, the way that a person understands and
organizes information provided in a problem. If information is
misunderstood or used inappropriately, then mistakes are likely--if
indeed the problem can be solved at all. With the nine-dot matrix
problem, for example, construing the instruction to draw four lines
as meaning "draw four lines entirely within the matrix" means that
the problem simply could not be solved. For another, consider this
problem: "The number of water lilies on a lake doubles each day.
Each water lily covers exactly one square foot. If it takes 100 days
for the lilies to cover the lake exactly, how many days does it take
for the lilies to cover exactly half of the lake?" If you think that
the size of the lilies affects the solution to this problem, you have
not represented the problem correctly. Information about lily size
is not relevant to the solution and only serves to distract from the
truly crucial information, the fact that the lilies double their
coverage each day. (The answer, incidentally, is that the lake is half
covered in 99 days; can you think why?)

Strategies to Assist Problem-Solving

Just as there are cognitive obstacles to problem-solving, there are
also general strategies that help the process be successful,
regardless of the specific content of a problem (Thagard, 2005). One

                                                                          Problem-Solving | 589
helpful strategy is problem analysis--identifying the parts of the
problem and working on each part separately. Analysis is especially
useful when a problem is ill-structured. Consider this problem, for
example: "Devise a plan to improve bicycle transportation in the
city." Solving this problem is easier if you identify its parts or
component subproblems, such as (1) installing bicycle lanes on busy
streets, (2) educating cyclists and motorists to ride safely, (3) fixing
potholes on streets used by cyclists, and (4) revising traffic laws
that interfere with cycling. Each separate subproblem is more
manageable than the original, general problem. The solution of each
subproblem contributes to the solution of the whole, though of
course is not equivalent to a whole solution.

   Another helpful strategy is working backward from a final
solution to the originally stated problem. This approach is especially
helpful when a problem is well-structured but also has elements
that are distracting or misleading when approached in a forward,
normal direction. The water lily problem described above is a good
example: starting with the day when all the lake is covered (Day
100), ask what day would it, therefore, be half-covered (by the terms
of the problem, it would have to be the day before, or Day 99).
Working backward, in this case, encourages reframing the extra
information in the problem (i. e. the size of each water lily) as merely
distracting, not as crucial to a solution.

   A third helpful strategy is analogical thinking--using knowledge
or experiences with similar features or structures to help solve
the problem at hand (Bassok, 2003). In devising a plan to improve
bicycling in the city, for example, an analogy of cars with bicycles
is helpful in thinking of solutions: improving conditions for both
vehicles requires many of the same measures (improving the
roadways, educating drivers). Even solving simpler, more basic
problems is helped by considering analogies. A first-grade student
can partially decode unfamiliar printed words by analogy to words
he or she has learned already. If the child cannot yet read the word
screen, for example, he can note that part of this word looks similar
to words he may already know, such as seen or green, and from this

590 | Problem-Solving
observation derive a clue about how to read the word screen.
Teachers can assist this process, as you might expect, by suggesting
reasonable, helpful analogies for students to consider.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=80#oembed-1

Video 5.4.1. Problem Solving explains strategies used for solving
problems.

IDEAL

Many systems for problem-solving can be taught to learners
(Pressley, 1995). There are problem-solving strategies to improve
general problem solving (Burkell, Schneider, & Pressley, 1990;
Mayer, 1987; Sternberg, 1988), scientific thinking (Kuhn, 1989),
mathematical problem solving (Schoenfeld, 1989), and writing
during the elementary years (Harris & Graham, 1992a) and during
adolescence (Applebee, 1984; Langer & Applebee, 1987).

   A problem-solving system that can be used in a variety of
curriculum areas and with a variety of problems is called IDEAL
(Bransford & Steen, 1984). IDEAL
involves five stages of problem-solving:

 1. Identify the problem. Learners must know what the problem is
      before they can solve it. During this stage of problem-solving,
      learners ask
      themselves whether they understand what the problem is and

                                                                           Problem-Solving | 591
      whether they have stated it clearly.
2. Define terms. During this stage, learners check whether they

      understand what each word in the problem statement means.
3. Explore strategies. At this stage, learners compile relevant

      information and try out strategies to solve the problem. This
      can involve drawing diagrams, working backward to solve a
      mathematical or reading comprehension problem, or breaking
      complex problems into manageable units.
4. Act on the strategy. Once learners have explored a variety of
      strategies, they select one and now use it.
5. Look at the effects. During the final stage of the IDEAL
      method, learners ask themselves whether they have come up
      with an acceptable solution.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=80#oembed-2

Video 5.4.2. The Problem Solving Model explains the process involved
in solving problems. These steps can be explicitly taught to enhance
problem-solving skills.
CC licensed content, Original

   Problem-Solving. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van Hoose.
      Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College. Retrieved
      from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/chapter/
      problemsolving. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

592 | Problem-Solving
   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Bohlin. License: CC BY:
      Attribution

CC licensed content, Specific attribution
   Problem Solving. Authored by: Carole Yue. Provided by: Khan
      Academy. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/J3GGx9wy07w.
      License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

All rights reserved content
   The Problem Solving Model. Provided by: Gregg Learning.
      Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/CDk_BD1LXiI. License: All
      Rights Reserved

                                                                          Problem-Solving | 593
Instructional Strategies that
Stimulate Complex Thinking

Because the forms of thinking just described--critical thinking,
creativity and problem solving--are broad and important
educationally, it is not surprising that educators have identified
strategies to encourage their development. Some of the possibilities
are shown in the figure below and group several instructional
strategies along two dimensions: how much the strategy is student-
centered and how much a strategy depends on group interaction. It
should be emphasized that the two-way classification in Table 1 is
not very precise, but it gives a useful framework for understanding
the options available for planning and implementing instruction.
The more important of the two dimensions in the table is the first
one--the extent to which an instructional strategy is either directed
by the teacher or initiated by students. We take a closer look at this
dimension in the next part of this chapter, followed by discussion of
group-oriented teaching strategies.

594 | Instructional Strategies that
Stimulate Complex Thinking
 Figure 5.5.1. Instructional strategies to facilitate complex
                                 thinking.

 DEFINITIONS OF TERMS IN Figure
5.5.1

     Lecture: Telling or explaining previously
        organized information--usually to a group

     Assigned reading: Reading, usually individually,
        of previously organized information

     Advance organizers: Brief overview, either
        verbally or graphically, of material about to be
        covered in a lecture or text

     Outlining: Writing important points of a lecture
        or reading, usually in a hierarchical format

     Taking notes: Writing important points of a
        lecture or reading, often organized according to
        the learning needs of an individual student

     Concept maps: Graphic depiction of
        relationships among a set of concepts, terms, or
        ideas; usually organized by the student, but not
        always

     Madeline Hunter's "Effective Teaching": A set
        of strategies that emphasizes clear presentation of
        goals, the explanation and modeling of tasks to
        students and careful monitoring of students'
        progress toward the goals

         Instructional Strategies that Stimulate Complex Thinking | 595
Teacher-Directed Instruction

As the name implies, teacher-directed instruction includes any
strategies initiated and guided primarily by the teacher. A classic
example is exposition or lecturing (simply telling or explaining
important information to students) combined with assigning
reading from texts. But teacher-directed instruction also includes
strategies that involve a more active response from students, such
as encouraging students to elaborate on new knowledge or to
explain how new information relates to prior knowledge. Whatever
their form, teacher-directed instructional methods normally
include the organizing of information on behalf of students, even if
teachers also expect students to organize it further on their own.
Sometimes, therefore, teacher-directed methods are thought of as
transmitting knowledge from teacher to student as clearly and
efficiently as possible, even if they also require mental work on the
part of the student.

Lectures and Readings

Lectures and readings are traditional staples of educators,
particularly with older students (including university students). At
their best, they pre-organize information so that (at least in theory)
the student only has to remember what was said in the lecture
or written in the text in order to begin understanding it (Exley &
Dennick, 2004). Their limitation is the ambiguity of the responses
they require: listening and reading are by nature quiet and
stationary, and do not in themselves indicate whether a student
is comprehending or even attending to the material. Educators
sometimes complain that "students are too passive" during lectures
or when reading. But physical quietness is intrinsic to these
activities, not to the students who do them. A book just sits still,

596 | Instructional Strategies that Stimulate Complex Thinking
after all, unless a student makes an effort to read it, and a lecture
may not be heard unless a student makes the effort to listen to it.

Advance Organizers

In spite of these problems, there are strategies for making lectures
and readings effective. A teacher can be especially careful about
organizing information for students, and she can turn part of the
mental work over to students themselves. An example of the first
approach is the use of advance organizers--brief overviews or
introductions to new material before the material itself is presented
(Ausubel, 1978). Textbook authors (including ourselves) often try
deliberately to insert periodic advance organizers to introduce new
sections or chapters in the text. When used in a lecture, advance
organizers are usually statements in the form of brief introductory
remarks, though sometimes diagrams showing relationships among
key ideas can also serve the same purpose (Robinson, et al., 2003).
Whatever their form, advance organizers partially organize the
material on behalf of the students, so that they know where to put
it all, so to speak, as they learn them in more detail.

Recalling and Relating Prior Knowledge

Another strategy for improving teacher-directed instruction is to
encourage students to relate the new material to prior familiar
knowledge. When one of us (Kelvin) first learned a foreign language
(in his case French), for example, he often noticed similarities
between French and English vocabulary. A French word for picture,
for example, was image, spelled exactly as it is in English. The
French word for splendid was splendide, spelled almost the same as

                  Instructional Strategies that Stimulate Complex Thinking | 597
in English, though not quite. Relating the French vocabulary to
English vocabulary helped in learning and remembering the French.

   As children and youth become more experienced in their
academics, they tend to relate new information to previously
learned information more frequently and automatically (Goodwin,
1999; Oakhill, Hartt, & Samols, 2005). But teachers can also facilitate
students' use of this strategy. When presenting new concepts or
ideas, the teacher can relate them to previously learned ideas
deliberately--essentially modeling a memory strategy that students
learn to use for themselves. In a science class, for example, she can
say, "This is another example of. . ., which we studied before"; in
social studies she can say, "Remember what we found out last time
about the growth of the railroads? We saw that. . ."

   If students are relatively young or are struggling academically, it
is especially important to remind them of their prior knowledge.
Teachers can periodically ask questions like "What do you already
know about this topic?" or "How will your new knowledge about
this topic change what you know already?" Whatever the age of
students, connecting new with prior knowledge is easier with help
from someone more knowledgeable, such as the teacher. When
learning algorithms for multiplication, for example, students may
not at first see how multiplication is related to addition processes
that they probably learned previously (Burns, 2001). But if a teacher
takes time to explain the relationship and gives students time to
explore it, then the new skill of multiplication may be learned more
easily.

Elaborating Information

Elaborating on new information means asking questions about the
new material, and inferring ideas and relationships among the new
concepts. Such strategies are closely related to the strategy of
recalling prior knowledge as discussed above: elaboration enriches

598 | Instructional Strategies that Stimulate Complex Thinking
the new information and connects it to other knowledge. In this
sense, elaboration makes the new learning more meaningful and
less arbitrary.

   A teacher can help students use elaboration by modeling this
behavior. The teacher can interrupt his or her explanation of an
idea, for example, by asking how it relates to other ideas, or by
speculating about where the new concept or idea may lead. He or
she can also encourage students to do the same, and even give
students questions to guide their thinking. When giving examples
of a concept, for example, a teacher can hold back from offering
all of the examples, and instead, ask students to think of additional
examples themselves. The same tactic can work with assigned
readings; if the reading includes examples, the teacher can instruct
students to find or make up additional examples of their own.

Organizing New Information

There are many ways to organize new information that are
especially well-suited to teacher-directed instruction. A common
way is simply to ask students to outline information read in a text
or heard in a lecture. Outlining works especially well when the
information is already organized somewhat hierarchically into a
series of main topics, each with supporting subtopics or subpoints.
Outlining is basically a form of the more general strategy of taking
notes, or writing down key ideas and terms from reading or lecture.
Research studies find that the precise style or content of notes
is less important than the quantity of notes taken: more detail is
usually better than less (Ward & Tatsukawa, 2003). Written notes
insure that a student thinks about the material not only while
writing it down, but also when reading the notes later. These
benefits are especially helpful when students are relatively
inexperienced at school learning in general (as in the earlier grade
levels), or relatively inexperienced about a specific topic or content

                 Instructional Strategies that Stimulate Complex Thinking | 599
in particular. Not surprisingly, such students may also need more
guidance than usual about what and how to write notes. It can be
helpful for the teacher to provide a note-taking guide, like the ones
in Note-Taking Guides 1 and 2.

     NOTE-TAKING GUIDE 1

     Notes on Science Experiment

        1. Purpose of the experiment (in one sentence):
        2. Equipment needed (list each item and define any
     special terms):
        1)
        2)
        3)
        4)
        3. Procedure used (be specific!):
        4. Results (include each measurement, rounded to the
     nearest integer):

          Observation #1
          Observation #2
          Observation #3
          Observation #4
          Average measurement, #1-4:

600 | Instructional Strategies that Stimulate Complex Thinking
     NOTE-TAKING GUIDE 2

     Guide to Notes About Tale of Two Cities

        1. Main characters (list and describe in just a few words):
        a)
        b)
        c)
        d)
        2. Setting of the story (time and place):
        3. Unfamiliar vocabulary in the story (list and define):
        a)
        b)
        c)
        d)
        4. Plot (write down only the main events):
        a)
        b)
        c)
        d)
        5. Theme (or underlying "message") of the story:

In learning expository material, another helpful strategy--one that
is more visually oriented--is to make concept maps or diagrams of
the connections among concepts or ideas. The figure below shows

                  Instructional Strategies that Stimulate Complex Thinking | 601
concept maps made by two individuals that graphically depict how
a key idea, child development, relates to learning and education. One
of the maps was drawn by a classroom teacher and the other by
a university professor of psychology (Seifert, 1991). They suggest
possible differences in how the two individuals think about children
and their development. Not surprisingly, the teacher gave more
prominence to practical concerns (for example, classroom learning
and child abuse), and the professor gave more prominence to
theoretical ones (for example, Erik Erikson and Piaget).
The differences suggest that these two people may have something
different in mind when they use the same term, child development.
The differences have the potential to create misunderstandings
between them (Seifert, 1999; Super & Harkness, 2003). By the same
token, the two maps also suggest what each person might need
to learn in order to achieve a better understanding of the other
person's thinking and ideas.

   Figure 5.5.2. Maps of personal definitions of "child development"

Mastery Learning

This term refers to an instructional approach in which all students
learn the material to an identically high level, even if some students
require more time than others to do so (Gentile, 2004). In mastery
learning, the teacher directs learning, though sometimes only in
the sense of finding, writing, and orchestrating specific modules or

602 | Instructional Strategies that Stimulate Complex Thinking
units for students to learn. In one typical mastery learning program,
the teacher introduces a few new concepts or topics through a brief
lecture or teacher-led demonstration. Then she gives an ungraded
assignment or test immediately in order to assess how well students
have learned the material, and which ones still need help. The
students who have already learned the unit are given enrichment
activities. Those needing more help are provided individual tutoring
or additional self-guiding materials that clarify the initial content;
they work until they have in fact mastered the content (hence the
name mastery learning). At that point, students take another test or
do another assignment to show that they have in fact learned the
material to the expected high standard. When the system is working
well, all students end up with high scores or grades, although
usually, some take longer to do so than others.

   As you might suspect, mastery learning poses two challenges.
The first is ethical: is it really fair to give enrichment only to faster
students and remediation only to slower students? This practice
could deteriorate into continually providing the fast with an
interesting education, while continually providing the slow only
with boring, repetitious material. In using the approach, therefore,
it is important to make all materials interesting, whether
enrichment or remedial. It is also important to make sure that the
basic learning goals of each unit are truly important--even
crucial--for everyone to learn so that even slower individuals spend
their time well.

   The other challenge of mastery learning is more practical: the
approach makes strong demands for a detailed, highly organized
curriculum. If the approach is to work, the teacher must either
locate such a curriculum, write one herself, or assemble a suitable
mixture of published and self-authored materials. However the
curriculum is created, the end result has to be a program filled
with small units of study as well as ample enrichment and remedial
materials. Sometimes providing these practical requirements can be
challenging. But not always: some subjects (like mathematics) lend
themselves to a detailed, sequential organization especially well. In

                 Instructional Strategies that Stimulate Complex Thinking | 603
many cases, too, commercial publishers have produced curricula
already organized for use in mastery learning programs (Fox, 2004).

Direct Instruction

Although the term direct instruction is sometimes a synonym
for teacher-directed instruction, more often it refers to a version of
mastery learning that is highly scripted, meaning that it not only
organizes the curriculum into small modules or units as described
above, but also dictates how teachers should teach and sometimes
even the words they should speak (Adams & Engelmann, 1996;
Magliaro, Lockee, & Burton, 2005). Direct instruction programs are
usually based on a mix of ideas from behaviorism and cognitive
theories of learning. In keeping with behaviorism, the teacher is
supposed to praise students immediately and explicitly when they
give a correct answer. In keeping with cognitive theory, she is
supposed to state learning objectives in advance of teaching them
(providing a sort of mini-advance organizer), provide frequent
reviews of materials, and check deliberately on how well students
are learning. Direct instruction usually also introduces material in
small, logical steps, and calls for plenty of time for students to
practice.

   Direct instruction programs share one of the challenges of other
mastery learning approaches: because they hold all students to the
same high standard of achievement, they must deal with differences
in how long students require to reach the standard. But direct
instruction has an additional challenge, in that they often rely on
small-group interaction more heavily than other mastery learning
programs, and use self-guiding materials less. This difference has
the benefit that direct instruction works especially well with
younger students (especially kindergarten through third grade),
who may have limited skills at working alone for extended periods.
The challenge is that reliance on small-group interaction can make

604 | Instructional Strategies that Stimulate Complex Thinking
it impractical to use direct instruction with an entire class or for
an entire school day. In spite of these limits, however, research has
found direct instruction to be very effective in teaching basic skills
such as early reading and arithmetic (Adams & Engelmann, 1996).

Madeline Hunter's Effective Teaching Model

A number of direct instruction strategies have been combined by
Madeline Hunter into a single, relatively comprehensive approach
that she calls mastery teaching (not to be confused with the related
term mastery learning) or the effective teaching model (M. Hunter,
1982; R. Hunter, 2004). Important features of the model are
summarized in the outline below (R. Hunter, 2004). As you can see,
the features span all phases of contact with students--before,
during, and after lessons.

   Prepare students to learn.
         Make good use of time at the beginning of a lesson or
            activity, when attention is best
         Direct students' attention to what lies ahead in a
            lesson--for example, by offering "advance organizers"
         Explain lesson objectives explicitly

   Present information clearly and explicitly.
         Set a basic structure to the lesson and stay with it
            throughout
         Use familiar terms and examples
         Be concise

   Check for understanding and give guided practice.
         Ask questions that everyone responds to--for example,
            "Raise your hand if you think the answer is X"
         Invite choral responses--for example, "Is this a correct
            answer or not?"

                 Instructional Strategies that Stimulate Complex Thinking | 605
         Sample individuals' understanding--for example, "Barry,
            what's your example of X?"

   Provide for independent practice.

         Work through the first few exercises or problems together
         Keep independent practice periods brief and intersperse

            with discussions that offer feedback

What happens even before a lesson begins? Like many forms of
teacher-directed instruction, the effective teaching model requires
curricula and learning goals that are tightly organized and divisible
into small parts, ideas, or skills. In teaching about photosynthesis,
for example, the teacher (or at least her curriculum) needs to
identify the basic elements that contribute to this process, and how
they relate to each other. With photosynthesis, the elements include
the sun, plants, animals, chlorophyll, oxygen produced by plants
and consumed by animals, and carbon dioxide produced by animals
and consumed by plants. The roles of these elements need to be
identified and expressed at a level appropriate for the students.
With advanced science students, oxygen, chlorophyll, and carbon
dioxide may be expressed as part of complex chemical reactions;
with first-grade students, though, they may be expressed simply as
parts of a process akin to breathing or respiration.

   Once this analysis of the curriculum has been done, Hunter's
effective teaching model requires making the most of the lesson
time by creating an anticipatory set, which is an activity that
focuses or orients the attention of students to the upcoming
content. Creating an anticipatory set may consist, for example, of
posing one or more questions about students' everyday knowledge
or knowledge of prior lessons. In teaching about the differences
between fruits and vegetables, the teacher could start by asking:
"If you are making a salad strictly of fruit, which of these would
be OK to use: apple, tomato, cucumber, or orange?" As the lesson
proceeds, information needs to be offered in short, logical pieces,
using language as familiar as possible to the students. Examples
should be plentiful and varied: if the purpose is to define and

606 | Instructional Strategies that Stimulate Complex Thinking
distinguish fruits and vegetables, for example, then features
defining each group should be presented singularly or at most just
a few at a time, with clear-cut examples presented of each feature.
Sometimes models or analogies also help to explain examples. A
teacher can say: "Think of a fruit as a sort of `decoration' on the plant
because if you pick it, the plant will go on living." But models can also
mislead students if they are not used thoughtfully, since they may
contain features that differ from the original concepts. In likening a
fruit to decoration, for example, students may overlook the essential
role of fruit in plant reproduction, or think that lettuce qualifies as a
fruit since picking a few lettuce leaves does not usually kill a lettuce
plant.

   Throughout a lesson, the teacher repeatedly checks for
understanding by asking questions that call for active thinking on
the part of students. One way is to require all students to respond
somehow, either with an actual choral response (speaking in unison
together), or another way with a non-verbal signal like raising hands
to indicate answers to questions. In teaching about fruits and
vegetables, for example, a teacher can ask, "Here's a list of fruits and
vegetables. As I point to each one, raise your hand if it's a fruit, but
not if it's a vegetable." Or she can ask: "Here's a list of fruits and
vegetables. Say together what each one is as I point to it; you say
`fruit' or `vegetable'--whichever applies." Even though some students
may hide their ignorance by letting more knowledgeable classmates
do the responding, the general level or quality of response can still
give a rough idea of how well students are understanding. These
checks can be supplemented, of course, with questions addressed
to individuals, or with questions to which individuals must respond
briefly in writing. A teacher can ask everyone, "Give me an example
of one fruit and one vegetable," and then call on individuals to
answer. She can also say: "I want everyone to make a list with two
columns, one listing all the fruits you can think of and the other
listing all the vegetables you can think of."

   As a lesson draws to a close, the teacher arranges for students to
have further independent practice. The point of the practice is not

                 Instructional Strategies that Stimulate Complex Thinking | 607
to explore new material or ideas, but to consolidate or strengthen
recent learning. At the end of a lesson about long division, for
example, the teacher can make a transition to independent practice
by providing a set of additional problems similar to the ones she
explained during the lesson. After working one or two with
students, she can turn the rest of the task over to the students
to practice on their own. But note that even though the practice
is supposedly "independent," students' understanding still has to
be checked frequently. A long set of practice problems, therefore,
needs to be broken up into small subsets of problems, and written
or oral feedback offered periodically

What are the Limits of Teacher-Directed
Instruction?

Whatever the grade level, most subjects taught in schools have
at least some features, skills, or topics that benefit from direct
instruction. Even subjects usually considered "creative" can benefit
from a direct approach at times: to draw, sing, or write a poem,
for example, requires skills that may be easier to learn if presented
sequentially in small units with frequent feedback from a teacher.
Research supports the usefulness of teacher-directed instruction
for a variety of educational contexts when it is designed well and
implemented as intended (Rosenshine & Mesister, 1995; Good &
Brophy, 2004). Teachers themselves also tend to support the
approach in principle (Demant & Yates, 2003).

   But there are limits to its usefulness. Some are the practical ones
that are pointed out above. Teacher-directed instruction, whatever
the form, requires well-organized units of instruction in advance of
when students are to learn. Such units may not always be available,
and it may not be realistic to expect busy teachers to devise their
own. Other limits of direct instruction have more to do with the
very nature of learning. Some critics argue that organizing material

608 | Instructional Strategies that Stimulate Complex Thinking
on behalf of the students encourages students to be passive--an
ironic and undesirable result if true (Kohn, 2000, 2006). According
to this criticism, the mere fact that a curriculum or unit of study is
constructed by a teacher (or other authority) makes some students
think that they should not bother seeking information actively on
their own, but wait for it to arrive on its own accord. In support
of this argument, critics point to the fact that direct instruction
approaches sometimes contradict their own premises by requiring
students to do a bit of cognitive organizational work of their own.
This happens, for example, when a mastery learning program
provides enrichment material for faster students to work
independently; in that case, the teacher may be involved in the
enrichment activities only minimally.

   Criticisms like these have led to additional instructional
approaches that rely more fully on students to seek and organize
their own learning. In the next section, we discuss some of these
options. As you will see, student-centered models of learning do
solve certain problems of teacher-directed instruction, but they
also have problems of their own.

Student-Centered Models of Learning

Student-centered models of learning shift some of the
responsibility for directing and organizing learning from the
teacher to the student. Being student-centered does not mean,
however, that a teacher gives up organizational and leadership
responsibilities completely. It only means a relative shift in the
teacher's role, toward one with more emphasis on guiding students'
self-chosen directions. As we explained earlier in this chapter,
teacher-directed strategies do not take over responsibility for
students' learning completely; no matter how much a teacher
structures or directs learning, the students still have responsibility
for working and expending effort to comprehend new material. By

                 Instructional Strategies that Stimulate Complex Thinking | 609
the same token, student-centered models of learning do not mean
handing over all organizational work of instruction to students. The
teacher is still the most knowledgeable member of the class and still
has both the opportunity and the responsibility to guide learning in
directions that are productive.

     The Power of Student-Driven Learning

                          One or more interactive elements has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You can
              view them online here:
              https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=81#oe
              mbed-1

        Video 5.5.1. The Power of Student-Driven Learning
     discusses how changing the orientation of learning
     empowers and motivates students to learn.

As you might suspect, therefore, teacher-directed and student-
centered approaches to instruction may overlap in practice. You can
see the overlap clearly, for example, in two instructional strategies
commonly thought of as student-centered, independent
study, and self-reflection. In independent study, as the name
implies, a student works alone a good deal of the time, consulting
with a teacher only occasionally. Independent study may be
student-centered in the sense that the student may be learning
a topic or skill--an exotic foreign language, for example--that is
personally interesting. But the opposite may also be true: the

610 | Instructional Strategies that Stimulate Complex Thinking
student may be learning a topic or skill that a teacher or an official
school curriculum has directed the student to learn--a basic subject
for which the student is missing a credit, for example. Either way,
though, the student will probably need guidance, support, and help
from a teacher. In this sense even independent study always
contains elements of teacher-direction.

   Similarly, self-reflection refers to thinking about beliefs and
experiences in order to clarify their personal meaning and
importance. In school, it can be practiced in a number of ways:
for example by keeping diaries or logs of learning or reading, by
retelling stories of important experiences or incidents in a student's
life, or by creating concept maps like the ones described earlier in
this chapter. Whatever form it takes, self-reflection by definition
happens inside a single student's mind, and in this sense is always
directed by the student. Yet most research on self-reflection finds
that self-reflection only works well when it involves and generates
responses and interaction with other students or with a teacher
(Seifert, 1999; Kuit, Reay, & Freeman, 2001). To be fully self-
reflective, students need to have access to more than their existing
base of knowledge and ideas--more than what they know already.
In one study about students' self-reflections of cultural and racial
prejudices (Gay & Kirkland, 2003), for example, the researchers
found that students tended to reflect on these problems in relatively
shallow ways if they worked on their own. It was not particularly
effective to write about prejudice in a journal that no one read
except themselves or to describe beliefs in a class discussion in
which neither the teacher nor classmates commented or challenged
the beliefs. Much more effective in both cases was for the teacher
to respond thoughtfully to students' reflective comments. In this
sense, the use of self-reflection, like independent study, required
elements of teacher-direction to be successful.

   How might a teacher emphasize students' responsibility for
directing and organizing their own learning? The alternatives are
numerous, as they are for teacher-directed strategies, so we can
only sample some of them here. We concentrate on ones that are

                  Instructional Strategies that Stimulate Complex Thinking | 611
relatively well known and used most widely, and especially on two:
inquiry learning and cooperative learning.
CC licensed content, Original

   Instructional Strategies . Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously
   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

612 | Instructional Strategies that Stimulate Complex Thinking
Inquiry-Based Learning

Inquiry-based learning stands the usual advice about expository
(lecture-style) teaching on its head: instead of presenting well-
organized knowledge to students, the teacher (or sometimes fellow
students) poses thoughtful questions intended to stimulate
discussion and investigation by students. The approach has been
described, used, and discussed by educators literally for decades,
though sometimes under other names, including inquiry
method (Postman & Weingartner, 1969), discovery learning (Bruner,
1960/2006), or progressive education (Dewey, 1933; Martin, 2003).
For convenience, we will stay with the term inquiry learning.

   The questions that begin a cycle of inquiry learning may be posed
either by the teacher or by students themselves. Their content
depends not only on the general subject area being studied but
also on the interests that students themselves have expressed. In
elementary-level science, for example, a question might be "Why
do leaves fall off trees when winter comes?" In high school social
studies classes, it might be "Why do nations get into conflict?" The
teacher avoids answering such questions directly, even if asked to
do so. Instead, she encourages students to investigate the questions
themselves, for example by elaborating on students' ideas and by
asking further questions based on students' initial comments. Since
students' comments can not be predicted precisely, the approach is
by nature flexible. The initial questioning helps students to create
and clarify questions that they consider worthy of further
investigation. Discussing questions about leaves falling off trees, for
example, can prompt students to observe trees in the autumn or to
locate books and references that discuss or explain the biology of
trees and leaves.

   But inquiry is not limited to particular grade levels or topics. If
initial questions in a high school social studies class have been about
why nations get into conflict, for example, the resulting discussions

                                                                 Inquiry-Based Learning | 613
can lead to investigating the history of past wars and the history
of peace-keeping efforts around the world. Whether the topic is
high school social studies or elementary school biology, the specific
direction of investigations is influenced heavily by students, but
with assistance from the teacher to ensure that the students'
initiatives are productive. When all goes well, the inquiry and
resulting investigations benefit students in two ways. The first is
that students (perhaps obviously) learn new knowledge from their
investigations. The second is that students practice a constructive,
motivating way of learning, one applicable to a variety of problems
and tasks, both in school and out.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=82#oembed-1

Video 5.6.1. What is Inquiry-Based Learning explains inquiry-based
learning and the process used in the classroom.
CC licensed content, Original

   Inquiry-Based Learning. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

All rights reserved content

   What is Inquiry-Based Learning. Authored by: Scott Crombie.
      Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/u84ZsS6niPc. License: All

614 | Inquiry-Based Learning
Rights Reserved
                                                          Inquiry-Based Learning | 615
Cooperative Learning

Even though inquiry-oriented discussion and investigation benefits
when it involves the teacher, it can also be useful for students
to work together somewhat independently, relying on a teacher's
guidance only indirectly. Working with peers is a major feature
of cooperative learning (sometimes also called collaborative
learning). In this approach, students work on a task in groups and
often are rewarded either partially or completely for the success of
the group as a whole. Aspects of cooperative learning have been part
of education for a long time; some form of cooperation has always
been necessary to participate on school sports teams, for example,
or to produce a student-run school newspaper. What is a bit newer
is using cooperative or collaborative activities systematically to
facilitate the learning of a range of educational goals central to the
academic curriculum (Prince, 2004).

              Figure 5.7.1. Components of cooperative learning.
   Even though teachers usually value cooperation in students,
circumstances at school can sometimes reduce students' incentives
616 | Cooperative Learning
to show it. The traditional practice of assessing students
individually, for example, can set the stage for competition over
grades, and cultural and other forms of diversity can sometimes
inhibit individuals from helping each other spontaneously.
Strategies exist, however, for reducing such barriers so that
students truly benefit from each other's presence, and are more
likely to feel like sharing their skills and knowledge. Here, for
example, are several key features that make cooperative learning
work well (Johnson & Johnson, 1998; Smith, et al., 2005):

   Students need time and a place to talk and work together. This
      may sound obvious, but it can be overlooked if time in class
      becomes crowded with other tasks and activities, or with
      interruptions related to school (like assemblies) but not to the
      classroom. It is never enough simply to tell students to work
      together, only to leave them wondering how or when they are
      to do so.

   Students need skills at working together. As an adult, you may
      feel relatively able to work with a variety of partners on a
      group task. The same assumption cannot be made, however,
      about younger individuals, whether teenagers or children.
      Some students may get along with a variety of partners, but
      others may not. Many will benefit from advice and coaching
      about how to focus on the tasks at hand, rather than on the
      personalities of their partners.

   Assessment of activities should hold both the group and the
      individuals accountable for success. If a final mark for a project
      goes only to the group as a whole, then freeloading is possible:
      some members may not do their share of the work and may be
      rewarded more than they deserve. Others may be rewarded
      less than they deserve. If, on the other hand, a final grade for a
      group project goes only to each member's individual
      contribution to a group project, then overspecialization can
      occur: individuals have no real incentive to work together, and
      cooperative may deteriorate into a set of smaller individual

                                                                    Cooperative Learning | 617
      projects (Slavin, 1994).
   Students need to believe in the value and necessity of

      cooperation. Collaboration will not occur if students privately
      assume that their partners have little to contribute to their
      personal success. Social prejudices from the wider
      society--like racial bias or gender sexism, for example--can
      creep into the operations of cooperative groups, causing some
      members to be ignored unfairly while others are overvalued.
      Teachers can help reduce these problems in two ways: first by
      pointing out and explaining that a diversity of talents is
      necessary for success on a group project, and second by
      pointing out to the group how undervalued individuals are
      contributing to the overall project (Cohen, Brody, & Sapon-
      Shevin, 2004).

As these comments imply, cooperative learning does not happen
automatically and requires monitoring and support by the teacher.
Some activities may not lend themselves to cooperative work,
particularly if every member of the group is doing essentially the
same task. Giving everyone in a group the same set of arithmetic
problems to work on collaboratively, for example, is a formula for
cooperative failure: either the most skilled students do the work for
others (freeloading) or else members simply divide up the problems
among themselves in order to reduce their overall work
(overspecialization). A better choice for a cooperative task is one
that clearly requires a diversity of skills, what some educators call
a rich group work task (Cohen, Brody, & Sapon-Shevin, 2004).
Preparing a presentation about medieval castles, for example, might
require (a) writing skill to create a report, (b) dramatic skill to put
on a skit, and (c) artistic talent to create a poster. Although a few
students may have all of these skills, more are likely to have only
one, and they are therefore likely to need and want their fellow
group members' participation.

618 | Cooperative Learning
Examples of Cooperative and Collaborative
Learning

Although this description may make the requirements for
cooperative learning sound somewhat precise, there are actually
a variety of ways to implement it in practice. The table below
summarizes several of them. As you can see, the strategies vary
in the number of how many students they involve, the prior
organization or planning provided by the teacher, and the amount
of class time they normally require.

                                                                    Cooperative Learning | 619
Table 5.7.1. Strategies for encouraging cooperative learning

Strategy           Type of     What the teacher       What the
                   groups      does                   students do
                   involved

Think-pair-share   Pairs of    Teacher poses initial  First, students
(Lyman, 1981)      students,   problem or             think individually
                   sometimes   question.              of the answer;
                   linked to                          second, they
                   one other                          share their
                   pair                               thinking with
                                                      partner; third, the
                                                      partnership
                                                      shares their
                                                      thinking with
                                                      another
                                                      partnership

Jigsaw             5-6         Teacher assigns        Students in each
classroom,         students    students to groups     group work
version #1         per group,  and assigns one        together to
(Aronson, et al.,  and 5-6     aspect of a complex    become experts
2001)              groups      problem to each        in their particular
                   overall     group.                 aspect of the
                                                      problem; later the
                                                      expert groups
                                                      disband, and form
                                                      new groups
                                                      containing one
                                                      student from each
                                                      of the former
                                                      expert groups.

Jigsaw             4-5         Teacher assigns        Students initially
classroom,         students    students to groups     work in groups to
version #2         per group,  and assigns each       learn about the
(Slavin, 1994)     and 4-5     group to study or      entire problem;
                   groups      learn about the        later the groups
                   overall     same entire complex    disband and
                               problem.               reform as expert
                                                      groups, with each
                                                      group focusing on
                                                      a selected aspect
                                                      of the general
                                                      problem; still later
                                                      the expert groups
                                                      disband and the
                                                      original general
                                                      groups reform to
                                                      learn what the
                                                      expert students
                                                      can now add to
                                                      their general
                                                      understanding.

620 | Cooperative Learning
Table 5.7.1. Strategies for encouraging cooperative learning

STAD             4-5          Teacher presents a      Students work
(Student-Teams   students     lesson or unit to the   together to insure
Achievement      per team     entire class, and       that team mates
Divisions)       (or group)   later tests them on     improve their
(Slavin, 1994)                it; grades individuals  performance as
                              based partly on         much as possible.
                              individuals' and the    Students take
                              team's                  tests as
                              improvement, not        individuals.
                              just on absolute
                              level of
                              performance.

Project-Based    Various      Teacher or students     Students work
Learning (Katz,  numbers      pose a question or      together for
2000)            of           problem of interest     extended periods
                 students,    to other students;      to investigate the
                 depending    teacher helps           original question
                 on the       students to clarify     or problem;
                 complexity   their interests and     project leads to a
                 of the       make plans to           presentation,
                 project, up  investigate the         written report, or
                 to and       question                other product.
                 including
                 the entire
                 class.

CC licensed content, Original

   Cooperative Learning. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van Hoose.
      Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College. Retrieved
      from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/chapter/
      cooperative-learn/. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

                              Cooperative Learning | 621
CC licensed content, Specific attribution
   Cooperative learning model. Authored by: Prashanti
      Eachempati, Kiran Kumar KS, Abdul Rashid Hj Ismail. Provided
      by: MedEdPublish. Retrieved from:
      https://www.mededpublish.org/manuscripts/1009. License:
      CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike

622 | Cooperative Learning
Chapter Summary:

Facilitating Complex

Thinking

Looking broadly at this chapter, you can see that choices among
instructional strategies are numerous indeed, and that deciding
among them depends on the forms of thinking that you want to
encourage, the extent to which ideas or skills need to be organized
by you to be understood by students, and the extent to which
students need to take responsibility for directing their own learning.
Although you may have personal preferences among possible
instructional strategies, the choice will also be guided by the
uniqueness of each situation of teaching--with its particular
students, grade-level, content, and purposes. If you need to develop
students' problem solving skills, for example, there are strategies
that are especially well suited for this purpose; we described some.
If you need to organize complex information so that students do
not become confused by it, there are effective ways of doing so.
If you want the students to take as much initiative as possible in
organizing their own learning, this too can be done.

   Yet having this knowledge is still not enough to teach well. What
is still needed are ideas or principles for deciding what to teach.
In this chapter we have still not addressed an obvious question:
How do I find or devise goals for my teaching and for my students'
learning? And assuming that I can determine the goals, where can I
find resources that help students to meet them?

   Teaching involves numerous instructional strategies, which are
decisions and actions designed to facilitate learning. The choice
of strategies depends partly on the forms of thinking intended for
students--whether the goal is for students to think critically, for
example, to think creatively, or to solve problems. A fundamental

                                                                Chapter Summary: Facilitating
                                                                        Complex Thinking | 623
decision in choosing instructional strategies is how much to
emphasize teacher-directed instruction, as compared to student-
centered models of learning. Teacher-directed strategies of
instruction include lectures and readings (expository teaching),
mastery learning, scripted or direct instruction, and complex
teacher-directed approaches such as Madeline Hunter's effective
teaching model. Student-centered models of learning include
independent study, student self-reflection, inquiry learning, and
various forms of cooperative or collaborative learning. Although for
some students, curriculum content and learning goals may lend
themselves toward one particular type of instruction, teaching is
often a matter of combining different strategies appropriately and
creatively.
CC licensed content, Original

   Facilitating Complex Thinking: Chapter Summary. Authored
      by: Nicole Arduini-Van Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley
      Community College. Retrieved from:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/chapter/
      summary-5/. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

624 | Chapter Summary: Facilitating Complex Thinking
Glossary

                                                                                     Glossary | 625
References

Aronson, E. (2001). In the jigsaw classroom. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
   Ausubel, D. (1978). In defense of advance organizers. Review of

Educational Research, 48(2), 251-157.
Bassok, J. (2003). Analogical transfer in problem solving. In

   Davidson, J. & Sternberg, R. (Eds.). The psychology of problem
   solving. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Brophy, J. (2004). Motivating students to learn, 2nd edition. Mahwah,
   NJ: Erlbaum.
   Bruner, J. (1960/2006). The process of education, Revised
Edition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Claxton, G., Edwards, L., & Constantinou, V. (2006). Cultivating
   creative mentalities: A framework for education. Thinking Skills
   and Creativity, 1(1), 57-61.
Cohen, E., Brody, C., & Sapon-Shevin, M. (2004). Teaching
   cooperative learning. Albany, NY: State University of New York
   Press.
Cropley, A. (2006). In praise of convergent thinking. Creativity
   Research Journal, 18(1), 291-404.
   Dewey, J. (1933). How we think. Boston: Houghton Mifflin
Company.
Exley, K. & Dennick, R. (2004). Giving a lecture: From presentation to
   teaching. New York: Routledge-Falmer.
Gardner, H. (1993). Creative minds. New York: Basic Books.
German, T. & Barrett, H. (2005). Functional fixedness in a
   technologically sparse culture. Psychological Science, 16(1), 1-5.
   Goodwin, L. (1999). Spontaneous comprehension monitoring
strategies of college freshmen and college seniors. In B. Palmer
(Ed.), College reading: Perspectives and practices. Carrolton, GA: The
College Reading Association.
Hawkins, J. (2006). Accessing multicultural issues through critical

626 | References
   thinking, critical inquiry, and the student research process. Urban
   Education, 41(2), 169-141.
   Johnson, D. & Johnson, R. (1998). Learning together and alone, 5th
edition. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
   Katz, L. (2000). Engaging children's minds: The project approach.
Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishers.
Kaufman, J. & Baer, J. (2006). Creativity and reason in cognitive
   development. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kim, K. (2006). Is creativity unidimensional or multidimensional?
   Analysis of Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking. Creativity
   Research Journal, 18(1), 251-259.
Leiserson, C., Rivest, R., Cormen, T., & Stein, C. (2001). Introduction
   to algorithms. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Liu, K. (2006). Annotation as an index to critical writing. Urban
   Education, 41(2), 192-207.
Luchins, A. & Luchins, E. (1994). The water-jar experiment and
   Einstellung effects. Gestalt Theory: An International
   Interdisciplinary Journal, 16(2), 101-121.
Lyman, F. T. (1981). The responsive classroom discussion: The
   inclusion of all students. In A. Anderson (Ed.), Mainstreaming
   Digest (pp. 109-113). College Park: University of Maryland Press.
   Martin, J. (2003). The education of John Dewey. New York:
Columbia University Press.
Mayer, R. & Wittrock, M. (2006). Problem-solving transfer. In D.
   Berliner & R. Calfee (Eds.), Handbook of Educational
   Psychology, pp. 47-62. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Oakhill, J., Hartt, J., & Samols, D. (2005). Levels of comprehension
   monitoring in good and poor readers. Reading and Writing,
   18(7-9), 657-686.
Postman, N. & Weingartner, C. (1969). Teaching as a subversive
   activity. New York: Delacorte Press.
Prince, M. (2004) "Does Active Learning Work? A Review of the
   Research," Journal of Engineering Education, 93:3, 223-231.
Robinson, D., Corliss, S., Bush, A., Bera, S., & Tomberlin, T. (2003).

                                                                                  References | 627
   Optimal presentation of graphic organizers and text. Educational
   technology research and development, 51(4), 25-41.
Runco. M. (2004). Divergent thinking, creativity, and giftedness. In
   R. Sternberg (Ed.), Definitions and conceptions of giftedness, pp.
   47-62.
   Seifert, K. (1999). Reflective thinking and professional development:
A primer. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.
   Slavin. R. (1994). Cooperative learning, 2nd edition. Boston: Allyn &
Bacon.
   Smith, K., Sheppard, S., Johnson, D., & Johnson, R. (2005).
Pedagogies of engagement: Classroom-based practices. Journal of
Engineering Education, 94(1), 87-103.
Sternberg, R. (2003). Wisdom, intelligence, and creativity
   synthesized. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Super, C. & Harkness, S. (2003). Metaphors of development. Human
   Development, 46(1), 3-23.
Thagard, R. (2005). Mind: Introduction to Cognitive Science, 2nd
   edition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Torrance, E. (1992). Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking. Bensenville,
   IL: Scholastic Testing Service.
Voss, J. (2006). Toulmin's model and the solving of ill-structured
   problems. Argumentation, 19(3), 321-329.
Warburton, E. & Torff, E. (2005). The effect of perceived learner
   advantages on teachers' beliefs about critical-thinking
   activities. Journal of Teacher Education, 56(1), 24-33.
   Ward, N. & Tatsukawa, H. (2003). A tool for taking class
notes. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 59(6),
959-981.
Williams, R., Oliver, R., & Stockade, S. (2004). Psychological versus
   generic critical thinking as predictors and outcome measures in
   a large undergraduate human development course.Journal of
   General Education, 53(1), 37-58.

628 | References
MOTIVATION

     Theme: Motivation and Learning

        Overview of Concepts:
          Innate Theories on Motivation
          Behavior Theories on Motivation
          Cognitive Theories on Motivation
          Process Theories on Motivation
          Maturation and Motivation
        Learning Objectives:
          Explain how motivation changes with maturation
          Explain why task-contingent rewards diminish

             intrinsic motivation
          Discuss how praise influences motivation
          Explain how expectancies and

             values influence motivation
          Compare mastery versus performance goals
          Identify attributions that enhance motivation
          Explain developmental and group differences in

             motivation
          Describe outcome expectations and efficacy
          Explain how self-worth affects the motivation of

             success-orientated students
          Explain how autonomy, competence, and

             relatedness can facilitate intrinsic motivation

                                                                                  Motivation | 629
Theories of Motivation

Motivation describes the wants or needs that direct behavior
toward a goal, but, why do we do the things we do? What
motivations underlie our behaviors? Is motivation an inherited trait
or is motivation influenced by reinforcement and consequences
that strengthen some behaviors and weaken others? Is the key to
motivating learners a lesson plan that captures their interest and
attention? In other words, is motivation something innate that we
are born with that can be strengthened by reinforcers external to
the learning task, or is it something interwoven with the learning
process itself?

Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation

Some motives are biological, like our need for food or water.
However, the motives that we will be more interested in are more
psychological. In general, we discuss motivation as
being intrinsic (arising from internal factors) or extrinsic (arising
from external factors). Intrinsically motivated behaviors are
performed because of the sense of personal satisfaction that they
bring, while extrinsically motivated behaviors are performed in
order to receive something from others.

                                                                  Theories of Motivation | 631
 Figure 6.1.1. Intrinsic motivation comes from within the individual,
    while extrinsic motivation comes from outside the individual.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=88#oembed-1

Video 6.1.1. Extrinsic vs Intrinsic Motivation explains the difference
and provides examples of these types of motivation.

   Think about why you are currently in college. Are you here
because you enjoy learning and want to pursue an education to
make yourself a more well-rounded individual? If so, then you are
intrinsically motivated. However, if you are here because you want
to get a college degree to make yourself more marketable for a high-
paying career or to satisfy the demands of your parents, then your
motivation is more extrinsic in nature.

   In reality, our motivations are often a mix of both intrinsic and
extrinsic factors, but the nature of the mix of these factors might

632 | Theories of Motivation
change over time (often in ways that seem counter-intuitive). There
is an old adage: "Choose a job that you love, and you will never
have to work a day in your life," meaning that if you enjoy your
occupation, work doesn't seem like . . . well, work. Some research
suggests that this isn't necessarily the case (Daniel & Esser, 1980;
Deci, 1972; Deci, Koestner, & Ryan, 1999). According to this research,
receiving some sort of extrinsic reinforcement (i.e., getting paid) for
engaging in behaviors that we enjoy leads to those behaviors being
thought of as work no longer providing that same enjoyment. As
a result, we might spend less time engaging in these reclassified
behaviors in the absence of any extrinsic reinforcement. For
example, Odessa loves baking, so in her free time, she bakes for
fun. Oftentimes, after stocking shelves at her grocery store job, she
often whips up pastries in the evenings because she enjoys baking.
When a coworker in the store's bakery department leaves his job,
Odessa applies for his position and gets transferred to the bakery
department. Although she enjoys what she does in her new job, after
a few months, she no longer has much desire to concoct tasty treats
in her free time. Baking has become work in a way that changes
her motivation to do it. What Odessa has experienced is called
the overjustification effect--intrinsic motivation is diminished when
extrinsic motivation is given. This can lead to extinguishing intrinsic
motivation and creating a dependence on extrinsic rewards for
continued performance (Deci et al., 1999).

  Other studies suggest that intrinsic motivation
may not be so vulnerable to the effects of extrinsic
reinforcements, and in fact, reinforcements such
as verbal praise might actually increase intrinsic
motivation (Arnold, 1976; Cameron & Pierce, 1994).
In that case, Odessa's motivation to bake in her free
time might remain high if, for example, customers
regularly compliment her baking or cake
decorating skills.

   These apparent discrepancies in the researchers' findings may

                                                                  Theories of Motivation | 633
be understood by considering several factors. For one, physical
reinforcement (such as money) and verbal reinforcement (such as
praise) may affect an individual in very different ways. In fact,
tangible rewards (i.e., money) tend to have more negative effects
on intrinsic motivation than do intangible rewards (i.e., praise).
Furthermore, the expectation of the extrinsic motivator by an
individual is crucial: If the person expects to receive an extrinsic
reward, then intrinsic motivation for the task tends to be reduced.
If, however, there is no such expectation, and the extrinsic
motivation is presented as a surprise, then intrinsic motivation for
the task tends to persist (Deci et al., 1999).

   In addition, culture may influence motivation. For example, in
collectivistic cultures, it is common to do things for your family
members because the emphasis is on the group and what is best
for the entire group, rather than what is best for any one individual
(Nisbett, Peng, Choi, & Norenzayan, 2001). This focus on others
provides a broader perspective that takes into account both
situational and cultural influences on behavior; thus, a more
nuanced explanation of the causes of others' behavior becomes
more likely. (You will learn more about collectivistic and
individualistic cultures when you learn about social psychology.)

   In educational settings, students are more likely to experience
intrinsic motivation to learn when they feel a sense of belonging
and respect in the classroom. This internalization can be enhanced
if the evaluative aspects of the classroom are de-emphasized and
if students feel that they exercise some control over the learning
environment. Furthermore, providing students with activities that
are challenging, yet doable, along with a rationale for engaging
in various learning activities can enhance intrinsic motivation for
those tasks (Niemiec & Ryan, 2009). Consider Hakim, a first-year law
student with two courses this semester: Family Law and Criminal
Law. The Family Law professor has a rather intimidating classroom:
He likes to put students on the spot with tough questions, which
often leaves students feeling belittled or embarrassed. Grades are
based exclusively on quizzes and exams, and the instructor posts

634 | Theories of Motivation
the results of each test on the classroom door. In contrast, the
Criminal Law professor facilitates classroom discussions and
respectful debates in small groups. The majority of the course grade
is not exam-based but centers on a student-designed research
project on a crime issue of the student's choice. Research suggests
that Hakim will be less intrinsically motivated in his Family Law
course, where students are intimidated in the classroom setting,
and there is an emphasis on teacher-driven evaluations. Hakim is
likely to experience a higher level of intrinsic motivation in his
Criminal Law course, where the class setting encourages inclusive
collaboration and a respect for ideas, and where students have more
influence over their learning activities.

     Think About It

        Schools often use concrete rewards to increase adaptive
     behaviors. How might this be a disadvantage for students
     intrinsically motivated to learn? What are the educational
     implications of the potential for concrete rewards to
     diminish intrinsic motivation for a given task?

        We would expect to see a shift from learning for the sake
     of learning to learning to earn some reward. This would
     undermine the foundation upon which traditional
     institutions of higher education are built. For a student
     motivated by extrinsic rewards, dependence on those may
     pose issues later in life (post-school) when there are not
     typically extrinsic rewards for learning.

                                                                  Theories of Motivation | 635
Theories of Motivation

Like motivation itself, theories of it are full of diversity. For
convenience in navigating through the diversity, we have organized
the theories around two perspectives about motion. The first set
of theories focuses on the innateness of motivation. These theories
emphasize instinctual or inborn needs and drives that influence
our behavior. The second set of theories proposes cognition as
the source of motivation. Individual motivation is influenced by
thoughts, beliefs, and values. The variation in these theories is due
to disagreement about which cognitive factors are essential to
motivation and how those cognitive factors might be influenced by
the environment.

Innate Motivation Theories

First, we will describe some early motivational theories that focus
on innate needs and drives. Not all of these theories apply to the
classroom, but learning about them will show you how different
theorists have approached the issue of motivation. You are sure to
find some elements of your own thinking about motivation in each
of them. We will examine instinct theory, drive theory, and arousal
theory as early explanations of motivation. We will also discuss
the behavioral perspective on motivation and the deficiency-growth
perspective, as exemplified by Maslow's hierarchy of needs.

Cognitive Theories of Motivation

Cognitive theories of motivation assume that behavior is a result
of cognitive processes. These theories presume that individuals are
interpreting information and making decisions, not just acting on

636 | Theories of Motivation
basic needs and drives. Cognitive motivation theories share strong
ties with the cognitive and social learning theories that we
discussed previously. We will examine several cognitive motivation
theories: interest, attribution theory, expectancy-value theory, and
self-efficacy theory. All emphasize that learners need to know,
understand, and appreciate what they are doing in order to become
motivated. Then, along with these cognitive motivation theories, we
will examine a motivational perspective called self-determination
theory, which attempts to reconcile cognitive theory's emphasis on
intrinsic motivation with more traditional notions of human needs
and drives.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=88#oembed-2

Video 6.1.2. Instincts, Arousal, Needs, Drives provides a brief
overview of some of the major motivational theories.
CC licensed content, Original

   Theories of Motivation . Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: . License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

                                                                  Theories of Motivation | 637
   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Borlin. License: CC BY:
      Attribution

   Psychology 2e. Authored by: Rose M. Spielman, William J.
      Jenkins, Marilyn D. Lovett. Provided by: Open Stax. Retrieved
      from: https://openstax.org/books/psychology-2e/. License:
      CC BY: Attribution

All rights reserved content
   Extrinsic vs Intrinsic Motivation. Provided by: ASCatRIT.
      Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/kUNE4RtZnbk. License: All
      Rights Reserved

638 | Theories of Motivation
Instinct, Drive, and Arousal
Theories

Instinct Theory

William James (1842-1910) was an important contributor to early
research into motivation, and he is often referred to as the father
of psychology in the United States. James theorized that behavior
was driven by a number of instincts, which aid survival. From a
biological perspective, an instinct is a species-specific pattern of
behavior that is not learned. There was, however, considerable
controversy among James and his contemporaries over the exact
definition of instinct. James proposed several dozen special human
instincts, but many of his contemporaries had their own lists that
differed. A mother's protection of her baby, the urge to lick sugar,
and hunting prey were among the human behaviors proposed as
true instincts during James's era. This view--that human behavior
is driven by instincts--received a fair amount of criticism because
of the undeniable role of learning in shaping all sorts of human
behavior. In fact, as early as the 1900s, some instinctive behaviors
were experimentally demonstrated to result from associative
learning (Faris, 1921).

                                                                    Instinct, Drive, and Arousal
                                                                                     Theories | 639
   Figure 6.2.1. (a) William James proposed the instinct theory of motivation,
  asserting that behavior is driven by instincts. (b) In humans, instincts may
include behaviors such as an infant's rooting for a nipple and sucking. (credit

                 b: modification of work by "Mothering Touch"/Flickr)

Drive Theory

Another early theory of motivation proposed that the maintenance
of homeostasis is particularly important in directing behavior. You
may recall from your earlier reading that homeostasis is the
tendency to maintain a balance, or optimal level, within a biological
system. In a body system, a control center (which is often part of the
brain) receives input from receptors (which are often complexes of
neurons). The control center directs effectors (which may be other
neurons) to correct any imbalance detected by the control center.

   According to the drive theory of motivation, deviations from
homeostasis create physiological needs. These needs result in
psychological drive states that direct behavior to meet the need and,
ultimately, bring the system back to homeostasis. For example, if it's

640 | Instinct, Drive, and Arousal Theories
been a while since you ate, your blood sugar levels will drop below
normal. This low blood sugar will induce a physiological need and a
corresponding drive state (i.e., hunger) that will direct you to seek
out and consume food. Eating will eliminate hunger, and, ultimately,
your blood sugar levels will return to normal.

   All activity is directed toward reducing the tension triggered by
needs and drives. Drive reduction, therefore, is the psychological
mechanism underlying both activity and learning. Whatever
behavior results in lessening the tension (and consequently the
drive) will be repeated until it becomes habitual. A habit is a pattern
of behavior in which we regularly engage. Once we have engaged in
a behavior that successfully reduces a drive, we are more likely to
engage in that behavior whenever faced with that drive in the future
(Graham & Weiner, 1996).

   There are two types of drives: primary and acquired.
Primary drives are forces within the individual that are triggered
by biological needs such as hunger and thirst. These drives produce
random activity (recall Skinner's animal experiments). This activity
is essentially directionless until the need is satisfied. Whatever
behavior satisfies the need eventually becomes learned as a habit
through the processes of drive reduction and reinforcement.

   Acquired drives include desires for money, for love, to play
sports, to write, or to create music. They do not spring from a
biological need. Rather, they are acquired through a process of
association with a primary drive. Drive theory assumes that almost
all psychological motives are acquired drives.

   The drive theory of motivation provides the foundation for
behavioral learning theory (discussed in the next section) and,
unlike instinct theory, still has its proponents. Extrinsic
reinforcers (for example, money or good grades) are viewed as
incentives that activate acquired drives. The behavior that is
instrumental in getting each incentive is learned through a
combination of both drive reduction and reinforcement processes.

                                               Instinct, Drive, and Arousal Theories | 641
Arousal Theory

Extensions of drive theory take into account levels of arousal as
potential motivators. As you recall from your study of learning,
these theories assert that there is an optimal level of arousal that
we all try to maintain (Figure 6.2.2). If we are under-aroused, we
become bored and will seek out some sort of stimulation. On the
other hand, if we are over-aroused, we will engage in behaviors to
reduce our arousal (Berlyne, 1960). Most students have experienced
this need to maintain optimal levels of arousal over the course
of their academic careers. Think about how much stress students
experience toward the end of the spring semester. They feel
overwhelmed with seemingly endless exams, papers, and major
assignments that must be completed on time. They probably yearn
for the rest and relaxation that awaits them over the extended
summer break. However, once they finish the semester, it doesn't
take too long before they begin to feel bored. Generally, by the time
the next semester is beginning in the fall, many students are quite
happy to return to school. This is an example of how arousal theory
works.

642 | Instinct, Drive, and Arousal Theories
        Figure 6.2.2. The concept of optimal arousal in relation to
performance on a task is depicted here. Performance is maximized
 at the optimal level of arousal, and it tapers off during under- and

                                      overarousal.
   So what is the optimal level of arousal? What level leads to the
best performance? Research shows that moderate arousal is
generally best; when arousal is very high or very low, performance
tends to suffer (Yerkes & Dodson, 1908). Think of your arousal level
regarding taking an exam for this class. If your level is very low,
such as boredom and apathy, your performance will likely suffer.
Similarly, a very high level, such as extreme anxiety, can be
paralyzing and hinder performance. Consider the example of a
softball team facing a tournament. They are favored to win their first
game by a large margin, so they go into the game with a lower level
of arousal and get beat by a less skilled team.
   But optimal arousal level is more complex than a simple answer
that the middle level is always best. Researchers Robert Yerkes
(pronounced "Yerk-EES") and John Dodson discovered that the
optimal arousal level depends on the complexity and difficulty of
the task to be performed (Figure 6.2.3). This relationship is known
as Yerkes-Dodson law, which holds that a simple task is performed
best when arousal levels are relatively high, and complex tasks are
best performed when arousal levels are lower.

                                              Instinct, Drive, and Arousal Theories | 643
   Figure 6.2.3. Task performance is best when arousal levels are in
   a middle range, with difficult tasks best performed under lower
   levels of arousal and simple tasks best performed under higher

                                   levels of arousal.
CC licensed content, Original

   Instinct, Drive, and Arousal Theory. Authored by: Nicole
      Arduini-Van Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community
      College. Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      edpsy/chapter/instinct-drive-and-arousal-theory/. License:
      CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Psychology 2e. Authored by: Rose M. Spielman, William J.
      Jenkins, Marilyn D. Lovett. Provided by: OpenStax. Retrieved
      from: https://openstax.org/books/psychology-2e/pages/
      1-introduction. License: CC BY: Attribution

644 | Instinct, Drive, and Arousal Theories
Behaviorism and Motivation

Sometimes it is useful to think of motivation not as something
"inside" a student driving the student's behavior, but as equivalent to
the student's outward behaviors. This is the perspective of
behaviorism, which is a way to think about the learning process.
In its most thorough-going form, behaviorism focuses almost
completely on what can be directly seen or heard about a person's
behavior, and has relatively few comments about what may lie
behind (or "underneath" or "inside") the behavior. When it comes
to motivation, this perspective means minimizing or even ignoring
the distinction between the inner drive or energy of students, and
the outward behaviors that express the drive or energy. The two are
considered the same, or nearly so.

   Equating the inner and the outward might seem to violate
common sense. How can a student do something without some sort
of feeling or thought to make the action happen? As we will explain,
this very question has led to alternative models of motivation that
are based on cognitive rather than behaviorist theories of learning.
We will explain some of these later in this chapter. Before getting to
them, however, we encourage you to consider the advantages of a
behaviorist perspective on motivation.

   Sometimes the circumstances of teaching limit teachers'
opportunities to distinguish between inner motivation and outward
behavior. Certainly teachers see plenty of student behaviors--signs
of motivation of some sort. But the multiple demands of teaching
can limit the time needed to determine what the behaviors mean. If
a student asks a lot of questions during discussions, for example, is
he or she curious about the material itself, or just wanting to look
intelligent in front of classmates and the teacher? In a class with
many students and a busy agenda, there may not be a lot of time
for a teacher to decide between these possibilities. In other cases,
the problem may not be limited time as much as communication

                                                          Behaviorism and Motivation | 645
difficulties with a student. Consider a student who is still learning
English, or who belongs to a cultural community that uses patterns
of conversation that are unfamiliar to the teacher, or who has a
disability that limits the student's general language skill. In these
cases discerning the student's inner motivations may take more
time and effort. It is important to invest the extra time and effort for
such students, but while a teacher is doing so, it is also important
for her to guide and influence the students' behavior in constructive
directions. That is where behaviorist approaches to motivation can
help.

Operant Conditioning as a Way of Motivating

The most common version of the behavioral perspective on
motivation is the theory of operant conditioning associated with
B. F. Skinner (1938, 1957). The description in that chapter focused
on behavioral learning, but the same operant model can be
transformed into an account of motivation. In the operant model,
you may recall, a behavior being learned (the "operant") increases
in frequency or likelihood because performing it makes a
reinforcement available. To understand this model in terms of
motivation, think of the likelihood of response as the motivation and
the reinforcement as the motivator. Imagine, for example, that a
student learns by operant conditioning to answer questions during
class discussions: each time the student answers a question (the
operant), the teacher praises (reinforces) this behavior. In addition
to thinking of this situation as behavioral learning, however, you can
also think of it in terms of motivation: the likelihood of the student
answering questions (the motivation) is increasing because of the
teacher's praise (the motivator).

646 | Behaviorism and Motivation
                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=90#oembed-1

Video 6.3.1. Incentive Theory discusses how incentives can motivate
behaviors through reinforcement.

   Many concepts from operant conditioning, in fact, can be
understood in motivational terms. Another one, for example, is the
concept of extinction, which is the tendency for learned behaviors
to become less likely when reinforcement no longer occurs--a sort
of "unlearning," or at least a decrease in performance of previously
learned. The decrease in performance frequency can be thought of
as a loss of motivation, and the removal of the reinforcement can be
thought of as the removal of the motivator. Table 6.3.1 summarizes
this way of reframing operant conditioning in terms of motivation.

                                                           Behaviorism and Motivation | 647
Table 6.3.1. Operant conditioning as learning and as motivation

Concept         Definition phrased in                           Definition phrased in    Classroom exam
                terms of learning                               terms of motivation

Operant         Behavior that becomes                           Behavior that suggests   Student listens
                more likely because of                          an increase in           teacher's comm
                reinforcement                                   motivation               during lecture o
                                                                                         discussion

Reinforcement Stimulus that increases likelihood of a behavior  Stimulus that motivates Teacher praises for listening

Positive        Stimulus                                        Stimulus that motivates  Teacher makes
reinforcement   that increases likelihood of a                  by its presence; an      encouraging rem
                behavior by                                     "incentive"              about student's
                being introduced or added to                                             homework
                a situation

Negative        Stimulus that increases the                     Stimulus that motivates Teacher stops n
reinforcement   likelihood of a behavior by
                being removed or taken                          by                       student about
                away from a situation
                                                                its absence or avoidance late homework

Punishment      Stimulus that decreases the                     Stimulus that            Teacher deduct
                likelihood of a behavior by                     decreases motivation     for late homewo
                being introduced or added                       by its presence
                to a situation

Extinction      Removal of reinforcement                        Removal of motivating    Teacher stops
                for a behavior                                  stimulus that leads to   commenting alt
                                                                decrease in motivation   about student's
                                                                                         homework

Shaping         Reinforcements for                              Stimuli that gradually   Teacher praises
successive      behaviors that gradually                        shift motivation toward  for returning ho
approximations  resemble (approximate) a                        a final goal motivation  a bit closer to th
                final goal behavior                                                      deadline; gradua
                                                                                         praises for actua
                                                                                         being on time

Continuous      Reinforcement that occurs                       Motivator that           Teacher praises
reinforcement   each time that an operant                       occurs each time that a  active student
                behavior occurs                                 behavioral sign of       for every time h
                                                                motivation occurs        for five minutes
                                                                                         interruption

Intermittent    Reinforcement                                   Motivator that           Teacher praises
reinforcement   that sometimes occurs                           occurs sometimes when    active
                following an operant                            a behavioral sign of     student sometim
                behavior, but not on every                      motivation occurs, but   he works withou
                occasion                                        not on every occasion    interruption, bu
                                                                                         every time

648 | Behaviorism and Motivation
Cautions about Behavioral Perspectives on
Motivation

As we mentioned, behaviorist perspectives about motivation do
reflect a classroom reality: that teachers sometimes lack time and
therefore must focus simply on students' appropriate outward
behavior. But there are nonetheless cautions about adopting this
view. An obvious one is the ambiguity of students' specific
behaviors; what looks like a sign of one motive to the teacher may
in fact be a sign of some other motive to the student (DeGrandpre,
2000). If a student looks at the teacher intently while she is
speaking, does it mean the student is motivated to learn, or only
that the student is daydreaming? If a student invariably looks away
while the teacher is speaking, does it mean that the student is
disrespectful of the teacher, or that the student comes from a family
or cultural group where avoiding eye contact actually shows more
respect for a speaker than direct eye contact?

   Another concern about behaviorist perspectives, including
operant conditioning, is that it leads teachers to ignore students'
choices and preferences, and to "play God" by making choices on
their behalf (Kohn, 1996). According to this criticism, the distinction
between "inner" motives and expressions of motives in outward
behavior does not disappear just because a teacher (or a
psychological theory) chooses to treat a motive and the behavioral
expression of a motive as equivalent. Students usually do know what
they want or desire, and their wants or desires may not always
correspond to what a teacher chooses to reinforce or ignore. This,
in a new guise, is once again the issue
of intrinsic versus extrinsic motivation. Approaches that are
exclusively behavioral, it is argued, are not sensitive enough to
students' intrinsic, self-sustaining motivations.

   There is truth to this allegation if a teacher actually does rely
on rewarding behaviors that she alone has chosen, or even if she
persists in reinforcing behaviors that students already find

                                                          Behaviorism and Motivation | 649
motivating without external reinforcement. In those cases
reinforcements can backfire: instead of serving as an incentive to
desired behavior, reinforcement can become a reminder of the
teacher's power and of students' lack of control over their own
actions. A classic research study of intrinsic motivation illustrated
the problem nicely. In the study, researchers rewarded university
students for two activities--solving puzzles and writing newspaper
headlines --that they already found interesting. Some of the
students, however, were paid to do these activities, whereas others
were not. Under these conditions, the students who were paid
were less likely to engage in the activities following the experiment
than were the students who were not paid, even though both groups
had been equally interested in the activities to begin with (Deci,
1971). The extrinsic reward of payment, it seemed, interfered with
the intrinsic reward of working the puzzles.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=90#oembed-2

Video 6.3.2. Drive: The Surprising Truth About What Motivates
Us reveals unexpected findings regarding the use of rewards for
motivating complex behavior.

   Later studies confirmed this effect in numerous situations,
though they have also found certain conditions where extrinsic
rewards do not reduce intrinsic rewards. Extrinsic rewards are not
as harmful, for example, if a person is paid "by the hour" (i.e. by a
flat rate) rather than piecemeal (by the number of items completed)
(Cameron & Pierce, 1994; Eisenberger & Cameron, 1996). They also
are less harmful if the task itself is relatively well-defined (like
working math problems or playing solitaire) and high-quality

650 | Behaviorism and Motivation
performance is expected at all times. So there are still times and
ways when externally determined reinforcements are useful and
effective. In general, however, extrinsic rewards do seem to
undermine intrinsic motivation often enough that they need to be
used selectively and thoughtfully (Deci, Koestner, & Ryan, 2001). As
it happens, help with being selective and thoughtful can be found in
the other, more cognitively oriented theories of motivation. These
use the goals, interests, and beliefs of students as ways of explaining
differences in students' motives and in how the motives affect
engagement with school. We turn to these cognitively oriented
theories next, beginning with those focused on students' goals.
CC licensed content, Original

   Behaviorism and Motivation. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/
      chapter/behaviorism-and-motivation/. License: CC BY-NC-
      SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

CC licensed content, Specific attribution

   Incentive Theory. Authored by: Shreena Desai. Provided by:
      Khan Academy. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/vr9k-
      TO1_Zc. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-
      ShareAlike

All rights reserved content

   Drive: The Surprising Truth About What Motivates Us.

                                                           Behaviorism and Motivation | 651
      Provided by: The RSA. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/
      u6XAPnuFjJc. License: All Rights Reserved

652 | Behaviorism and Motivation
Deficiency-Growth Theory:
Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs

Abraham Maslow's perspective on motivation, deficiency-growth
needs theory, has both similarities to, and differences from, instinct
and drive theory. Like the originators of those theories, Maslow
proposes that people are born with innate needs that they strive to
satisfy. However, in contrast to Freud and Hull, Maslow (1943, 1970)
believes that the ultimate direction of this energy is not simply the
satisfaction of biological needs or tension reduction but a striving
for self-actualization. Consequently, his theory accentuates the
positive, intellectual, uplifting (not simply hedonistic) side of human
beings. For Maslow, innate forces and an innate hierarchy of needs
(both deficiency needs and growth needs) give human behavior
its distinctive energy and direction. The figure below
illustrates Maslow's hierarchy of growth and deficiency needs,
which range from primitive physiological requirements to complex
aesthetic and cognitive needs, which Maslow calls self-
actualization.

                                                      Deficiency-Growth Theory: Maslow's
                                                                      Hierarchy of Needs | 653
               Figure 6.4.1. Maslow's hierarchy of needs model.
   Basic needs are physiological and safety needs. These needs are
our more primitive and instinctual needs for survival. Physiological
needs include our needs for food, water, shelter, breathing, and
sleep; those functions and requirements to keep us alive. At the
safety needs level, we are concerned about avoiding harm and
keeping safe. This may include physical harm to our body, but may
also include psychological safety.
   Our psychological needs include belongingness and love needs,
and esteem needs. These needs relate to having meaning and
purpose in our lives, making life worth living. Belongingness and
love needs relate to our need to feel like we are accepted members
of social groups. These groups might include family, friends, work,
or other social connections. Esteem needs include our needs for
achievement, learning, industry, and status. These things contribute
to the development of identity and self-esteem.

654 | Deficiency-Growth Theory: Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs
   The pinnacle of the hierarchy is self-actualization. Self-
actualization is a brief time in which all needs have been fulfilled
and we are able to reach our potential. Not all individuals are able to
reach self-actualization due to lower-level needs all needing to be
fulfilled first. Those that do reach self-actualization will not remain
there long as, eventually, lower-level needs will arise.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=91#oembed-1

Video 6.4.1. Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs explains Maslow's theory
and the different needs at each level.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=91#oembed-2

CC licensed content, Original

   Deficiency-Growth Theory: Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs.
      Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van Hoose. Provided by: Hudson
      Valley Community College. Retrieved from:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/chapter/
      deficiency-growth-theory/. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously
                 Deficiency-Growth Theory: Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs | 655
   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Gary D. Borich and
      Martin L. Tombari. License: CC BY: Attribution

CC licensed content, Specific attribution
   Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs. Authored by: Chiquo. Provided
      by: Wikimedia Commons. Retrieved from:
      https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/88/
      Maslow%27s_Hierarchy_of_Needs.jpg. License: CC BY-SA:
      Attribution-ShareAlike
   Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs. Authored by: Shreena Desai.
      Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/JPhd76sGIs8. License: CC
      BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

656 | Deficiency-Growth Theory: Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs
Interest as Motivation

In addition to holding different kinds of goals--with consequent
differences in academic motivation--students show obvious
differences in levels of interest in the topics and tasks of the
classroom. Suppose that two high school classmates, Frank and
Jason, both are taking chemistry, and specifically learning how to
balance chemical equations. Frank finds the material boring and has
to force himself to study it; as a result, he spends only the time
needed to learn the basic material and complete the assignments
at a basic level. Jason, on the other hand, enjoys the challenges of
balancing chemical equations. He thinks of the task as an intriguing
puzzle; he not only solves each of them but also compares the
problems to each other as he goes through them.

   Frank's learning is based on effort compared to Jason's, whose
learning is based more fully on interest. As the example implies,
when students learn from interest they tend to devote more
attention to the topic than if they learn from effort (Hidi &
Renninger, 2006). The finding is not surprising since interest is
another aspect of intrinsic motivation--energy or drive that comes
from within. A distinction between effort and interest is often
artificial, however, because the two motives often get blended or
combined in students' personal experiences. Most of us can
remember times when we worked at a skill that we enjoyed and
found interesting, but that also required effort to learn. The
challenge for teachers is therefore to draw on and encourage
students' interest as much as possible, and thus keep the required
effort within reasonable bounds--neither too hard nor too easy.

Situational Interest versus Personal Interest

Students' interests vary in how deeply or permanently they are

                                                                   Interest as Motivation | 657
located within students. Situational interests are ones that are
triggered temporarily by features of the immediate situation.
Unusual sights, sounds, or words can stimulate situational interest.
A teacher might show an interesting image on the overhead
projector, play a brief bit of music, or make a surprising comment
in passing. At a more abstract level, unusual or surprising topics
of discussion can also arouse interest when they are first
introduced. Personal interests are relatively permanent
preferences of the student and are usually expressed in a variety
of situations. In the classroom, a student may (or may not) have a
personal interest in particular topics, activities, or subject matter.
Outside class, though, he or she usually has additional personal
interests in particular non-academic activities (e.g. sports, music)
or even in particular people (a celebrity, a friend who lives nearby).
The non-academic personal interests may sometimes conflict with
academic interests; it may be more interesting to go to the shopping
mall with a friend than to study even your favorite subject.

Benefits of Personal Interest

In general, personal interest in an academic topic or activity tends
to correlate with achievement related to the topic or activity. As
you might suppose, a student who is truly interested is more likely
to focus on the topic or activity more fully, work at it for longer
periods, use more thoughtful strategies in learning--and enjoy
doing so (Hidi, 2001; Hidi & Renninger, 2006). Small wonder that the
student achieves more! Note, though, a persistent ambiguity about
this benefit: it is often not clear whether personal interest leads
to higher achievement, or higher achievement leads to stronger
interest. Either possibility seems plausible. Research to sort them
out, however, has suggested that at least some of the influence
goes in the direction of interest to achievement; when elementary
students were given books from which to learn about a new topic,

658 | Interest as Motivation
for example, they tended to learn more from books which they
chose themselves than from books that were simply assigned
(Reynolds & Symons, 2001). So interest seemed to lead to learning.
But this conclusion does not rule out its converse, that achievement
may stimulate interest as well. As Joe learns more about history,
he steadily finds history more interesting; as McKenzie learns more
about biology, she gradually wants to learn more about it.

Stimulating Situational Interests

If a student has little prior personal interest in a topic or activity,
the teacher is faced with stimulating initial, situational interest,
in hopes that the initial interest will gradually become more
permanent and personal. Hidi and Renninger (2006) proposed a
four-phase model of interest development describing how interest
develops from transient situational interest into stable individual
interest.

   In the first phase, situational interest is sparked by environmental
features such as novel, incongruous, or surprising information,
which is called triggered situational interest. Triggered situational
interest provokes attention and arousal only in the short term. A
teacher might include surprises in their comments and in classroom
activities from time to time: tell students facts that are true but
counter-intuitive, for example, or demonstrate a science
experiment that turns out differently than students expect (Guthrie,
Wigfield, & Humenick, 2006).

   The second phase is referred to as maintained situational interest,
which involves focused attention and persistence over a longer
period of time. Situational interest is sustained when a person finds
the meaningfulness of tasks or personal connections to the tasks.
Only maintained situational interest can develop into long-term
individual interest. The teacher might relate the new material to
students' prior experiences even if their experiences are not related

                                                                   Interest as Motivation | 659
to academics or to school directly. The concepts of gravitation and
acceleration, for example, operate every time a ball is hit or thrown
in a softball game. If this connection is pointed out to a student
who enjoys playing a lot of softball, the concepts can make concepts
more interesting.

   The third phase of interest development is called emerging
individual interest, marking a transition to individual interest. This
phase is characterized by an individual's tendency to reengage with
tasks and to generate his or her own curiosity questions without
much external support as well as the individual's (?) positive feelings.
A teacher could encourage students to respond to new material
actively. By having students talk about the material together, for
example, students can begin making their own connections to prior
personal interests, and the social interaction itself helps to link the
material to their personal, and social interests as well.

   The last phase is referred to as well-developed individual interest,
a person's deep-seated interest that involves a tendency to engage,
with positive feelings, with a topic over an extended period of time.

   Although the four-phase model of interest development has been
generally accepted, the model is underspecified and has received
limited empirical support. For example, the model does not provide
a psychological mechanism explaining how the transition to the
next phase occurs. More research is needed to achieve a better
understanding of interest development.

A Caution

Even though it is important to stimulate interest in new material
somehow, it is also possible to mislead or distract students
accidentally by adding inappropriate, but stimulating features to
new material (Garner, et al., 1992; Harp & Mayer, 1998). Distractions
happen in a number of ways, such as these, among others:

660 | Interest as Motivation
   deliberately telling jokes in class
   using colorful illustrations or pictures
   adding interesting bits of information to a written or verbal

      explanation

When well-chosen, all of these moves can indeed arouse students'
interest in a new topic. But if they do not really relate to the topic
at hand, they may simply create misunderstandings or prevent
students from focusing on key material. As with most other learning
processes, however, there are individual differences among
students in distractability, students who are struggling and are
more prone to distraction and misunderstanding than students who
are already learning more successfully (Sanchez & Wiley, 2006). On
balance, the best advice is probably, therefore, to use strategies
to arouse situational interest, but to assess students' responses
to them continually and as honestly as possible. The key issue is
whether students seem to learn because of the stimulating
strategies that you provide, or in spite of them.
CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

   Foundations of Learning and Instructional Design Technology .
      Authored by: Richard E. West. Provided by: . Retrieved from:
      https://lidtfoundations.pressbooks.com/chapter/motivation-
      in-lidt-by-seungwon-park/. License: CC BY: Attribution

                                                                   Interest as Motivation | 661
Attribution Theory

Attributions are perceptions about the causes of success and
failure. Suppose that you get a low mark on a test and are wondering
what caused the low mark. You can construct various explanations
for--make various attributions about--this failure. Maybe you did
not study very hard; maybe the test itself was difficult; maybe you
were unlucky; maybe you just are not smart enough. Each
explanation attributes the failure to a different factor. The
explanations that you settle upon may reflect the truth
accurately--or then again, they may not. What is important about
attributions is that they reflect personal beliefs about the sources or
causes of success and failure. As such, they tend to affect motivation
in various ways, depending on the nature of the attribution (Weiner,
2005).

Locus, Stability, and Controllability

Attributions vary in three underlying ways: locus, stability, and
controllability. The locus of attribution is the location (figuratively
speaking) of the source of success or failure. If you attribute a top
mark on a test to your ability, then the locus is internal; if you
attribute the mark to the test's having easy questions, then the locus
is external. The stability of attribution is its relative permanence. If
you attribute the mark to your ability, then the source of success
is relatively stable--by definition, the ability is a relatively lasting
quality. If you attribute a top mark to the effort you put into
studying, then the source of success is unstable--effort can vary
and has to be renewed on each occasion, or else it disappears. The
controllability of attribution is the extent to which the individual
can influence it. If you attribute a top mark to your effort at

662 | Attribution Theory
studying, then the source of success is relatively controllable--you
can influence effort simply by deciding how much to study. But
if you attribute the mark to simple luck, then the source of the
success is uncontrollable--there is nothing that can influence
random chance.

                      Figure 6.6.1. Attribution theory model.
   As you might suspect, the way that these attributions combine
affects students' academic motivations in major ways. It usually
helps both motivation and achievement if a student attributes
academic successes and failures to factors that are internal and
controllable, such as effort or a choice to use particular learning
strategies (Dweck, 2000). Attributing successes to factors that are
internal but stable or controllable (like ability), on the other hand,
is both a blessing and a curse: sometimes it can create optimism
about prospects for future success ("I always do well"), but it can
also lead to indifference about correcting mistakes (Dweck, 2006),
or even create pessimism if a student happens not to perform at
the accustomed level ("Maybe I'm not as smart as I thought"). Worst
of all for academic motivation is attributions, whether stable or
not, related to external factors. Believing that performance depends
simply on luck ("The teacher was in a bad mood when marking") or
on the excessive difficulty of material removes the incentive for a

                                                                       Attribution Theory | 663
student to invest in learning. All in all, then, it seems important for
teachers to encourage internal, stable attributions about success.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=93#oembed-1

Video 6.6.1. Weiner's Attribution Theory explains the theory and
provides examples.

Influencing Students' Attributions

How can they do so? One way or another, effective strategies
involve framing teachers' own explanations of success and failure
around internal, controllable factors. Instead of telling a student:
"Good work! You're smart!" try saying: "Good work! Your effort really
made a difference, didn't it?" If a student fails, instead of saying,
"Too bad! This material is just too hard for you," try saying, "Let's
find a strategy for practicing this more, and then you can try again."
In both cases, the first option emphasizes uncontrollable factors
(effort, difficulty level), and the second option emphasizes internal,
controllable factors (effort, use of specific strategies).

   Such attributions will only be convincing, however, if teachers
provide appropriate conditions for students to learn--conditions in
which students' efforts really do pay off. There are three conditions
that have to be in place in particular. First, academic tasks and
materials actually have to be at about the right level of difficulty.
If you give problems in advanced calculus to a first-grade student,
the student will not only fail them but also be justified in attributing

664 | Attribution Theory
the failure to an external factor, task difficulty. If assignments are
assessed in ways that produce highly variable, unreliable marks,
then students will rightly attribute their performance to an external,
unstable source: luck. Both circumstances will interfere with
motivation.

   Second, teachers also need to be ready to give help to individuals
who need it--even if they believe that an assignment is easy enough
or clear enough that students should not need individual help.
Readiness to help is always essential because it is often hard to
know in advance exactly how hard a task will prove to be for
particular students. Without assistance, a task that proves difficult
initially may remain difficult indefinitely, and the student will be
tempted to make unproductive, though correct, attributions about
his or her failure ("I will never understand this," "I'm not smart
enough," or "It doesn't matter how hard I study").

   Third, teachers need to remember that ability--usually
considered a relatively stable factor--often actually
changes incrementally over the long term. Recognizing this fact is
one of the best ways to bring about actual increases in students'
abilities (Blackwell, Trzniewski, & Dweck, 2007; Schunk, Pintrich, &
Meese, 2008). A middle-years student might play the trumpet in
the school band at a high level of ability, but this ability actually
reflects a lot of previous effort and a gradual increase in ability. A
second-grade student who reads fluently, in this sense may have a
high current ability to read; but at some point in the distant past
that same student could not read as well, and even further back he
may not have been able to read at all. The increases in ability have
happened at least in part because of effort. While these ideas may
seem obvious, they can easily be forgotten in the classroom because
effort and ability evolve according to very different time frames.
Effort and its results appear relatively immediately; a student
expends effort this week, this day, or even at this very moment, and
the effort (if not the results) is visible right away. But ability may take
longer to show itself; a student often develops it only over many
weeks, months, or years.

                                                                       Attribution Theory | 665
CC licensed content, Original
   Attribution Theory. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van Hoose.
      Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College. Retrieved
      from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/chapter/
      attribution-theory/. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously
   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. . Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

All rights reserved content
   Weiner's Attribution Theory. Authored by: Deborah M. Taylor.
      Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/EZUpBwIiUsI. License: All
      Rights Reserved

666 | Attribution Theory
Self-Efficacy Theory

In addition to being influenced by their drives, interests, and
attributions, students' motives are affected by specific beliefs about
the student's personal capacities. In self-efficacy theory, the beliefs
become a primary, explicit explanation for motivation (Bandura,
1977, 1986, 1997). Self-efficacy is the belief that you are capable of
carrying out a specific task or of reaching a specific goal. Note that
the belief and the action or goal are specific. Self-efficacy is a belief
that you can write an acceptable term paper, for example, repair an
automobile, or make friends with the new student in class. These
are relatively specific beliefs and tasks. Self-efficacy is not about
whether you believe that you are intelligent in general, whether you
always like working with mechanical things, or thinking that you
are generally a likable person. These more general judgments are
better regarded as various mixtures of self-concepts (beliefs about
general personal identity) or of self-esteem (evaluations of identity).
They are important in their own right and sometimes influence
motivation, but only indirectly (Bong & Skaalvik, 2004). Self-efficacy
beliefs, furthermore, are not the same as "true" or documented
skill or ability. They are self-constructed, meaning that they are
personally developed perceptions. There can sometimes, therefore,
be discrepancies between a person's self-efficacy beliefs and the
person's abilities. You can believe that you can write a good term
paper, for example, without actually being able to do so, and vice
versa: you can believe yourself incapable of writing a paper, but
discover that you are in fact able to do so. In this way, self-efficacy
is like the everyday idea of confidence, except that it is defined
more precisely. And as with confidence, it is possible to have either
too much or too little self-efficacy. The optimum level seems to
be either at or slightly above true capacity (Bandura, 1997). As we
indicate below, large discrepancies between self-efficacy and ability
can create motivational problems for the individual.

                                                                     Self-Efficacy Theory | 667
                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=94#oembed-1

Video 6.7.1. Self-Efficacy theory of motivation explained.

Effects of Self-Efficacy on Students' Behavior

Self-efficacy may sound like a uniformly desirable quality, but
research, as well as teachers, experience suggests that its effects
are a bit more complicated than they first appear. Self-efficacy has
three main effects, each of which has both a "dark" or undesirable
side and a positive or desirable side.

Choice of Tasks

The first effect is that self-efficacy makes students more willing to
choose tasks where they already feel confident about succeeding.
This effect is almost inevitable, given the definition of the concept
of self-efficacy, it has also been supported by research on self-
efficacy beliefs (Pajares & Schunk, 2001). For teachers, the effect on
choice can be either welcome or not, depending on circumstances.
If a student believes that he or she can solve mathematical
problems, then the student is more likely to attempt the
mathematics homework that the teacher assigns. Unfortunately, the
converse is also true. If a student believes that he or she is incapable
of math, then the student is less likely to attempt the math

668 | Self-Efficacy Theory
homework (perhaps telling himself, "What's the use of trying?"),
regardless of the student's actual ability in math.

   Since self-efficacy is self-constructed, furthermore, it is also
possible for students to miscalculate or misperceive their true skills,
and the misperceptions themselves can have complex effects on
students' motivations. From a teacher's point of view, all is well even
if students overestimate their capacity but actually do succeed at
a relevant task anyway, or if they underestimate their capacity, yet
discover that they can succeed and raise their self-efficacy beliefs
as a result. All may not be well, though, if students do not believe
that they can succeed and therefore do not even try, or if students
overestimate their capacity by a wide margin, but are disappointed
unexpectedly by failure and lower their self-efficacy beliefs.

Persistence at Tasks

A second effect of high self-efficacy is increased persistence in
relevant tasks. If you believe that you can solve crossword puzzles,
but encounter one that takes longer than usual, then you are more
likely to work longer at the puzzle until you (hopefully) really do
solve it. This is probably a desirable behavior in many situations
unless the persistence happens to interfere with other, more
important tasks (what if you should be doing homework instead of
working on crossword puzzles?). If you happen to have low self-
efficacy for crosswords, on the other hand, then you are more likely
to give up early on a difficult puzzle. Giving up early may often be
undesirable because it deprives you of a chance to improve your
skill by persisting. Then again (on the third hand?), the consequent
lack of success because of giving up may provide a useful incentive
to improve your crossword skills. And again, misperceptions of
capacity make a difference. Overestimating your capacity by a lot
(excessively high self-efficacy) might lead you not to prepare for or
focus on a task properly, and thereby impair your performance. So

                                                                     Self-Efficacy Theory | 669
as with choosing tasks, the effects of self-efficacy vary from one
individual to another and one situation to another. The teacher's
task is therefore two-fold: first, to discern the variations, and
second, to encourage the positive self-efficacy beliefs. Table 1 offers
some additional advice about how to do this.

Table 6.7.1. Ways of encouraging self-efficacy beliefs

Strategy                     Example of what the teacher might say

Set goals with students,     "By the end of the month, I want you to
and get a commitment         know all of the times table up to 25  25.
from them to reach the       Can I count on you to do that?"
goals.

Encourage students to        "Compare that drawing against the one
compare their performance    that you made last semester. I think you'll
with their own previous      find improvements!"
performance, not with
other students.

Point out links between      "I saw you studying for this test more this
effort and improvement.      week. No wonder you did better this time!"

In giving feedback about     "Part 1 of the lab write-up was very
performance, focus on        detailed, just as the assignment asked. Part
information, not evaluative  2 has a lot of good ideas in it, but it needs
judgments.                   to be more detailed and stated more
                             explicitly."

Point out that increases in  "Every time I read another one of your
knowledge or skill happen    essays, I see more good ideas than the last
gradually by sustained       time. They are so much more complete
effort, not because of       than when you started the year."
inborn ability.

Response to Failure

High self-efficacy for a task not only increases a person's
persistence at the task but also improves their ability to cope with
stressful conditions and to recover their motivation following
outright failures. Suppose that you have two assignments--an essay
and a science lab report--due on the same day, and this
circumstance promises to make your life hectic as you approach

670 | Self-Efficacy Theory
the deadline. You will cope better with the stress of multiple
assignments if you already believe yourself capable of doing both of
the tasks, than if you believe yourself capable of doing just one of
them or (especially) of doing neither. You will also recover better in
the unfortunate event that you end up with a poor grade on one or
even both of the tasks.

   That is the good news. The bad news, at least from a teacher's
point of view, is that the same resilience can sometimes also serve
non-academic and non-school purposes. How so? Suppose, instead
of two school assignments due on the same day, a student has only
one school assignment due but also holds a part-time evening job
as a server in a local restaurant. Suppose, further, that the student
has high self-efficacy for both of these tasks; he believes, in other
words, that he is capable of completing the assignment as well as
continuing to work at the job. The result of such resilient beliefs can
easily be a student who devotes less attention to school work than
ideal, and who even ends up with a lower grade on the assignment
than he or she is capable of.

Learned Helplessness and Self-Efficacy

If a person's sense of self-efficacy is very low, he or she can
develop learned helplessness, a perception of complete lack of
control in mastering a task. The attitude is similar to depression,
a pervasive feeling of apathy, and a belief that effort makes no
difference and does not lead to success. Learned helplessness was
originally studied from the behaviorist perspective of classical and
operant conditioning by the psychologist Martin Seligman (1995).
The studies used a somewhat "gloomy" experimental procedure in
which an animal, such as a rat or a dog, was repeatedly shocked in a
cage in a way that prevented the animal from escaping the shocks.
In a later phase of the procedure, conditions were changed so that
the animal could avoid the shocks by merely moving from one side

                                                                      Self-Efficacy Theory | 671
of the cage to the other. Yet frequently they did not bother to do so!
Seligman called this behavior learned helplessness.

   In people, learned helplessness leads to characteristic ways of
dealing with problems. They tend to attribute the source of a
problem to themselves, generalize the problem to many aspects of
life, and see the problem as lasting or permanent. More optimistic
individuals, in contrast, are more likely to attribute a problem to
outside sources, to see it as specific to a particular situation or
activity, and to see it as temporary or time-limited. Consider, for
example, two students who each fail a test. The one with a lot of
learned helplessness is more likely to explain the failure by saying
something like: "I'm stupid; I never perform well on any schoolwork,
and I never will perform well at it." The other, more optimistic
student is more likely to say something like: "The teacher made the
test too hard this time, so the test doesn't prove anything about how
I will do next time or in other subjects."

   What is noteworthy about these differences in perception is how
much the more optimistic of these perspectives resembles high
self-efficacy and how much learned helplessness seems to
contradict or differ from it. As already noted, high self-efficacy
is a strong belief in one's capacity to carry out a specific task
successfully. By definition, therefore, self-efficacy focuses attention
on a temporary or time-limited activity (the task), even though
the cause of successful completion (oneself) is "internal." Teachers
can minimize learned helplessness in students, therefore, by
encouraging their self-efficacy beliefs. There are several ways of
doing this, as we explain next.

Sources of Self-Efficacy Beliefs

Psychologists who study self-efficacy have identified four major
sources of self-efficacy beliefs (Pajares & Schunk, 2001, 2002). In
order of importance, they are (1) prior experiences of mastering

672 | Self-Efficacy Theory
tasks, (2) watching others mastering tasks, (3) messages or
"persuasion" from others, and (4) emotions related to stress and
discomfort. Fortunately, the first three can be influenced by
teachers directly, and even the fourth can sometimes be influenced
indirectly by appropriate interpretive comments from the teacher
or others.

Prior Experiences of Mastery

Not surprisingly, past successes at a task increase students' beliefs
that they will succeed again in the future. The implication of this
basic fact means that teachers need to help students build a history
of success. Whether they are math problems, reading assignments,
or athletic activities, tasks have to end with success more often
than with failure. Note, though, that the successes have to represent
mastery that is genuine or competence that is truly authentic.
Success at tasks that are trivial or irrelevant does not improve self-
efficacy beliefs, nor does praise for successes that a student has not
really had (Erikson, 1968/1994).

   As a practical matter, creating a genuine history of success is
most convincing if teachers also work to broaden a student's vision
of "the past." Younger students (elementary-age) in particular have
relatively short or limited ideas of what counts as "past experience";
they may go back only a few occasions when forming impressions
of whether they can succeed again in the future (Eccles, et al., 1998).
Older students (secondary school) gradually develop longer views
of their personal "pasts," both because of improvements in memory
and because of accumulating a personal history that is truly longer.
The challenge for working with any age, however, is to ensure that
students base self-efficacy beliefs on all relevant experiences from
their past, not just on selected or recent experiences.

                                                                     Self-Efficacy Theory | 673
Watching Others' Experiences of Mastery

A second source of efficacy beliefs comes from vicarious experience
of mastery, or observing others' successes (Schunk & Zimmerman,
1997). Simply seeing someone else succeed at a task, in other words,
can contribute to believing that you, too, can succeed. The effect
is stronger when the observer lacks experience with the task and
therefore may be unsure of his or her own ability. It is also stronger
when the model is someone respected by the observer, such as
a student's teacher, or a peer with generally comparable ability.
Even under these conditions, though, vicarious experience is not
as influential as a direct experience. The reasons are not hard to
imagine. Suppose, for example, you witness both your teacher and
a respected friend succeed at singing a favorite tune, but you are
unsure whether you personally can sing. In that case, you may feel
encouraged about your own potential, but are likely still to feel
somewhat uncertain of your own efficacy. If on the other hand you
do not witness others' singing, but you have a history of singing well
yourself, it is a different story. In that case, you are likely to believe
in your efficacy, regardless of how others perform.

   All of which suggests that to a modest extent, teachers may be
able to enhance students' self-efficacy by modeling success at a task
or by pointing out classmates who are successful. These strategies
can work because they not only show how to do a task but also
communicate a more fundamental message, the fact that the
task can in fact be done. If students are learning a difficult
arithmetic procedure, for example, you can help by demonstrating
the procedure, or by pointing out classmates who are doing it. Note,
though, that vicarious mastery is helpful only if backed up with real
successes performed by the students themselves. It is also helpful
only if the "model classmates" is perceived as truly comparable in
ability. Overuse of vicarious models, especially in the absence of
real success by learners, can cause learners to disqualify a model's
success; students may simply decide that the model is "out of their

674 | Self-Efficacy Theory
league" in skills and is therefore irrelevant to judging their own
potential.

Social Messages and Persuasion

A third source of efficacy beliefs is encouragements, both implied
and stated, that persuade a person of his or her capacity to do
a task. Persuasion does not create high efficacy by itself, but it
often increases or supports it when coupled with either direct or
vicarious experience, especially when the persuasion comes from
more than one person (Goddard, Hoy, & Hoy, 2004).

   For teachers, this suggests two things. The first, of course, is that
encouragement can motivate students, especially when it is focused
on achievable, specific tasks. It can be motivating to say things like:
"I think you can do it" or "I've seen you do this before, so I know
that you can do it again." But the second implication is that teachers
should arrange wherever possible to support their encouragement
by designing tasks at hand that is in fact achievable by the student.
Striking a balance of encouragement and task difficulty may seem
straightforward, but sometimes it can be challenging because
students can sometimes perceive teachers' comments and tasks
quite differently from how teachers intend. Giving excessive
amounts of detailed help, for example, may be intended as support
for a student, but be taken as a lack of confidence in the student's
ability to do the task independently.

Emotions Related to Success, Stress, or
Discomfort

The previous three sources of efficacy beliefs are all rather cognitive
or "thinking oriented," but emotions also influence expectations of

                                                                     Self-Efficacy Theory | 675
success or failure. Feeling nervous or anxious just before speaking
to a large group (sometimes even just a class full of students!) can
function like a message that says "I'm not going to succeed at doing
this," even if there is in fact good reason to expect success. But
positive feelings can also raise beliefs about efficacy. When recalling
the excitement of succeeding at a previous, unrelated task, people
may overestimate their chances of success at a new task with which
they have no previous experience, and are therefore in no position
to predict their efficacy.

   For teachers, the most important implication is that students'
motivation can be affected when they generalize from past
experiences that they believe, rightly or wrongly, to be relevant. By
simply announcing a test, for example, a teacher can make some
students anxious even before the students find out anything about
the test-- whether it is easy or difficult, or even comparable in any
way to other experiences called "tests" in their pasts. Conversely,
it can be misleading to encourage students on the basis of their
success at past academic tasks if the earlier tasks were not really
relevant to the requirements of the new tasks at hand. Suppose, for
example, that a middle-years student has previously written only
brief opinion-based papers, and never written a research-based
paper. In that case, boosting the student's confidence by telling him
that "it is just like the papers you wrote before" may not be helpful
or even honest.

A Caution: Motivation as Content versus
Motivation as Process

A caution about self-efficacy theory is its heavy emphasis on just the
process of motivation, at the expense of the content of motivation.
The basic self-efficacy model has much to say about how beliefs
affect behavior, but relatively little to say about which beliefs and
tasks are especially satisfying or lead to the greatest well-being in

676 | Self-Efficacy Theory
students. The answer to this question is important to know since
teachers might then select tasks as much as possible that are
intrinsically satisfying, and not merely achievable.

   Another way of posing this concern is by asking: "Is it possible to
feel high self-efficacy about a task that you do not enjoy?" It does
seem quite possible for such a gap to exist. As a youth, for example,
one of us (Kelvin Seifert) had considerable success with solving
math problems in high school algebra and expended considerable
effort doing algebra assignments as homework. Before long, he had
developed high self-efficacy with regard to solving such problems.
But Kelvin never really enjoyed solving the algebra problems, and
later even turned away permanently from math or science as a
career (much to the disappointment of his teachers and family).
In this case, self-efficacy theory nicely explained the process of
his motivation--Kelvin's belief in his capacity led to persistence in
the tasks. But it did not explain the content of his motivation--his
growing dislike of the tasks. Accounting for such a gap requires a
different theory of motivation, one that includes not only specific
beliefs but "deeper" personal needs as well. An example of this
approach is self-determination theory, where we turn next.
CC licensed content, Original

   Self-Efficacy Theory. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van Hoose.
      Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College. Retrieved
      from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/chapter/
      self-efficacy-theory/. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

                                                                     Self-Efficacy Theory | 677
All rights reserved content
   Self-Efficacy, Locus of Control, and Self-Perception . Provided
      by: PsychExamReview. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/
      lywFMVsZvNE. License: All Rights Reserved

678 | Self-Efficacy Theory
Expectancy-Value Theory

As we have explained in this chapter, motivation is affected by
several factors, including reinforcement for behavior, but especially
also students' goals, interests, and sense of self-efficacy and self-
determination. The factors combine to create two general sources
of motivation: students' expectations of success and the value that
students place on a goal. Viewing motivation in this way is often
called the expectancy-value model of motivation (Wigfield & Eccles,
2002; Wigfield, Tonk, & Eccles, 2004), and sometimes written with
a multiplicative formula: expectancy x value = motivation. The
relationship between expectation and value is "multiplicative" rather
than additive because, in order to be motivated, it is necessary
for a person to have at least a modest expectation of success and
to assign a task at least some positive value. If you have high
expectations of success but do not value a task at all (mentally assign
it a "0" value), then you will not feel motivated at all. Likewise, if you
value a task highly but have no expectation of success in completing
it (assign it a "0" expectancy), then you also will not feel motivated
at all.

                      Figure 6.8.1. Expectancy-value model.
   Task value answers the question, "Why should I do this task?"
There are four possible answers to the question: intrinsic value,
attainment value, utility value, and cost (Wigfield & Eccles,
1992). Intrinsic value is the pure enjoyment a student feels from
performing a task. When they are intrinsically interested in it,
students are willing to become involved in a given task. Attainment
value refers to the importance of doing well on a task. Tasks are

                                                             Expectancy-Value Theory | 679
perceived as important when they reflect the important aspects of
one's self. Utility value is the perception that a task will be useful for
meeting future goals, for instance, taking a Chinese class to get a
job in China. The last component of task value, cost, refers to what
an individual has to give up to engage in a task or the effort needed
to accomplish the task. If the cost is too high, students will be less
likely to engage in a given task. For instance, students may not
decide to take an extra course when they need to reduce the hours
of their part-time job.

   Numerous studies have shown that students' expectancies for
success and subjective task values positively influenced
achievement behaviors and outcomes (Dennissen, Zarret, & Eccles,
2007; Durik, Shechter, Noh, Rozek, & Harackiewicz, 2015; Wigfield
& Eccles, 2000). For example, Bong (2001) reported that college
students' perceived competence was a significant predictor of their
performance. Also, students' perceived utility predicted future
enrollment intentions. These relations have been also found in
online learning environments. Joo, Lim, and Kim (2013) reported
that the perceived competence and task value of students enrolled
in an online university significantly predicted learner satisfaction,
persistence, and achievement.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=95#oembed-1

Video 6.8.1. Expectancy-Value Theory of Achievement Motivation
explains EVT and application of the theory.

680 | Expectancy-Value Theory
Influencing Student Motivation

Ideally, both expectancies and values are high in students on any key
learning task. The reality, however, is that students sometimes do
not expect success, nor do they necessarily value it when success
is possible. How can a teacher respond to low expectations and
low valuing? We have offered a number of suggestions to meet this
challenge throughout this chapter. In brief, raising low expectations
depends on adjusting task difficulty so that success becomes a
reasonable prospect: a teacher must make tasks neither too hard
nor too easy. Reaching this general goal depends in turn on
thoughtful, appropriate planning--selecting reasonable objectives,
adjusting them on the basis of experience, finding supportive
materials, and providing students with help when needed.

   Raising the value of academic tasks is equally important, but the
general strategies for doing so are different than for raising
expectations. Increasing value requires linking the task to students'
personal interests and prior knowledge, showing the utility of the
task to students' future goals, and showing that the task is valuable
to other people whom students respect.

    Influencing Expectancy
          Perceptions

Students may not believe that their effort leads to high performance
for a multitude of reasons. First, they may not have the skills,

                                                              Expectancy-Value Theory | 681
knowledge, or abilities to successfully perform. Supporting students
in acquiring the necessary skills and knowledge can help raise
expectancy. Second, low levels of expectancy may be because
students feel that something other than effort predicts
performance, such as fairness or favoritism. If students believe that
the learning environment is not conducive to performing well
(resources are lacking or teacher's expectations are unclear),
expectancy will also suffer. Therefore, clearing the path to
performance and creating an environment in which students do not
feel restricted will be helpful. Finally, some students may perceive
little connection between their effort and performance level
because they have an external locus of control, low self-esteem, or
other personality traits that condition them to believe that their
effort will not make a difference. In such cases, providing positive
feedback and encouragement may help motivate them.

 Influencing Instrumentality
          Perceptions

Showing students that their performance is rewarded is going to
increase instrumentality perceptions. Therefore, the first step in
influencing instrumentality is to connect rewards to performance.
However, this is not always sufficient, because students may not be
aware of some of the rewards awaiting high performers. Students
may need to be made aware of the payoffs to learning. It is also
important to highlight that performance, not something else, is

682 | Expectancy-Value Theory
being rewarded. A meritless reward system may actually hamper the
motivation of the highest performers by eroding instrumentality.
However, performance-related skill mastery and progress can be
acknowledged and rewarded without a student mastering all skills
or being the best performer.

      Influencing Valence

Students are more likely to be motivated if they find the reward
to be attractive. This process involves teachers finding what their
students value. Desirable rewards tend to be fair and satisfy
different students' diverging needs. Ensuring high valence involves
getting to know students and giving students various rewards to
increase valence.

    Figure 6.8.2. Ways to influence expectancy, instrumentality, and
                                         valence.

CC licensed content, Original
                                                             Expectancy-Value Theory | 683
   Expectancy-Value Theory. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/
      chapter/expectancy-value-theory/%20u200e. License: CC
      BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously
   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution
   Foundations of Learning and Instructional Design Technology .
      Authored by: Richard E. West. Retrieved from:
      https://lidtfoundations.pressbooks.com/chapter/motivation-
      in-lidt-by-seungwon-park/. License: CC BY: Attribution
   An introduction to Organizational Behavior. Authored by: Talya
      Baur and Berrin Erdogan. Retrieved from:
      https://2012books.lardbucket.org/books/an-introduction-to-
      organizational-behavior-v1.1/s09-theories-of-motivation.html.
      License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

684 | Expectancy-Value Theory
Self-Determination Theory

Pintrich (1991) believes that both attribution and self-efficacy theory
make motivation appear too cognitive, too abstract, and too devoid
of energy and passion. Similarly, Deci and his colleagues (1991) argue
that most current approaches to motivation fail to deal with the
question of why learners desire certain goals or outcomes. For
example, Deci believes that attribution and self-efficacy theory
emphasize too strongly the role of beliefs when accounting for
intrinsic motivation. He questions how these theories account for
the needs of learners to feel competent and independent. He claims
that such theories make the motivational process appear too
rational, too cold, and too isolated from the day-to-day emotions
and feelings that characterize the classroom behavior of children.

   Deci offers an alternative, self-determination theory. He contends
that this theory reintroduces a component of motivation that has
long been neglected by most modern cognitive motivational
theories: human needs. Moreover, it does so while still assigning a
critical role to the learners' thought processes. Let's examine the
self-determination perspective and see how it can be
applied. Human Needs. In our presentation of attribution theory,
we pointed out that a learner's intrinsic motivation for a particular
task depended on her beliefs about what was responsible for past
successes or failures. We outlined teaching practices that lead
learners to believe that success results from factors under their
control.

   Self-efficacy theory tells us that learners' intrinsic motivation for
a task rests with their beliefs about whether they are good at it and
can achieve its goals. We learned about instructional practices that
promote positive self-efficacy beliefs. Self-determination theory is
more complex. It tells us that underlying intrinsic motivation is an
attitude of self-determination to accomplish a goal. This attitude is
more than just a belief in one's self-efficacy, although that is a

                                                           Self-Determination Theory | 685
component of self-determination. Likewise, self-determination
involves more than beliefs about the causes of success or failure.
Rather, self-determination theory focuses on three innate human
needs: competence, relationships, and autonomy.

   Competence needs involve the learner's knowledge of how to
achieve certain goals and the skill for doing so. Deci believes that
learners have an innate psychological need to believe that they are
competent. Relationship needs are innate requirements for secure
and satisfying connections with peers, teachers, and parents.
Finally, autonomy needs refer to the ability to initiate and regulate
one's own actions.

   Note that these needs are all psychological, not physical; hunger
and sex, for example, are not on the list. They are also about
personal growth or development, not about deficits that a person
tries to reduce or eliminate. Unlike food (in behaviorism) or safety
(in Maslow's hierarchy), you can never get enough autonomy,
competence, or relatedness. You (and your students) will seek to
enhance these continually throughout life.

   The key idea of self-determination theory is that when persons
(such as you or one of your students) feel that these basic needs
are reasonably well met, they tend to perceive their actions and
choices to be intrinsically motivated or "self-determined." In that
case, they can turn their attention to a variety of activities that they
find attractive or important, but that does not relate directly to their
basic needs. Among your students, for example, some individuals
might read books that you have suggested, and others might listen
attentively when you explain key concepts from the unit that you
happen to be teaching. If one or more basic needs are not met well,
however, people will tend to feel coerced by outside pressures or
external incentives. They may become preoccupied, in fact, with
satisfying whatever need has not been met and thus exclude or
avoid activities that might otherwise be interesting, educational, or
important. If the persons are students, their learning will suffer.

686 | Self-Determination Theory
                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=96#oembed-1

Video 6.9.1. Motivation: What Moves Us and Why? explains the
principles of self-determination theory.

Self-Determination and Intrinsic Motivation

In proposing the importance of needs, then, self-determination
theory is asserting the importance of intrinsic motivation. The self-
determination version of intrinsic motivation, however, emphasizes
a person's perception of freedom, rather than the presence or
absence of "real" constraints on action. Self-determination means a
person feels free, even if the person is also operating within certain
external constraints. In principle, a student can experience self-
determination even if the student must, for example, live within
externally imposed rules of appropriate classroom behavior. To
achieve a feeling of self-determination, however, the student's basic
needs must be met--needs for autonomy, competence, and
relatedness. In motivating students, then, the bottom line is that
teachers have an interest in helping students to meet their basic
needs, and in not letting school rules or the teachers' own
leadership styles interfere with or block satisfaction of students'
basic needs.

   "Pure" self-determination may be ideal for most teachers and
students, of course, but the reality is usually different. For a variety
of reasons, teachers in most classrooms cannot be expected to meet
all students' basic needs at all times. One reason is the sheer number

                                                            Self-Determination Theory | 687
of students, which makes it impossible to attend to every student
perfectly at all times. Another reason is teachers' responsibility for
a curriculum, which can require creating expectations for students'
activities that sometimes conflict with students' autonomy or makes
them feel (temporarily) less than fully competent. Still, another
reason is students' personal histories, ranging from divorce to
poverty, which may create needs in some individuals which are
beyond the power of teachers to remedy.

   The result from students' point of view is usually only a partial
perception of self-determination, and therefore a simultaneous mix
of intrinsic and extrinsic motivations. Self-determination theory
recognizes this reality by suggesting that the "intrinsic-ness" of
motivation is really a matter of degree, extending from
highly extrinsic, through various mixtures of intrinsic and extrinsic,
to highly intrinsic (Koestner & Losier, 2004). At the extrinsic end of
the scale is learning that is regulated primarily by external rewards
and constraints, whereas at the intrinsic end is learning regulated
primarily by learners themselves. Table 1 summarizes and gives
examples of the various levels and their effects on motivation. By
assuming that motivation is often a mix of the intrinsic and
extrinsic, the job of the teacher becomes more realistic; the job
is not to expect purely intrinsic motivation from students all the
time, but simply to arrange and encourage motivations that are
as intrinsic as possible. To do this, the teacher needs to support
students' basic needs for autonomy, competence, and relatedness.

688 | Self-Determination Theory
Table 6.9.1. Combinations of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation

Source of   Description             Example
regulation
of action

"Pure"      Person lacks the        Student completes no work even
extrinsic   intention to take any   when pressured or when incentives
motivation  action, regardless of   are offered
            pressures or
            incentives

Very        Actions regulated       Student completes
external    only by outside         assignment only if reminded
to person   pressures and           explicitly of the incentive of grades
            incentives, and         and/or negative consequences of
            controls                failing

Somewhat    Specific actions        Student completes assignment
external    regulated internally,   independently, but only because of
            but without             fear of shaming self or because of
            reflection or           guilt about consequences of not
            connection to           completing assignment
            personal needs

Somewhat    Actions recognized      Student generally completes school
internal    by individual as        work independently, but only
            important or as         because of its value in
            valuable as a means     gaining admission to college
            to a more valued
            goal

Very        Actions adopted by      Student generally completes school
internal    individual as integral  work independently, because being
            to self-concept and     well educated is part of the student's
            to person's major       concept of himself
            personal values

"Pure"      Actions practiced       Student enjoys every topic, concept,
intrinsic   solely because they     and assignment that every teacher
regulation  are enjoyable and       ever assigns, and completes school
            valued for their own    work solely because of his enjoyment
            sake

Using Self-Determination Theory in the
Classroom

What are some teaching strategies for supporting students' needs?

                                                           Self-Determination Theory | 689
Educational researchers have studied this question from a variety
of directions, and their resulting recommendations converge and
overlap in a number of ways. For convenience, the
recommendations can be grouped according to the basic need that
they address, beginning with the need for autonomy.

Supporting Autonomy in Learners

A major part of supporting autonomy is to give
students choices wherever possible (Ryan & Lynch, 2003). The
choices that encourage the greatest feelings of self-control,
obviously, are ones that are about relatively major issues or that
have relatively significant consequences for students, such as whom
to choose as partners for a major group project. But choices also
encourage some feeling of self-control even when they are about
relatively minor issues, such as how to organize your desk or what
kind of folder to use for storing your papers at school. It is
important, furthermore, to offer choices to all students, including
students needing explicit directions in order to work successfully;
avoid reserving choices for only the best students or giving up
offering choices altogether to students who fall behind or who need
extra help. All students will feel more self-determined and therefore
more motivated if they have choices of some sort.

   Teachers can also support students' autonomy more directly by
minimizing external rewards (like grades) and comparisons among
students' performance, and by orienting and responding themselves
to students' expressed goals and interests. In teaching elementary
students about climate change, for example, you can support
autonomy by exploring which aspects of this topic have already
come to students' attention and aroused their concern. The point of
the discussion would not be to find out "who knows the most" about
this topic but to build and enhance students' intrinsic motivations
as much as possible. In reality, of course, it may not be possible

690 | Self-Determination Theory
to succeed at this goal fully--some students may simply have no
interest in the topic, for example, or you may be constrained by time
or resources from individualizing certain activities fully. But any
degree of attention to students' individuality, as well as any degree
of choice, will support students' autonomy.

Supporting the Need for Competence

The most obvious way to make students feel competent is by
selecting activities that are challenging but nonetheless achievable
with reasonable effort and assistance (Elliott, McGregor, & Thrash,
2004). Although few teachers would disagree with this idea, there
are times when it is hard to put into practice, such as when you first
meet a class at the start of a school year and therefore are unfamiliar
with their backgrounds and interests. But there are some strategies
that are generally effective even if you are not yet in a position to
know the students well. One is to emphasize activities that require
an active response from students. Sometimes this simply means
selecting projects, experiments, discussions, and the like that
require students to do more than simply listen. Other times it means
expecting active responses in all interactions with students, such as
by asking questions that call for "divergent" (multiple or elaborated)
answers. In a social studies class, for example, try asking "What are
some ways we could find out more about our community?" instead
of "Tell me the three best ways to find out about our community."
The first question invites more divergent, elaborate answers than
the second.

   Another generally effective way to support competence is to
respond and give feedback as immediately as possible. Tests and
term papers help subsequent learning more if returned, with
comments, sooner rather than later. Discussions teach more if you
include your own ideas in them, while still encouraging students'
input. Small group and independent activities are more effective if

                                                            Self-Determination Theory | 691
you provide a convenient way for students to consult authoritative
sources for guidance when needed, whether the source is you
personally, a teaching assistant, a specially selected reading, or even
a computer program. In addition, you can sometimes devise tasks
that create a feeling of competence because they have a "natural"
solution or ending point. Assembling a jigsaw puzzle of the
community, for example, has this quality, and so does creating a
jigsaw puzzle of the community if the students need a greater
challenge.

Supporting the Need to Relate to Others

The main way to support students' need to relate to others is to
arrange activities in which students work together in ways that
are mutually supportive, recognize students' diversity, and minimize
competition among individuals. There is a lot more to say about
this strategy--including the discussion of several varieties of
cooperative learning and some of their pitfalls to be avoided. For
now, simply note that having students work together can happen in
many ways. You can, for example, deliberately arrange projects that
require a variety of talents; some educators call such activities "rich
group work" (Cohen, 1994; Cohen, Brody, & Sapon-Shevin, 2004). In
studying in small groups about medieval society, for example, one
student can contribute his drawing skills, another can contribute his
writing skills, and still, another can contribute his dramatic skills.
The result can be a multi-faceted presentation--written, visual, and
oral. The groups needed for rich group work provide for students'
relationships with each other, whether they contain six individuals
or only two.

   There are other ways to encourage relationships among students.
In the jigsaw classroom (Aronson & Patnoe, 1997), for example,
students work together in two phases. In the first phase, groups of
"experts" work together to find information on a specialized topic.

692 | Self-Determination Theory
In a second phase, the expert groups split up and reform into
"generalist" groups containing one representative from each former
expert group. In studying the animals of Africa, for example, each
expert group might find information about a different particular
category of animal or plant; one group might focus on mammals,
another on birds, a third on reptiles, and so on. In the second phase
of the jigsaw, the generalist groups would pool information from the
experts to get a more well-rounded view of the topic. The generalist
groups would each have an expert on mammals, for example, but
also an expert on birds and about reptiles.

   As a teacher, you can add to these organizational strategies by
encouraging the development of your own relationships with class
members. Your goal, as a teacher, is to demonstrate caring and
interest in your students not just as students, but as people. The
goal also involves behaving as if good relationships between and
among class members are not only possible but ready to develop
and perhaps even already developing. A simple tactic, for example, is
to speak of "we" and "us" as much as possible, rather than speaking
of "you students." Another tactic is to present cooperative activities
and assignments without apology, as if they are in the best interests
not just of students, but of "us all" in the classroom, yourself
included.

Keeping Self-Determination in Perspective

In certain ways, self-determination theory provides a sensible way
to think about students' intrinsic motivation and therefore think
about how to get them to manage their own learning. A particular
strength of the theory is that it recognizes degrees of self-
determination and bases many ideas on this reality. Most people
recognize combinations of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation
guiding particular activities in their own lives. We might enjoy
teaching, for example, but also do this job partly to receive a

                                                           Self-Determination Theory | 693
paycheck. To its credit, self-determination theory also relies on
a list of basic human needs--autonomy, competence, and
relatedness--that relate comfortably with some of the larger
purposes of education.

   Although these are positive features for understanding and
influencing students' classroom motivation, some educators and
psychologists nonetheless have lingering questions about the
limitations of self-determination theory. One is whether merely
providing choices actually improves students' learning, or simply
improves their satisfaction with learning. There is evidence
supporting both possibilities (Flowerday & Schraw, 2003; Deci &
Ryan, 2003), and it is likely that there are teachers whose classroom
experience supports both possibilities as well. Another question is
whether it is possible to overdo attention to students' needs--and
again there is evidence for both favoring and contradicting this
possibility. Too many choices can actually make anyone (not just
a student) frustrated and dissatisfied with a choice the person
actually does make (Schwartz, 2004). Furthermore, differentiating
activities to students' competence levels may be impractical if
students are functioning at extremely diverse levels within a single
class, as sometimes happens. Differentiating may be inappropriate,
too, if it holds a teacher back from covering key curriculum
objectives which students need and which at least some students
are able to learn. These are serious concerns, though in our
opinion not serious enough to give up offering choices to students
or to stop differentiating instruction altogether.
CC licensed content, Original

   Self-Determination Theory. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and

694 | Self-Determination Theory
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution
   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Bohlin. License: CC BY:
      Attribution
CC licensed content, Specific attribution
   Motivation: What Moves Us and Why?. Authored by: RoninOwl.
      Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/pQX_YRu744I?t=7. License:
      CC BY: Attribution

                                                           Self-Determination Theory | 695
Goal Orientation Theory

Goal setting is a key motivational process (Locke & Latham, 1984).
Goals are the outcome that a person is trying to accomplish. People
engage in activities that are believed to lead to goal attainment. As
learners pursue multiple goals such as academic goals and social
goals, goal choice and the level at which learners commit to
attaining the goals influence their motivation to learn (Locke &
Latham, 2006; Wentzel, 2000).

   Besides goal content (i.e., what a person wants to achieve), the
reason that a person tries to achieve a certain goal also has a
significant influence on learning and performance. Goal
orientations refer to the reasons or purposes for engaging in
learning activities and explain individuals' different ways of
approaching and responding to achievement situations (Ames &
Archer, 1988; Meece, Anderman, & Anderman, 2006). The two most
basic goal orientations are mastery and performance goals (Ames
& Archer, 1988). Different researchers refer to these goals with the
following terms: learning and performance goals (Elliot & Dweck,
1988), task-involved and ego-involved goals (Nicholls, 1984), and
task-focused and ability-focused goals (Maehr & Midgley, 1991). A
mastery goal orientation is defined as a focus on mastering new
skills, trying to gain increased understanding, and improving
competence (Ames & Archer, 1988). Students adopting mastery
goals define success in terms of improvement and learning. In
contrast, a performance goal orientation focuses on doing better
than others and demonstrating competence, for example, by
striving to best others, using social comparative standards to make
judgments about their abilities while seeking favorable judgment
from others (Dweck & Leggett, 1988).

   In addition to the basic distinction between mastery and
performance goals, performance goal orientations have been
further differentiated into performance-approach and

696 | Goal Orientation Theory
performance-avoidance goals (Elliot & Church, 1997; Elliot &
Harackiewicz, 1996). Performance-approach goals represent
individuals motivated to outperform others and demonstrate their
superiority, whereas a performance-avoidance goal orientation
refers to those who are motivated to avoid negative judgments and
appear inferior to others. Incorporating the same approach and
avoidance distinction, some researchers have further distinguished
mastery-approach and mastery-avoidance goals (Elliot & McGregor,
2001). Mastery-approach goals are related to attempts to improve
knowledge, skills, and learning. In contrast, mastery-avoidance
goals represent a focus on avoiding misunderstanding or the failure
to master a task. For instance, athletes who are concerned about
falling short of their past performances reflect a mastery-avoidance
goal. Despite the confirmatory factor analyses of the 22 goal
framework (Elliot & McGregor, 2001; see Table 6.11.1), the mastery-
avoidance construct remains controversial and is in fact the least
accepted construct in the field.

   Table 6.11.1. Model of goal orientations

           Mastery Goal                 Performance Goal

           Focus on mastery of          Focus on outperforming others
           learning

Approach    Learn from errors           Errors indicative of failure
Focus       Judge performance           Judge performance based

               based on standards of        on normative standards of
               self-improvement             being the best performer
               and progress

Avoidance  Focus on avoiding not        Focus on avoiding failure
Focus      mastering task
                                          Errors indicative of failure
             Errors indicative of        Judge performance based
                 failure
                                              on normative standards of
             Judge performance               not being the worst
                 based on standards of        performer
                 not being wrong

                                        Goal Orientation Theory | 697
Studies typically report that mastery-approach goals are associated
with positive achievement outcomes such as high levels of effort,
interest in the task, and use of deep learning strategies (e.g., Greene,
Miller, Crowson, Duke, & Akey, 2004; Harackiewicz, Barron, Pintrich,
Elliot, & Thrash, 2002; Wolters, 2004). On the other hand, research
on performance-avoidance goals has consistently reported that
these goals induced detrimental effects, such as poor persistence,
high anxiety, use of superficial strategies, and low achievement
(Linnenbrink, 2005; Urdan, 2004; Wolters, 2003, 2004). With regard
to performance-approach goals, the data have yielded a mix of
outcomes. Some studies have reported modest positive relations
between performance-approach goals and achievement
(Linnenbrink-Garcia, Tyson, & Patall, 2008). Others have found
maladaptive outcomes such as poor strategy use and test anxiety
(Keys, Conley, Duncan, & Domina, 2012; Elliot & McGregor, 2001;
Middleton & Midgley, 1997). Taken together, these findings suggest
that students who adopt performance-approach goals demonstrate
high levels of achievement but experience negative emotionality
such as test anxiety. Mastery-avoidance goals are the least studied
goal orientation thus far. However, some studies have found
mastery-avoidance to be a positive predictor of anxiety and a
negative predictor of performance (Howell & Watson, 2007;
Hulleman, Schrager, Bodmann, & Harackiewicz, 2010).

698 | Goal Orientation Theory
    Figure 6.11.1. The likelihood of goal success is influenced by the
   goal orientation. Mastery-approach goals are most likely to be
    successful, and performance-avoidance goals are least likely.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=97#oembed-1

Video 6.11.1. Goal Orientation Theory explains the four goal
orientations and their implications for teaching.

Goals that Contribute to Achievement

What kinds of achievement goals do students hold? Imagine three
individuals, Maria, Sara, and Lindsay, who are taking algebra
together. Maria's main concern is to learn the material as well as
possible because she finds it interesting and because she believes
it will be useful to her in later courses, perhaps at university. Hers
is a mastery goal because she wants primarily to learn or master
the material. Sara, however, is concerned less about algebra than
about getting top marks on the exams and in the course. Hers is
a performance goal because she is focused primarily on looking
successful; learning algebra is merely a vehicle for performing well
in the eyes of peers and teachers. Lindsay, for her part, is primarily
concerned about avoiding a poor or failing mark. Hers is a
performance-avoidance goal or failure-avoidance goal because she
is not really as concerned about learning algebra, as Maria is, or
about competitive success, as Sara is; she is simply intending to
avoid failure.

                                                               Goal Orientation Theory | 699
   As you might imagine, mastery, performance, and performance-
avoidance goals often are not experienced in pure form, but in
combinations. If you play the clarinet in the school band, you might
want to improve your technique simply because you enjoy playing
as well as possible--essentially a mastery orientation. But you might
also want to look talented in the eyes of classmates--a performance
orientation. Another part of what you may wish, at least privately, is
to avoid looking like a complete failure at playing the clarinet. One
of these motives may predominate over the others, but they all may
be present.

   Mastery goals tend to be associated with the enjoyment of
learning the material at hand, and in this sense represent an
outcome that teachers often seek for students. By definition
therefore they are a form of intrinsic motivation. As such mastery
goals have been found to be better than performance goals at
sustaining students' interest in a subject. In one review of research
about learning goals, for example, students with primarily mastery
orientations toward a course they were taking not only tended to
express greater interest in the course, but also continued to express
interest well beyond the official end of the course, and to enroll
in further courses in the same subject (Harackiewicz, et al., 2002;
Wolters, 2004).

   Performance goals, on the other hand, imply extrinsic
motivation and tend to show the mixed effects of this orientation.
A positive effect is that students with a performance orientation
do tend to get higher grades than those who express primarily a
mastery orientation. The advantage in grades occurs both in the
short term (with individual assignments) and in the long term (with
overall grade point average when graduating). But there is evidence
that performance-oriented students do not actually learn the
material as deeply or permanently as students who are more
mastery-oriented (Midgley, Kaplan, & Middleton, 2001). A possible
reason is that measures of performance--such as test scores--often
reward relatively shallow memorization of information and
therefore guide performance-oriented students away from

700 | Goal Orientation Theory
processing the information thoughtfully or deeply. Another possible
reason is that a performance orientation, by focusing on gaining
recognition as the best among peers, encourages competition
among peers. Giving and receiving help from classmates is thus
not in the self-interest of a performance-oriented student, and the
resulting isolation limits the student's learning.

Goals that Affect Achievement Indirectly

Failure-Avoidant Goals

As we mentioned, failure-avoidant goals by nature undermine
academic achievement. Often they are a negative byproduct of the
competitiveness of performance goals (Urdan, 2004). If a teacher
(and sometimes also fellow students) put too much emphasis on
being the best in the class, and if interest in learning the material as
such therefore suffers, then some students may decide that success
is beyond their reach or may not be desirable in any case. The
alternative--simply avoiding failure--may seem wiser as well as
more feasible. Once a student adopts this attitude, he or she may
underachieve more or less deliberately, doing only the minimum
work necessary to avoid looking foolish or to avoid serious conflict
with the teacher. Avoiding failure in this way is an example of self-
handicapping--deliberate actions and choices that reduce the
chances of success. Students may self-handicap in a number of
ways; in addition to not working hard, they may procrastinate about
completing assignments, for example, or set goals that are
unrealistically high.

                                                                Goal Orientation Theory | 701
Social Goals

Most students need and value relationships, both with classmates
and with teachers, and often (though not always) they get a good
deal of positive support from the relationships. But the effects of
social relationships are complex, and at times can work both for and
against academic achievement. If a relationship with the teacher
is important and reasonably positive, then the student is likely to
try to please the teacher by working hard on assignments (Dowson
& McInerney, 2003). Note, though, that this effect is closer to
performance than mastery; the student is primarily concerned
about looking good to someone else. If, on the other hand, a student
is especially concerned about relationships with peers, the effects
on achievement depend on the student's motives for the
relationship, as well as on peers' attitudes. Desiring to be close to
peers personally may lead a student to ask for help from, and give
help to peers--a behavior that may support higher achievement,
at least up to a point. But desiring to impress peers with skills
and knowledge may lead to the opposite: as we already mentioned,
the competitive edge of such a performance orientation may keep
the student from collaborating, and in this indirect way reduce
a student's opportunities to learn. The abilities and achievement
motivation of peers themselves can also make a difference, but once
again the effects vary depending on the context. Low achievement
and motivation by peers affect an individual's academic motivation
more in elementary school than in high school, more in learning
mathematics than learning to read, and more if there is a wide
range of abilities in a classroom than if there is a more narrow range
(Burke & Sass, 2006).

   In spite of these complexities, social relationships are valued so
highly by most students that teachers should generally facilitate
them, though also keep an eye on their nature and their consequent
effects on achievement. As we explain further, many assignments
can be accomplished productively in groups, for example, as long

702 | Goal Orientation Theory
as the groups are formed thoughtfully; in that chapter, we discuss
some ways of ensuring that such groups are successful, such as
by choosing group tasks wisely and recognizing all members'
contributions as fully as possible. Relationships can also be
supported with activities that involve students or adults from
another class or from outside the school, as often happens with
school or community service projects. These can provide
considerable social satisfaction and can sometimes be connected
to current curriculum needs (Butin, 2005). But the majority of
students' social contacts are likely always to come from students'
own initiatives with each other in simply taking time to talk and
interact. The teacher's job is to encourage these informal contacts,
especially when they happen at times that support rather than
interfere with learning.

Encouraging Mastery Goals

Even though a degree of performance orientation may be inevitable
in school because of the mere presence of classmates, it does not
have to take over students' academic motivation completely.
Teachers can encourage mastery goals in various ways, and should
in fact do so because a mastery orientation leads to more sustained,
thoughtful learning, at least in classrooms, where classmates may
sometimes debate and disagree with each other (Darnon, Butera, &
Harackiewicz, 2006).

   How can teachers do so? One way is to allow students to choose
specific tasks or assignments for themselves, where possible,
because their choices are more likely than usual to reflect prior
personal interests, and hence be motivated more intrinsically than
usual. The limitation of this strategy, of course, is that students may
not see some of the connections between their prior interests and
the curriculum topics at hand. In that case, it also helps for the
teacher to look for and point out the relevance of current topics

                                                               Goal Orientation Theory | 703
or skills to students' personal interests and goals. Suppose, for
example, that a student enjoys the latest styles of music. This
interest may actually have connections with a wide range of school
curricula, such as:

   biology (because of the physiology of the ear and of hearing)
   physics or general science (because of the nature of musical

      acoustics)
   history (because of changes in musical styles over time)
   English (because of relationships between musical lyrics and

      themes with literary themes)
   foreign languages (because of comparisons of music and songs

      among cultures)

Still another way to encourage mastery orientation is to focus on
students' individual efforts and improvement as much as possible,
rather than on comparing students' successes to each other. You
can encourage this orientation by giving students detailed feedback
about how they can improve performance, or by arranging for
students to collaborate on specific tasks and projects rather than
to compete about them, and in general by showing your own
enthusiasm for the subject at hand.
CC licensed content, Original

   Goal Orientation Theory. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/
      chapter/goal-orientation-theory/. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/

704 | Goal Orientation Theory
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution
   Motivational Theories and Instructional Design Technology .

      Authored by: S. Won Park. Retrieved from:
      https://lidtfoundations.pressbooks.com/chapter/motivation-
      in-lidt-by-seungwon-park/. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Specific attribution
   Goal Orientation Theory. Authored by: Shanda Lamonde and
      Meaghan Muller. Provided by: McGill University. Retrieved
      from: https://youtu.be/BZt8htsrf2k. License: All Rights
      Reserved

                                                               Goal Orientation Theory | 705
Student Orientation Toward
Achievement

The distinction between the orientations of approaching success
and avoiding failure is important in understanding students'
motivation. Students' tendencies to approach success and avoid
failures allow us to understand the motivation of four different
types of students. Imagine a student's attempts to approach success
falls along a spectrum, with some students highly motivated to
achieve success and other students not very motivated. Similarly,
avoiding failure is also a spectrum, with students either being highly
motivated to avoid failure or not.

   Figure 6.11.1. Student motivation orientation. Source: Bohlin, 2011.
   Success-oriented students are highly motivated to achieve
success and are less concerned with avoiding failure. These
students are intrinsically motivated and desire to achieve mastery of
goals. Success-orientated students define success as being the best
they can be, regardless of the achievements of others. This group
706 | Student Orientation Toward
Achievement
of students differs from the other three groups in that the other
defines success as doing better than others.

   Like success-oriented students, overstrivers are driven to
achieve success, but unlike success-oriented students, they fear
failure. These students are motivated to prove themselves by
outperforming others. To maximize their likelihood of success over
their peers they may employ several strategies (Covington, 1984;
Stipek, 2002):

 1. Select easy tasks to guarantee success with little learning.
2. Maintaining low expectations and aspirations allows students

      to set the bar low and perceive success when they perform
      better than anticipated. This strategy gives the impression that
      with minimal effort the student has high ability.
3. Rehearsed responses involve anticipating which tasks the
      student will need to perform and practicing the correct
      response to give the impression that the student has higher
      ability.
4. Excessive attention to detail and effort. Overstrivers doubt
      their abilities and attribute their success to effort, such as
      being overprepared or showing excessive attention to detail.
      This often involves requiring frequent feedback and check-ins
      with the teacher.
5. Cheating might be employed as a measure to ensure success
      and avoid failure. This may be a choice they make over asking
      for assistance, which they might consider the admission of
      inability.

Failure-avoiding students are highly motivated to avoid failure but,
unlike overstrivers, they do not have high expectations for success.
Failure-avoiding students are not only trying to avoid failure but
the negative outcomes associated with that failure, such as anxiety
or criticism. Instead of learning to be proud of their successes,
they learn to internalize the relief of avoiding failure (Covington
& Meller, 2001). To avoid appearing incompetent, they use self-

                                       Student Orientation Toward Achievement | 707
handicapping strategies that often interfere with learning
(Covington, 1984; Covington & Beery, 1976):

 1. Minimize, avoid, or withdraw from participation.
2. Make excuses for their lack of performance or effort.
3. Procrastinate in completing tasks.
4. Setting unattainable goals or selecting very difficult tasks that

      make success unlikely.
5. Not trying to perform or giving others the impression that they

      didn't really try.

Low-achieving students tend to use more self-handicapping
strategies than students who are doing well academically (Leondari
& Gonida, 2007). For failure-avoiding students, self-handicapping
strategies allow them to attribute failure to causes other than their
lack of ability. Students may feel inept if they realize that they must
put a great deal of effort into something that others do easily. Also,
when students do put forth effort but still fail, this highlights their
low ability. However, when a student fails due to a lack of effort, they
can avoid acknowledging a lack of ability.

   While choosing to not put forth effort might save students from
acknowledging their inabilities, it creates a secondary problem.
Because teachers tend to value effort, students who do not put forth
effort are risking negative consequences (Urdan et al., 1998; Weiner,
1994). When students do not complete tasks or do not put forth an
effort, teachers may criticize or even punish this behavior. Students
may feel stuck between choosing negative consequences for not
trying or risk trying and failing.

   Unlike the other three types of students, failure-accepting
students are not motivated toward success nor away from failure.
These students have experienced significant failure and as a result,
they accept failure. Failure-accepting students do not take credit
for any successes that they do experience and believe that success
is determined by external, uncontrollable factors; however, they do

708 | Student Orientation Toward Achievement
blame themselves for their failures. Each failure is a confirmation of
their lack of ability (Covington, 1984).

   Failure-accepting students also experience learned helplessness
and are not motivated to learn because they do not believe that
they have control over success or failure. Due to their external
locus of control, these students are the most difficult to motivate.
Positive reinforcement for successes does not work and convincing
them that they could succeed in the future is difficult (Ames, 1990;
Covington & Omelich, 1985).

   In an effort to maintain positive self-worth, failure-avoiding and
failure-accepting students may discount the importance of school
altogether (Harter, Whitesell, & Junkin, 1998). Some students may
shift their efforts to developing abilities in other areas, such as
sports, creative endeavors, or trade skills. Others may turn to
delinquent behavior (Stipek, 2002). It
It is important for teachers to identify students with failure-
avoiding or failure-accepting orientations so they may help them
develop more positive mastery behaviors.
CC licensed content, Original

   Student Orientation Toward Achievement. Authored by: Nicole
      Arduini-Van Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community
      College. Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      edpsy/chapter/students-orientation/. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

                                       Student Orientation Toward Achievement | 709
Keller's ARCS Model:
Integrating Ideas About
Motivation

The shared attributes of the different motivational concepts
constitute the acronym ARCS, attention, relevance, confidence,
and satisfaction, representing Keller's four categories of learner
motivation (Keller, 2010). The ARCS model describes strategies for
stimulating and sustaining motivation in each of the four categories
as well as a systematic process of motivational design.

                            Figure 6.12.1. The ARCs Model
   The first category, attention, is related to stimulating and
maintaining learners' interests. The learner's attention is required
710 | Keller's ARCS Model:
Integrating Ideas About Motivation
before any learning can take place. This attention should also be
sustained in order to keep learners focused and engaged. Keller
(2010) describes three categories of attention-getting strategies:
perceptual arousal, inquiry arousal, and variability. Perceptual
arousal refers to capturing interest by arousing learners' senses and
emotions. This construct is conceptually similar to triggered
situational interest in Hidi and Renninger's (2006) development of
interest. Likewise, perceptual arousal is usually transitory. One of
the most common ways to provoke perceptual arousal is making
an unexpected change in the environment. Example tactics include
a change in light, a sudden pause, and presenting a video after
text-based information in an online learning environment. Inquiry
arousal, similar to the construct of maintained situational interest,
refers to a cognitive level of curiosity. Students are cognitively
attracted to learning materials, for instance, when they contain
paradoxical facts. Variability concerns variation in instructional
methods. No matter how effective motivational tactics are, they lose
their potency when used unvaryingly.

   The second category, relevance, refers to making the learning
experience personally relevant or meaningful. According to the goal
theory, students engage in learning activities that help to attain
their goals (Locke & Latham, 1984). Also, as described in expectancy-
value theory and self-determination theory, the perceived value
of the task is a critical antecedent of motivation (Deci & Ryan,
2000; Wigfield & Eccles, 1992). One way to establish the perceived
relevance of the learning materials is to use authentic or real-world
examples and assignments. Simply relating the instruction to what
is familiar to learners (e.g., prior knowledge) can also help learners
to perceive its relevance.

   The confidence category is pertinent to self-efficacy and
expectancies for the success of the expectancy-value theory.
According to self-determination theory, the feeling of competence
is one of the basic human needs (Ryan & Deci, 2000). If the learners'
need for competence is not satisfied during learning, they would
develop low expectancies for success and demonstrate low self-

                    Keller's ARCS Model: Integrating Ideas About Motivation | 711
efficacy, which results in poor motivation to learn (Bandura, 1997;
Wigfield & Eccles, 2000). Strategies to enhance self-efficacy, such
as the experience of success, can be applied in order to build
confidence in instruction. Another way to enhance confidence is to
foster learners' belief that they have control over their performance.
Autonomy support such as providing choices and making internal,
controllable attributions are a few examples.

   The last category, satisfaction, concerns learners' continued
motivation to learn. If they experience satisfying outcomes,
students are likely to develop a persistent desire to learn (Skinner,
1963). Satisfying or positive consequences of instruction can result
from both extrinsic and intrinsic matters (Ryan & Deci, 2000). High
grades, certificates, and other tangible rewards are the most
common extrinsic outcomes. However, these extrinsic rewards may
not always result in feelings of satisfaction. For example, a student
is not pleased with the high score that he or she received on a
final exam because the test was extremely easy and most students
did well. If the extrinsic rewards fail to fulfill learners' inner needs,
students won't be satisfied. Such intrinsic consequences that lead
to satisfaction include a feeling of mastery and the pleasure of
accomplishing a challenging task.

712 | Keller's ARCS Model: Integrating Ideas About Motivation
Attention             Relevance             Confidence            Satisfaction

Perceptual arousal    Goal orientation      Learning              Intrinsic
Provide novelty and                         requirements          reinforcement
surprise              Present objectives
                      and useful purpose    Inform students       Encourage and
Inquiry arousal       of instruction and    about learning and    support intrinsic
Stimulate curiosity   specific methods for  performance           enjoyment of the
by posing questions   successful            requirements and      learning experience
or problems to solve  achievement           assessment criteria
                                                                  Extrinsic rewards
Variability           Motive matching       Successful
Incorporate a range                         opportunities         Provide positive
of methods and        Match objectives to                         reinforcement and
media to meet         student needs and     Provide challenging   motivational
students' varying     motives               and meaningful        feedback
needs                                       opportunities for
                      Familiarity           successful learning   Equity

                      Present content in    Personal              Maintain consistent
                      ways that are         responsibility        standards and
                      understandable and                          consequences for
                      that related to the   Link learning         success
                      learners'             success to students'
                      experiences and       personal effort and
                      values                ability

      Source: Nicoguaro [CC BY 4.0], from Wikimedia Commons.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=99#oembed-1

Video 6.12.1. Student Motivation: The ARCS Model explains the
components of the model and its implications for teachers.

   Besides identifying the four major categories of motivational
design, the ARCS model describes 10 steps for a systematic process
of motivational design (Keller, 2010). The first four steps are the
analysis process. This includes the acquisition of course and
audience information and analysis of audience motivation and

                    Keller's ARCS Model: Integrating Ideas About Motivation | 713
existing materials. The main goal of these steps is to identify
motivational problems. The next four steps (Step 5 through Step
8) correspond to the design phase in the traditional instructional
design process. The first task in the design phase is to determine
the motivational behaviors of learners that you wish to observe
based on the motivational problems identified in the previous steps.
Then, you select or design motivational tactics that help to achieve
the objectives and can be feasibly incorporated into instruction.
One important task is to integrate these tactics into instructional
materials. Designers are to determine where and how to insert
the motivational tactics in the instruction. In this process, they
may need to modify the design of instruction. Steps 9 and 10 are
the development and evaluation phases. After identifying the
motivational tactics to use, designers will develop the actual
motivational materials. Lastly, they will evaluate the effectiveness
of the embedded motivational tactics, for instance, by collecting
learners' reactions to the learning materials. Table 6.12.1 summarizes
the steps of motivational design.

   Table 6.12.1. The systematic process of motivational design
(adapted from Keller, 2010)

CC licensed content, Shared previously
714 | Keller's ARCS Model: Integrating Ideas About Motivation
   Keller's ARC Model: Integrating Ideas About Motivation.
      Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van Hoose. Provided by: Hudson
      Valley Community College. Retrieved from:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/chapter/kellers-
      arcs-model/%20. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright

   Motivation Theories and Instructional Design. Authored by: S.
      Won Park. Retrieved from:
      https://lidtfoundations.pressbooks.com/chapter/motivation-
      in-lidt-by-seungwon-park/. License: CC BY: Attribution

   Description of ARCS Model. Authored by: Leeann Waddington
      and Debra Dell. Provided by: BC Campus. Retrieved from:
      https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/arcanddl/chapter/
      chapter-1/. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Specific attribution

   ARCS Model Components Table. Authored by: Nicoguaro.
      Provided by: Wikimedia Commons. Retrieved from:
      https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
      File:ARCS_model_components_table.svg. License: CC BY:
      Attribution

All rights reserved content

   Student Motivation: The ARCS Model. Provided by: Teachings
      in Education. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/
      tYu90ZK2WUA. License: All Rights Reserved

                    Keller's ARCS Model: Integrating Ideas About Motivation | 715
Chapter Summary:

Motivation

Motivation--the energy or drive that gives behavior direction and
focus--can be understood in a variety of ways, each of which has
implications for teaching. Instinct, drive, arousal, and deficiency/
growth motivation theories agree that humans, for
the most part, give energy and direction to their own behaviors
without thinking about it. Instinctual, inherited needs present at
birth give behavior its direction. The drive to satisfy these needs
explains how behavior becomes energized. Individuals are largely
unaware of these two aspects of behavior. Another perspective on
motivation comes from behaviorism and equates underlying drives
or motives with their outward, visible expression in behavior.

   Most theories of motivation come from cognitive theories of
learning and development. Motives are affected by the kind of goals
set by students--whether they are oriented to mastery,
performance, failure-avoidance, or social contact. They are also
affected by students' interests, both personal and situational. And
they are affected by students' attributions about the causes of
success and failure--whether they perceive the causes are due to
ability, effort, task difficulty, or luck.

   A major current perspective about motivation is based on self-
efficacy theory, which focuses on a person's belief that he or she
is capable of carrying out or mastering a task. High self-efficacy
affects students' choice of tasks, their persistence at tasks, and
their resilience in the face of failure. It helps to prevent learned
helplessness, a perception of complete lack of control over mastery
or success. Teachers can encourage high self-efficacy beliefs by
providing students with experiences of mastery and opportunities
to see others' experiences of mastery, by offering well-timed
messages persuading them of their capacity for success, and by

716 | Chapter Summary: Motivation
interpreting students' emotional reactions to success, failure, and
stress.

   An extension of self-efficacy theory is self-determination theory,
which is based on the idea that everyone has basic needs for
autonomy, competence, and relatedness to others. According to the
theory, students will be motivated more intrinsically if these three
needs are met as much as possible. A variety of strategies can assist
teachers in doing so. One program for doing so is called TARGET; it
draws on ideas from several theories of motivation to make practical
recommendations about motivating students.

                                                        Chapter Summary: Motivation | 717
Glossary

hierarchy of needs: spectrum of needs ranging from basic biological
needs to social needs to self-actualization
motivation: wants or needs that direct behavior toward some goal
self-efficacy: individual's belief in his own capabilities or capacities
to complete a task
drive theory: deviations from homeostasis create physiological
needs that result in psychological drive states that direct behavior
to meet the need and ultimately bring the system back to
homeostasis
habit: pattern of behavior in which we regularly engage
instinct: species-specific pattern of behavior that is unlearned
motivation: wants or needs that direct behavior toward some goal
Yerkes-Dodson law: simple tasks are performed best when arousal
levels are relatively high, while complex tasks are best performed
when arousal is lower

718 | Glossary
References

Bohlin, L., Durwin, C., & Reese-Weber, M. (2011). Ed Psych Modules.
McGraw-Hill.
Burke, M. & Sass, T. (2006). Classroom peer effects and student

   achievement. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the
   American Economic Association, Boston, USA.
Butin, D. (2005). Service learning in higher education. New York:
   Palgrave Macmillan.
Darnon, C., Butera, F., & Harackiewicz, J. (2006). Achievement goals
   in social interactions: Learning with mastery versus performance
   goals. Motivation and Emotion, 31, 61-70.
Dowson, M. & McInerney, D. (2003). What do students say about
   their motivational goals? Toward a more complex and dynamic
   perspective on student motivation. Contemporary Educational
   Psychology, 28, 91-113.
Harzckiewicz, J., Barron, K., Tauer, J., & Elliot, A. (2002). Short-
   term and long-term consequences of achievement goals. Journal
   of Educational Psychology, 92, 316-320.
Midgley, C., Kaplan, A., & Middleton, M. (2001). Performance-
   approach goals: Good for what, for whom, and under what
   conditions, and at what cost? Journal of Educational Psychology,
   93, 77-86.
Urdan, T. (2004). Predictors of self-handicapping and achievement:
   Examining achievement goals, classroom goal structures, and
   culture. Journal of Educational Psychology, 96, 251-254.
Wolters, C. (2004). Advancing achievement goal theory: Using goal
   structures and goal orientations to predict students' motivation,
   cognition, and achievement. Journal of Educational Psychology, 96,
   236-250
Aronson, E. & Patnoe, S. (1997). The Jigsaw classroom: Building
   cooperation in the classroom, 2nd edition. New York: Longman.
Cohen, E. (1994). Designing groupwork: Strategies for the

                                                                                   References | 719
   heterogeneous classroom, 2nd edition. New York: Teachers' College
   Press.
Deci, E. & Ryan, R. (2003). The paradox of achievement: The harder
   you push, the worse it gets. In E. Aronson (Ed.), Improving
   academic achievement: Impact of psychological factors in
   education (pp. 62-90). Boston: Academic Press.
Elliott, A., McGregor, H., & Thrash, T. (2004). The need for
   competence. In E. Deci & R. Ryan (Eds.), Handbook of self-
   determination research (pp. 361-388). Rochester, NY: University of
   Rochester Press.
Flowerday, T., Shraw, G., & Stevens, J. (2004). Role of choice and
   interest in reader engagement. Journal of Educational Research,
   97, 93-103.
Koestner, R. & Losier, G. (2004). Distinguishing three ways of being
   highly motivated: a closer look at introjection, identification, and
   intrinsic motivation. In E. Deci & R. Ryan (Eds.), Handbook of self-
   determination research (pp. 101-122). Rochester, NY: University of
   Rochester Press.
Ryan, R. & Lynch, M. (2003). Philosophies of motivation and
   classroom management. In R. Curren (Ed.), Blackwell companion
   to philosophy: A companion to the philosophy of education (pp.
   260-271). New York, NY: Blackwell.
Sapon-Shevin, M. & Cohen, E. (2004). Conclusion. In Cohen, E.,
   Brody, C., & Sapon-Shevin, M. (Eds.), Teaching cooperative
   learning: The challenge for teacher education (pp. 217-224). Albany,
   NY: State University of New York Press.
Schwartz, B. (2004). The paradox of choice: Why more is less. New
   York: Ecco/Harper Collins.
Bandura, A. (1977). Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of
   behavioral change. Psychological Review, 84, 191-215.
Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A social
   cognitive theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York:
   Freeman.
Bong, M. & Skaalvik, E. (2004). Academic self-concept and self-

720 | References
   efficacy: How different are they really? Educational psychology
   review, 15(1), 1-40.
Eccles, J., Wigfield, A., & Schiefele, U. (1998). Motivation to succeed.
   In W. Damon & N. Eisenberg (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology,
   Volume 3: Social, emotional, and personality development, 5th
   edition (pp. 1017-1095). New York: Wiley.
Erikson, E. (1968/1994). Identity, youth, and crisis. New York: Norton.
Goddard, R., Hoy, W., & Hoy, A. (2004). Collective efficacy beliefs:
   Theoretical developments, empirical evidence, and future
   directions. Educational Researcher, 33(3), 3-13.
Pajares, F. & Schunk, D. (2001). Self-beliefs and school success: Self-
   efficacy, self-concept, and school achievement. In . Riding & S.
   Rayner (Eds.), Perception (pp. 239-266). London: Ablex Publishing.
Pajares, F. & Schunk, D. (2002). Self-beliefs in psychology and
   education: An historical perspective. In J. Aronson (Ed.), Improving
   academic achievement (pp. 3-21). New York: Academic Press.
Schunk, D. & Zimmerman, B. (1997). Social origins of self-regulatory
   competence. Educational psychologist, 34(4), 195-208.
Garner, R., Brown, R., Sanders, S. & Menke, D. (1992). "Seductive
   details" and learning from text. In A. Renninger, S. Hidi, & A.
   Krapp (Eds.), The role of interest in learning and development, pp.
   239-254. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Guthrie, J., Wigfield, A., & Humenick, N. (2006). Influences of
   stimulating tasks on reading motivation and
   comprehension. Journal of Educational Research, 99, 232-245.
Harp, S. & Mayer, R. (1998). How seductive details do their
   damage. Journal of Educational Psychology, 90, 414-434.
Hidi, S. & Renninger, A. (2006). A four-phase model of interest
   development. Educational Psychology, 41, 111-127.
Reynolds, P. & Symons, S. (2001). Motivational variables and
   children's text search. Journal of Educational Psychology, 93, 14-22.
Sanchez, C. & Wiley, J. (2006). An examination of the seductive
   details effect in terms of working memory capacity. Memory and
   Cognition, 34, 344-355.
Blackwell, L., Trzniewski, K., & Dweck, C. (2007). Implicit theories

                                                                                   References | 721
   predict achievement across an adolescent transition: a
   longitudinal study. Child Development, 78, 246-263.
Dweck, C. (2000). Self-theories: Their role in motivation, personality,
   and development. Philadelphia: Psychology Press.
Dweck, C. (2006). Mindset: The new psychology of success. New York:
   Random House.
Schunk, D., Pintrich, P., Meese, J. (2008). Motivation in education:
   Theory, research and applications. New York: Pearson
   Professional.
Weiner, B. (2005). Motivation from an attribution perspective and
   the social psychology of perceived competence. In A. Elliot & C.
   Dweck (Eds.), Handbook of Competence and Motivation, pp. 73-84.
   New York: Guilford Press.
Cameron, J. & Pierce, W. (1994). Reinforcement, reward, and intrinsic
   motivation: A meta-analysis. Review of Educational Research, 64,
   363-423.
Deci, E. (1971). Effects of externally mediated rewards on intrinsic
   motivation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 18,
   105-115.
Deci, E., Koestner, R., & Ryan, R. (2001). Extrinsic rewards and
   intrinsic motivation in education: Reconsidered once
   again. Review of Educational Research, 71(1), 1-27.
DeGranpre, R. (2000). A science of meaning: Can behaviorism bring
   meaning to psychological science? American Psychologist, 55(7),
   721-736.
Eisenberger, R. & Cameron, J. (1996). Detrimental effects of reward:
   Reality or myth? American Psychologist, 51, 1153-1166.
Kohn, A. (1996). No contest: The case against competition. Boston:
   Houghton Mifflin.
Skinner, B. F. (1938). The behavior of organisms. New York: Appleton-
   Century-Crofts.
Skinner, B. F. (1957). Verbal behavior. New York: Appleton-Century-
   Crofts.
Wigfield, A. & Eccles, J. (2002). The development of achievement
   motivation. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.

722 | References
Wigfield, A., Tonk, S., & Eccles, J. (2004). Expectancy-value theory
   in cross-cultural perspective. In D. McInerney & S. van Etten
   (Eds.), Research on Sociocultural Influences on Motivation and
   Learning. Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishers.

                                                                                  References | 723
STUDENT DIVERSITY

     Theme: How Individual Differences Affect
   Learning.

        Overview of Concepts:
          Intelligence, IQ, and development
          Giftedness and Creativity
          Cognitive Disabilities
          Emotional, Social, and Behavioral Disabilities
        Learning Objectives:
          Describe Spearman's two-factor theory
          Describe what IQ tests measure
          Describe the influence of environment and heredity

             on IQ
          Intelligence as it relates to giftedness and creativity
          Identify characteristics of the gifted
          Meeting the needs of the gifted
          Identify characteristics of creativity
          Describe cognitive disabilities and how they are

             identified
          Describe emotional, social, and behavioral

             disorders and how they are identified and
             interventions

                                                                         Student Diversity | 725
Student Differences

For convenience we will make a major distinction between
differences among individuals and differences among groups of
students. As the term implies, individual differences are qualities
that are unique; just one person has them at a time. Variation in hair
color, for example, is an individual difference; even though some
people have nearly the same hair color, no two people are exactly
the same. Group differences are qualities shared by members of
an identifiable group or community, but not shared by everyone
in society. An example is gender role: for better or for worse, one
portion of society (the males) is perceived differently and expected
to behave a bit differently than another portion of society (the
females). Notice that distinguishing between individual and group
differences is convenient, but a bit arbitrary. Individuals with
similar, but nonetheless unique qualities sometimes group
themselves together for certain purposes, and groups unusually
contain a lot of individual diversity within them. If you happen
to enjoy playing soccer and have some talent for it (an individual
quality), for example, you may end up as a member of a soccer team
or club (a group defined by members' common desire and ability to
play soccer). But though everyone on the team fits a "soccer player's
profile" at some level, individual members will probably vary in level
of skill and motivation. The group, by its very nature, may obscure
these signs of individuality.

   To begin, then, we look at several differences normally considered
to be individual rather than group-based. This discussion will
necessarily be incomplete simply because individual differences are
so numerous and important in teaching that some of them are
also discussed in later chapters. Later sections of this chapter deal
with three important forms of group diversity: gender differences,
cultural differences, and language differences.

                                                                      Student Differences | 727
Intelligence

For nearly a century, educators and psychologists have debated the
nature of intelligence, and more specifically whether intelligence
is just one broad ability or can take more than one form. Many
classical definitions of the concept have tended to
define intelligence as a single broad ability that allows a person to
solve or complete many sorts of tasks, or at least many academic
tasks like reading, knowledge of vocabulary, and the solving of
logical problems (Garlick, 2002). Other psychologists believe that
instead of a single factor, intelligence is a collection of distinct
abilities. Still, other psychologists believe that intelligence should
be defined in more practical terms. We'll review three perspectives
on intelligence, Spearman's g, Sternberg's Triarchic Theory of
Intelligence, and Gardner's Frame of Mind. Understanding theories
of intelligence will help us understand variations in students'
intellectual abilities.

   British psychologist Charles Spearman believed intelligence
consisted of one general factor, called g, which could be measured
and compared among individuals. Spearman focused on the
commonalities among various intellectual abilities and
deemphasized what made each unique. There is research evidence
of such a global ability, and the idea of general intelligence often fits
with society's everyday beliefs about intelligence. Partly for these
reasons, an entire mini-industry has grown up around publishing
tests of intelligence, academic ability, and academic achievement.
Since these tests affect the work of teachers, I return to discussing
them later in this book.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online

728 | Intelligence
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=105#oembed-2

Video 7.1.1. Intelligence explains the different definitions of
intelligence and the nature/nurture debate in the context of
intelligence.

Measuring Intelligence: Standardization and the
Intelligence Quotient

The goal of most intelligence tests is to measure "g," the general
intelligence factor. Good intelligence tests are reliable, meaning
that they are consistent over time, and also demonstrate validity,
meaning that they actually measure intelligence rather than
something else. Because intelligence is such an important individual
difference dimension, psychologists have invested substantial effort
in creating and improving measures of intelligence, and these tests
are now considered the most accurate of all psychological tests. In
fact, the ability to accurately assess intelligence is one of the most
important contributions of psychology to everyday public life.

   Intelligence changes with age. A 3-year-old who could accurately
multiply 183 by 39 would certainly be intelligent, but a 25-year-
old who could not do so would be seen as unintelligent. Thus
understanding intelligence requires that we know the norms or
standards in a given population of people at a given age. The
standardization of a test involves giving it to a large number of
people of different ages and computing the average score on the
test at each age level.

   It is important that intelligence tests be standardized on a regular
basis, because the overall level of intelligence in a population may

                                                                                 Intelligence | 729
change over time. The Flynn effect refers to the observation that
scores on intelligence tests worldwide have increased substantially
over the past decades (Flynn, 1999). Although the increase varies
somewhat from country to country, the average increase is about 3
IQ points every 10 years. There are many explanations for the Flynn
effect, including better nutrition, increased access to information,
and more familiarity with multiple-choice tests (Neisser, 1998). But
whether people are actually getting smarter is debatable (Neisser,
1997).

   Once the standardization has been accomplished, we have a
picture of the average abilities of people at different ages and can
calculate a person's mental age, which is the age at which a person is
performing intellectually. If we compare the mental age of a person
to the person's chronological age, the result is the intelligence
quotient (IQ), a measure of intelligence that is adjusted for age. A
simple way to calculate IQ is by using the following formula:

                   IQ = mental age  chronological age  100.
   Thus a 10-year-old child who does as well as the average 10-year-
old child has an IQ of 100 (10  10  100), whereas an 8-year-old
child who does as well as the average 10-year-old child would have
an IQ of 125 (10  8  100). Most modern intelligence tests are based
on the relative position of a person's score among people of the
same age, rather than on the basis of this formula, but the idea of an
intelligence "ratio" or "quotient" provides a good description of the
score's meaning.

730 | Intelligence
Figure 7.1.1. Examples of the types of items you might see on an
                               intelligence test.

                                                                             Intelligence | 731
                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=105#oembed-3

Wechsler Scales

The Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS) is the most widely
used intelligence test for adults (Watkins, Campbell, Nieberding, &
Hallmark, 1995). The current version of the WAIS, the WAIS-IV, was
standardized on 2,200 people ranging from 16 to 90 years of age. It
consists of 15 different tasks, each designed to assess intelligence,
including working memory, arithmetic ability, spatial ability, and
general knowledge about the world. The WAIS-IV yields scores on
four domains: verbal, perceptual, working memory, and processing
speed. The reliability of the test is high (more than 0.95), and it
shows substantial construct validity. The WAIS-IV is correlated
highly with other IQ tests such as the Stanford-Binet, as well as
with criteria of academic and life success, including college grades,
measures of work performance, and occupational level. It also
shows significant correlations with measures of everyday
functioning among people with intellectual disabilities.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=105#oembed-4

732 | Intelligence
Video 7.1.2. Brain vs. Bias provides an overview of the WAIS & WISC
tests, standardization and validity, and IQ performance.

   The Wechsler scale has also been adapted for preschool children
in the form of the Wechsler primary and preschool scale of
intelligence-fourth edition (WPPSI-IV) and for older children and
adolescents in the form of the Wechsler intelligence scale for
children-fifth edition (WISC-V).

Bias in Intelligence Testing

Intelligence tests and psychological definitions of intelligence have
been heavily criticized since the 1970s for being biased in favor
of Anglo-American, middle-class respondents and for being
inadequate tools for measuring non-academic types of intelligence
or talent. Intelligence changes with experience, and intelligence
quotients or scores do not reflect that ability to change. What is
considered smart varies culturally as well, and most intelligence
tests do not take this variation into account. For example, in the
West, being smart is associated with being quick. A person who
answers a question the fastest is seen as the smartest, but in some
cultures, being smart is associated with considering an idea
thoroughly before giving an answer. A well- thought out, the
contemplative answer is the best answer.

     watch it

        Video 7.1.3. Watch this video to learn more about the
     history behind intelligence testing.

                                                                                 Intelligence | 733
                          One or more interactive elements has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You can
              view them online here:
              https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=105#o
              embed-5

Theories of Intelligence

Psychologists have long debated how to best conceptualize and
measure intelligence (Sternberg, 2003). These questions include
how many types of intelligence there are, the role of nature versus
nurture in intelligence, how intelligence is represented in the brain,
and the meaning of group differences in intelligence.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=105#oembed-6

Video 7.1.4. Theories of Intelligence reviews a few of the different
theoretical views of intelligence.

734 | Intelligence
General Intelligence Factor ("g")

From 1904-to 1905 the French psychologist Alfred Binet (1857-1914)
and his colleague Thodore Simon (1872-1961) began working on
behalf of the French government to develop a measure that would
identify children who would not be successful with the regular
school curriculum. The goal was to help teachers better educate
these students (Aiken, 1994). Binet and Simon developed what most
psychologists today regard as the first intelligence test, which
consisted of a wide variety of questions that included the ability
to name objects, define words, draw pictures, complete sentences,
compare items, and construct sentences.

   Binet and Simon (Binet, Simon, & Town, 1915; Siegler, 1992)
believed that the questions they asked the children all assessed the
basic abilities to understand, reason, and make judgments. It turned
out that the correlations among these different types of measures
were, in fact, all positive; that is, students who got one item correct
were more likely to also get other items correct, even though the
questions themselves were very different.

   On the basis of these results, the psychologist Charles Spearman
(1863-1945) hypothesized that there must be a single underlying
construct that all of these items measure. He called the construct
that the different abilities and skills measured on intelligence tests
have in common the general intelligence factor (g). Virtually all
psychologists now believe that there is a generalized intelligence
factor, "g," that relates to abstract thinking and that includes the
abilities to acquire knowledge, reason abstractly, adapt to novel
situations, and benefit from instruction and experience
(Gottfredson, 1997; Sternberg, 2003). People with higher general
intelligence learn faster.

   Soon after Binet and Simon introduced their test, the American
psychologist Lewis Terman at Stanford University (1877-1956)
developed an American version of Binet's test that became known as
the Stanford- Binet intelligence test. The Stanford-Binet is a measure

                                                                                 Intelligence | 735
of general intelligence made up of a wide variety of tasks, including
vocabulary, memory for pictures, naming of familiar objects,
repeating sentences, and following commands.

Sternberg's Triarchic theory

Although there is general agreement among psychologists that "g"
exists, there is also evidence for specific intelligence "s," a measure
of specific skills in narrow domains. One empirical result in support
of the idea of "s" comes from intelligence tests themselves. Although
the different types of questions do correlate with each other, some
items correlate more highly with each other than do other items;
they form clusters or clumps of intelligences.

   One advocate of the idea of multiple intelligences is the
psychologist Robert Sternberg. Sternberg has proposed a Triarchic
(three-part) Theory of Intelligence that proposes that people may
display more or less analytical intelligence, creative intelligence, and
practical intelligence. Sternberg (1985, 2003) argued that traditional
intelligence tests assess analytical intelligence, academic problem
solving, and performing calculations, but that they do not typically
assess creative intelligence, the ability to adapt to new situations
and create new ideas, and/or practical intelligence, the ability to
demonstrate common sense and street- smarts.

   As Sternberg proposed, research has found that creativity is not
highly correlated with analytical intelligence (Furnham & Bakhtiar,
2008), and exceptionally creative scientists, artists, mathematicians,
and engineers do not score higher on intelligence than do their less
creative peers (Simonton, 2000). Furthermore, the brain areas that
are associated with convergent thinking, thinking that is directed
toward finding the correct answer to a given problem, are different
from those associated with divergent thinking, the ability to
generate many different ideas or solutions to a single problem
(Tarasova, Volf, & Razoumnikova, 2010). On the other hand, being

736 | Intelligence
creative often takes some of the basic abilities measured by "g,"
including the abilities to learn from experience, to remember
information, and to think abstractly (bink & marsh, 2000). Ericsson
(1998), Weisberg (2006), Hennessey and Amabile (2010), and
Simonton (1992) studied creative people and identified at least five
components that are likely to be important for creativity as listed in
Table 7.1.1.

   Table 7.1.1. Important components for creativity

Component     Description

Expertise     Creative people have studied and learned about a
              topic
Imaginative
Thinking      Creative people view problems in new and different
              ways
Risk-Taking
              Creative people take on new, but potentially risky
Intrinsic     approaches
Interest
Working in    Creative people take on projects for interest, not
Creative      money
Environments
              The most creative people are supported, aided, and
              challenged by other people working on similar projects

The last aspect of the triarchic model, practical intelligence, refers
primarily to intelligence that cannot be gained from books or formal
learning. Practical intelligence represents a type of "street smarts"
or "common sense" that is learned from life experiences. Although a
number of tests have been devised to measure practical intelligence
(Sternberg, Wagner, & Okazaki, 1993; Wagner & Sternberg, 1985),
research has not found much evidence that practical intelligence is
distinct from "g" or that it is predictive of success at any particular
tasks (Gottfredson, 2003). Practical intelligence may include, at least
in part, certain abilities that help people perform well at specific
jobs, and these abilities may not always be highly correlated with
general intelligence (Sternberg et al., 1993).

              Intelligence | 737
Gardner's Frame of Mind

Theory of multiple intelligences: another champion of the idea of
specific types of intelligences rather than one overall intelligence
is the psychologist Howard Gardner (1983, 1999). Gardner argued
that it would be evolutionarily functional for different people to
have different talents and skills, and proposed that there are eight
intelligences that can be differentiated from each other. A potential
ninth intelligence, existential intelligence, still needs empirical
support. Gardner investigated intelligences by focusing on children
who were talented in one or more areas and adults who suffered
from strokes that compromised some capacities, but not others.
Gardner also noted that some evidence for multiple intelligences
comes from the abilities of autistic savants, people who score low on
intelligence tests overall but who nevertheless may have exceptional
skills in a given domain, such as math, music, art, or in being able
to recite statistics in a given sport (Treffert & Wallace, 2004). In
addition to brain damage and the existence of savants, Gardner
identified these 8 intelligences based on other criteria, including a
set developmental history and psychometric findings. See table 7.1.2
for a list of Gardner's eight specific intelligences.

   Table 7.1.2. Howard Gardner's eight specific intelligences

738 | Intelligence
Intelligence        Description

Linguistic          The ability to speak and write well

Logical-mathematical The ability to use logic and mathematical skills to solve problems

Spatial             The ability to think and reason about objects in
                    three dimensions

Musical             The ability to perform and enjoy music

Kinesthetic (body)  The ability to move the body in sports, dance, or
                    other physical activities

Interpersonal       The ability to understand and interact effectively
                    with others

Intrapersonal       The ability to have insight into the self

Naturalistic        The ability to recognize, identify and understand
                    animals, plants, and other living things

Source: Adapted from Gardner, H. (1999). Intelligence Framed: Multiple
Intelligences for the 21st Century. New York, NY: Basic Books.

The idea of multiple intelligences has been influential in the field
of education, and teachers have used these ideas to try to teach
differently to different students. For instance, to teach math
problems to students who have particularly good kinesthetic
intelligence, a teacher might encourage the students to move their
bodies or hands according to the numbers. On the other hand,
some have argued that these "intelligences" sometimes seem more
like "abilities" or "talents" rather than real intelligence. There is
no clear conclusion about how many intelligences there are. Our
sense of humor, artistic skills, dramatic skills, and so forth also
separate intelligences? Furthermore, and again demonstrating the
underlying power of a single intelligence, the many different
intelligences are, in fact, correlated and thus represent, in part, "g"
(Brody, 2003).

   Nonetheless, whatever the status of the research evidence, the
model itself can be useful as a way for teachers to think about their
work. Multiple intelligences suggest the importance of diversifying
instruction in order to honor and to respond to diversity in

                                 Intelligence | 739
students' talents and abilities. Viewed like this, whether Gardner's
classification scheme is actually accurate is probably less important
than the fact there is (or may be) more than one way to be "smart."
In the end, as with cognitive and learning styles, it may not be
important to label students' talents or intellectual strengths. It may
be more important simply to provide important learning and
knowledge in several modes or styles, ways that draw on more than
one possible form of intelligence or skill. A good example of this
principle is your own development in learning to teach. It is well and
good to read books about teaching (like this one, perhaps), but it is
even better to read books and talk with classmates and educators
about teaching and getting actual experience in classrooms. The
combination both invites and requires a wide range of your talents
and usually proves more effective than any single type of activity,
whatever your profile of cognitive styles or intellectual abilities
happens to be.

   https://lumenlearning.h5p.com/content/1290777754718118168

Extremes of Intelligence: Intellectual Disability
and Giftedness

The results of studies assessing the measurement of intelligence
show that IQ is distributed in the population in the form of a Normal
Distribution (or bell curve), which is the pattern of scores usually
observed in a variable that clusters around its average. In a normal
distribution, the bulk of the scores fall toward the middle, with
many fewer scores falling at the extremes. The normal distribution
of intelligence shows that on IQ tests, as well as on most other
measures, the majority of people cluster around the average (in
this case, where IQ = 100), and fewer are either very smart or
very dull. Because the standard deviation of an IQ test is about
15, this means that about 2% of people score above an IQ of 130,
often considered the threshold for giftedness, and about the same

740 | Intelligence
percentage score below an IQ of 70, often being considered the
threshold for intellectual disability.

            Figure 7.1.2. Distribution of IQ Scores in the General
    PopulationThe normal distribution of IQ scores in the general

        population shows that most people have about average
 intelligence, while very few have extremely high or extremely low

                                       intelligence.

Intellectual Disabilities

People with very low IQ define one end of the distribution of
intelligence scores. Intellectual disability (or intellectual
developmental disorder) is assessed based on cognitive capacity
(IQ) and adaptive functioning. The severity of the disability is based
on adaptive functioning, or how well the person handles everyday
life tasks. About 1% of the United States population, most of them
males, fulfill the criteria for intellectual developmental disorder, but
some children who are given this diagnosis lose the classification as
they get older and better learn to function in society.

   Students with intellectual disabilities score poorly on
standardized tests of intelligence. They may have limited language
or impaired speech and may not perform well academically.
Everyday tasks that most people take for granted, like getting

                                                                                  Intelligence | 741
dressed or eating a meal, may be possible, but they may also take
more time and effort than usual. Health and safety can sometimes
be a concern (for example, knowing whether it is safe to cross a
street). For older individuals, finding and keeping a job may require
help from supportive others. The exact combination of challenges
varies from one person to another, but it always (by definition)
involves limitations in both intellectual and daily functioning.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=105#oembed-7

Video 7.1.5. Intellectual Disabilities defines intellectual disabilities
(ID), explains the characteristics, and how to support students with
ID.

Levels of Support for Individuals with Intellectual Disabilities

Intellectual disabilities happen in different degrees or amounts,
though most often are relatively mild. Traditionally the intensity or
"amount" of the disability was defined by scores on a standardized
test of scholastic aptitude (or "IQ test"), with lower scores indicating
a more severe disability. Because of the insensitivity of such tests
to individuals' daily social functioning, however, current trends are
toward defining intensities by the amount of support needed by the
individual. Table 1 summarizes the most commonly used scheme
for this purpose, one created by the American Association on
Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities (AAMR, 2002). Levels of
support range from intermittent (just occasional or "as needed" for
specific activities) to pervasive (continuous in all realms of living).

742 | Intelligence
Table 7.1.3. Levels and areas of support for intellectual disabilities

Level of   Duration Frequency of            Setting      Amount of
support    of support support               of           professional
                                            support      assistance

Intermittent Only as needed  Occasional or  Usually      Occasional
                             infrequent     only one     consultation or
                                            or two       monitoring by
                                            (e.g. 1-2    professional
                                            classes
                                            or
                                            activities)

Limited    As needed,        Regular, but   Several      Occasional or
           but               frequency      settings,    regular contact
           sometimes         varies         but not      with professionals
           continuing                       usually
                                            all

Extensive  Usually           Regular, but   Several      Regular contact
                             frequency      settings,    with professionals
           continuing varies                but not      at least once a
                                            usually      week
                                            all

Pervasive  May be            Frequent       Nearly all   Continuous contact
           lifelong          or continuous  settings     and monitoring by
                                                         professionals

Source: American Association on Mental Retardation, 2002: Schalock &
Luckassen, 2004.

As a classroom teacher, the intellectual disabilities that you are
most likely to see are the ones requiring the least support in your
classroom. A student requiring only intermittent support may
require special help with some learning activities or classroom
routines, but not others; he or she might need help with reading or
putting on winter clothes, for example, but primarily on occasions
when there is pressure to do these things relatively quickly.
Students requiring somewhat more support are likely to spend
somewhat less time in your classroom and more time receiving
special help from other professionals, such as a special education
teacher, a speech and language specialist, or an assistant to these
professionals. These circumstances have distinct implications for
ways of teaching these students.

                                                         Intelligence | 743
Teaching Students with Intellectual Disabilities

There are many specific techniques that can help in teaching
students with mild or moderate intellectual disabilities, but most
can be summarized into three more general strategies. The first is
to give more time and practice than usual; the second is to embed
activities into the context of daily life or functioning where possible;
and the third is to include the child both in social and in academic
activities, rather than just one or the other. Let us look briefly at
each of these ideas.

Giving More Time and Practice

If a student has a mild intellectual disability, they may be able to
learn important fundamentals of the academic curriculum--basic
arithmetic, for example, and basic reading. Because of the disability,
though, the student may need more time or practice than most
other students. They may be able to read many words by sight
(day, night, morning, afternoon, etc.), but need longer than other
students to recognize and say them. Or the student may know that
2 + 3 = 5, but need help applying this math fact to real objects; you
(or a helper) might need to show the student that two pencils plus
three pencils make five pencils.

   Giving extra help takes time and perseverance, and can try the
patience of the student (and of you, too). To deal with this problem,
it may help to reward the student frequently for effort and
successes with well-timed praise, especially if it is focused on
specific, actual achievements; "You added that one correctly," may
be more helpful than "You're a hard worker," even if both comments
are true. Giving appropriate praise is in turn easier if you set
reasonable, "do-able" goals by breaking skills or tasks into steps that
the student is likely to learn without becoming overly discouraged.
At the same time, it is important not to insult the student with

744 | Intelligence
goals or activities that are too easy or by using curriculum materials
clearly intended for children who are much younger. Setting
expectations too low actually deprives a student with an intellectual
disability of rightful opportunities to learn--a serious ethical and
professional mistake (Bogdan, 2006). In many curriculum areas,
fortunately, there are already existing materials that are simplified,
yet also appropriate for older students (Snell, et al., 2005). Special
education teacher-specialists can often help in finding them and in
devising effective ways of using them.

Adaptive and Functional Skills

Students with intellectual disabilities present especially clear
examples of a universal dilemma of teaching: since there is not
enough time to teach everything, how do we choose what to teach?
One basis for selecting activities is to relate learning goals to
students' everyday lives and activities, just as you would with all
students. This strategy addresses the other defining feature of
intellectual disability, the student's difficulties with adapting to and
functioning in everyday living. In teaching addition and subtraction,
for example, you can create examples about the purchasing of
common familiar objects (e.g. food) and about the need to make or
receive change for the purchases. Similar considerations apply to
learning new reading or oral language vocabulary. Instead of simply
learning words in a "basic reading" series (or reading a textbook), try
encouraging the student to learn words that are especially useful
to the student's own life. Often the student, not you yourself, is the
best person to decide what these words actually are.

   An adaptive, functional approach can help in non-academic areas
as well. In learning to read or "tell time" on a clock, for example, try
focusing initially on telling the times important to the student, such
as when he or she gets up in the morning or when school starts.
As you add additional times that are personally meaningful to the
student, he or she works gradually towards full knowledge of how

                                                                                  Intelligence | 745
to read the hands on a clock. Even if the full knowledge proves slow
to develop, however, the student will at least have learned the most
useful clock knowledge first.

Include the Student in Group Activities

The keyword here is inclusion: the student should participate in
and contribute to the life of the class as much as possible. This
means that wherever possible, the student attends special events
(assemblies, field days) with the class; that if the class plays a group
game, then the student with the disability is part of the game; that
if classmates do an assignment as a group, then if at all possible
the student is assigned to one of the groups. The changes resulting
from these inclusions are real but can be positive for everyone. On
the one hand, they foster acceptance and helpfulness toward the
child with the disability; classmates learn that school is partly about
providing opportunities for everyone, and not just about evaluating
or comparing individuals' skills. On the other hand, the changes
caused by inclusion stimulate the student with the disability to learn
as much as possible from classmates, socially and academically.
Among other benefits, group activities can give the student chances
to practice "belonging" skills--how to greet classmates
appropriately, or when and how to ask the teacher a question. These
are skills, I might add, that are beneficial for everyone to learn,
disabled or not.

Gifted and Talented Students

Giftedness refers to those who have an IQ of 130 or higher (Lally
& Valentine-French, 2015). Having an extremely high IQ is clearly
less of a problem than having an extremely low IQ, but there may
also be challenges to being particularly smart. It is often assumed

746 | Intelligence
that schoolchildren who are labeled as "gifted" may have adjustment
problems that make it more difficult for them to create social
relationships. To study gifted children, Lewis Terman and his
colleagues (Terman & Oden, 1959) selected about 1,500 high school
students who scored in the top 1% on the Stanford-Binet and similar
IQ tests (i.e., who had IQs of about 135 or higher), and tracked them
for more than seven decades (the children became known as the
"termites" and are still being studied today). This study found that
these students were not unhealthy or poorly adjusted, but rather
were above average in physical health and were taller and heavier
than individuals in the general population. The students also had
above-average social relationships and were less likely to divorce
than the average person (Seagoe, 1975).

   Terman's study also found that many of these students went on
to achieve high levels of education and entered prestigious
professions, including medicine, law, and science. Of the sample,
7% earned doctoral degrees, 4% earned medical degrees, and 6%
earned law degrees. These numbers are all considerably higher than
what would have been expected from a more general population.
Another study of young adolescents who had even higher IQs found
that these students ended up attending graduate school at a rate
more than 50 times higher than that of the general population
(Lubinski & Benbow, 2006).

   As you might expect based on our discussion of intelligence, kids
who are gifted have higher scores on general intelligence "g," but
there are also different types of giftedness. Some children are
particularly good at math or science, some at automobile repair or
carpentry, some at music or art, some at sports or leadership, and so
on. The idea of multiple intelligences leads to new ways of thinking
about students who have special gifts and talents. More recently,
however, the meaning of gifted has broadened to include unusual
talents in a range of activities, such as music, creative writing, or
the arts (G. Davis & Rimm, 2004). To indicate the change, educators
often use the dual term gifted and talented.

                                                                                  Intelligence | 747
Qualities of the Gifted and Talented

What are students who are gifted and talented like? Generally, they
show some combination of the following qualities:

   They learn more quickly and independently than most
      students their own age.

   They often have a well-developed vocabulary, as well as
      advanced reading and writing skills.

   They are very motivated, especially on tasks that are
      challenging or difficult.

   They hold themselves to higher than usual standards of
      achievement.

Contrary to a common impression, students who are gifted or
talented are not necessarily awkward socially, less healthy, or
narrow in their interests--in fact, quite the contrary (Steiner & Carr,
2003). They also come from all economic and cultural groups.

   Ironically, in spite of their obvious strengths as learners, such
students often languish in school unless teachers can provide them
with more than the challenges of the usual curriculum. A
kindergarten child who is precociously advanced in reading, for
example, may make little further progress at reading if her teachers
do not recognize and develop her skill; her talent may effectively
disappear from view as her peers gradually catch up to her initial
level. Without accommodation to their unusual level of skill or
knowledge, students who are gifted or talented can become bored
with school, and eventually, the boredom can even turn into
behavior problems.

   Partly for these reasons, students who are gifted or talented have
sometimes been regarded as the responsibility of special education,
along with students with other sorts of disabilities. Often their
needs are discussed, for example, in textbooks about special
education, alongside discussions of students with intellectual
disabilities, physical impairments, or major behavior disorders

748 | Intelligence
(Friend, 2008). There is some logic to this way of thinking about
their needs; after all, they are quite exceptional, and they do require
modifications of the usual school programs in order to reach their
full potential. But it is also misleading to ignore obvious differences
between exceptional giftedness and exceptional disabilities of other
kinds. The key difference is in students' potential. By definition,
students with gifts or talents are capable of creative, committed
work at levels that often approach talented adults. Other
students--including students with disabilities--may reach these
levels, but not as soon and not as frequently. Many educators,
therefore, think of the gifted and talented not as examples of
students with disabilities, but as examples of diversity. As such they
are not so much the responsibility of special education specialists,
as the responsibility of all teachers to differentiate their instruction.

Supporting Gifted and Talented Students

Supporting the gifted and talented usually involves a mixture
of acceleration and enrichment of the usual curriculum (Schiever &
Maker, 2003). Acceleration involves either a child's skipping a grade,
or else the teacher's redesigning the curriculum within a particular
grade or classroom so that more material is covered faster. Either
strategy works, but only up to a point: children who have skipped a
grade usually function well in the higher grade, both academically
and socially. Unfortunately skipping grades cannot happen
repeatedly unless teachers, parents, and the students themselves
are prepared to live with large age and maturity differences within
single classrooms. In itself, too, there is no guarantee that
instruction in the new, higher-grade classroom will be any more
stimulating than it was in the former, lower-grade classroom.
Redesigning the curriculum is also beneficial to the student, but
impractical to do on a widespread basis; even if teachers had the

                                                                                 Intelligence | 749
time to redesign their programs, many non-gifted students would
be left behind as a result.

   Enrichment involves providing additional or different instruction
added to the usual curriculum goals and activities. Instead of books
at more advanced reading levels, for example, a student might read
a wider variety of types of literature at the student's current reading
level, or try writing additional types of literature himself. Instead of
moving ahead to more difficult kinds of math programs, the student
might work on unusual logic problems not assigned to the rest of
the class. Like acceleration, enrichment works well up to a point.
Enrichment curricula exist to help classroom teachers working with
gifted students (and save teachers the time and work of creating
enrichment materials themselves). Since enrichment is not part of
the normal, officially sanctioned curriculum, however, there is a
risk that it will be perceived as busywork rather than as intellectual
stimulation, particularly if the teacher herself is not familiar with
the enrichment material or is otherwise unable to involve herself in
the material fully.

   Obviously, acceleration and enrichment can sometimes be
combined. A student can skip a grade and also be introduced to
interesting "extra" material at the new grade level. A teacher can
move a student to the next unit of study faster than she moves the
rest of the class, while at the same time offering additional activities
not related to the unit of study directly. For a teacher with a student
who is gifted or talented, however, the real challenge is not simply
to choose between acceleration and enrichment, but to observe the
student, get to know him or her as a unique individual, and offer
activities and supports based on that knowledge. This is essentially
the challenge of differentiating instruction, something needed not
just by the gifted and talented, but by students of all sorts. As
you might suspect, differentiating instruction poses challenges in
managing instruction.

   There is a lively debate among scholars about whether it is
appropriate or beneficial to label some children as "gifted and
talented" in school and to provide them with accelerated special

750 | Intelligence
classes and other programs that are not available to everyone.
Although doing so may help the gifted kids (Colangelo & Assouline,
2009), it also may isolate them from their peers and make such
provisions unavailable to those who are not classified as "gifted."

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=105#oembed-8

Video 7.1.6. Gifted and Talented Students:            Teaching
Strategies suggests ways to support gifted students.
CC licensed content, Original

 Intelligence. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van Hoose. Provided
   by: Hudson Valley Community College. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
   Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

 Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
   Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
   Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
   educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

 Adolescent Psychology. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
   Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
   Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
   adolescent. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
   NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Specific attribution

 Intelligence. Authored by: Carole Yue. Provided by: Khan
                                                                                Intelligence | 751
      Academy . Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/F9n3hLnwwc0.
      License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
   Theories of Intelligence. Authored by: Brooke Miller. Provided
      by: Khan Academy. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/
      oaJ01Ex7DLw. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike
All rights reserved content
   Intellectual Disabilities. Authored by: Fittie Kolbe, Colleen
      Mcbrien, and Abby Pearlman. Retrieved from:
      https://youtu.be/ZPB5l67gpKk?t=17. License: All Rights
      Reserved
   Gifted and Talented Students: Teaching Strategies. Provided
      by: Teachings in Education. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/
      n3gXI1HFcbY. License: All Rights Reserved

752 | Intelligence
Learning Differences

All of us, including our students, have preferred ways of learning.
Teachers often refer to these differences as learning styles, though
this term may imply that students are more consistent across
situations than is really the case. One student may like to make
diagrams to help remember a reading assignment, whereas another
student may prefer to write a sketchy outline instead. Yet in many
cases, the students could in principle reverse the strategies and still
learn the material: if coaxed (or perhaps required), the diagram-
maker could take notes for a change and the note-taker could draw
diagrams. Both would still learn, though neither might feel as
comfortable as when using the strategies that they prefer. This
reality suggests that a balanced, middle-of-the-road approach may
be a teacher's best response to students' learning styles. Or put
another way, it is good to support students' preferred learning
strategies where possible and appropriate, but neither necessary
nor desirable to do so all of the time (Loo, 2004; Stahl, 2002). Most of
all, it is neither necessary nor possible to classify or label students
according to seemingly fixed learning styles and then allow them to
learn only according to those styles. A student may prefer to hear
new material rather than see it; he may prefer for you to explain
something orally, for example, rather than to see it demonstrated in
a video. But he may nonetheless tolerate or sometimes even prefer
to see it demonstrated. In the long run, in fact, he may learn it best
by encountering the material in both ways, regardless of his habitual
preferences.

   That said, there is evidence that individuals, including students,
do differ in how they habitually think. These differences are more
specific than learning styles or preferences, and psychologists
sometimes call them cognitive styles, meaning typical ways of
perceiving and remembering information, and typical ways of
solving problems and making decisions (Zhang & Sternberg, 2006).

                                                                    Learning Differences | 753
In a style of thinking called field dependence, for example,
individuals perceive patterns as a whole rather than focus on the
parts of the pattern separately. In a complementary tendency,
called field independence, individuals are more inclined to analyze
overall patterns in their parts. Cognitive research from the 1940s to
the present has found field dependence/independence differences
to be somewhat stable for any given person across situations,
though not completely so (Witkin, Moore, Goodenough, & Cox, 1977;
Zhang & Sternberg, 2005). Someone who is field-dependent
(perceives globally or "wholistically") in one situation, tends to a
modest extent to perceive things globally or holistically in other
situations. Field dependence and independence can be important
in understanding students because the styles affect students'
behaviors and preferences in school and classrooms. Field-
dependent persons tend to work better in groups, it seems, and
prefer "open-ended" fields of study like literature and history. Field
independent persons, on the other hand, tend to work better alone
and prefer highly analytic studies like math and science. The
differences are only a tendency, however, and there are a lot of
students who contradict the trends. As with the broader notion
of learning styles, the cognitive styles of field dependence and
independence are useful for tailoring instruction to particular
students, but their guidance is only approximate. They neither can
nor should be used to "lock" students to particular modes of
learning or to replace students' own expressed preferences and
choices about the curriculum.

   Another cognitive style is impulsivity as compared
to reflectivity. As the names imply, an impulsive cognitive style is
one in which a person reacts quickly, but as a result, makes
comparatively more errors. A reflective style is the opposite: the
person reacts more slowly and therefore makes fewer errors. As you
might expect, the reflective style would seem better suited to many
academic demands of school. Research has found that this is indeed
the case for academic skills that clearly benefit from reflection, such
as mathematical problem solving or certain reading tasks (Evans,

754 | Learning Differences
2004). Some classroom or school-related skills, however, may
actually develop better if a student is relatively impulsive. Being
a good partner in a cooperative learning group, for example, may
depend partly on responding spontaneously (i.e. just a bit
"impulsively") to others' suggestions; and being an effective member
of an athletic team may depend on not taking time to reflect
carefully on every move that you or your teammates make.

   There are two major ways to use knowledge of students' cognitive
styles (Pritchard, 2005). The first and the more obvious is to build
on students' existing style strengths and preferences. A student who
is field-independent and reflective, for example, can be encouraged
to explore tasks and activities that are relatively analytic and that
require relatively independent work. One who is field-dependent
and impulsive, on the other hand, can be encouraged and supported
to try tasks and activities that are more social or spontaneous. But a
second, less obvious way to use knowledge of cognitive styles is to
encourage more balance in cognitive styles for students who need
it. A student who lacks field independence, for example, may need
explicit help in organizing and analyzing key academic tasks (like
organizing a lab report in a science class). One who is already highly
reflective may need encouragement to try ideas spontaneously, as
in a creative writing lesson.

Diversity in Learning and Special Education
Needs

Beyond the diversity of learning styles, classrooms have become
increasingly diverse due to the inclusion of students with
disabilities in classrooms with non-disabled peers. In the United
States, the trend began in the 1970s, but accelerated with the
passage of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act in 1975,
and again when the Act was amended in 2004 (United States
Government Printing Office, 2005). The law guarantees free,

                                                                    Learning Differences | 755
appropriate education for children with disabilities of any
kind--whether the impairment is physical, cognitive, emotional, or
behavioral. The laws also recognize that such students need special
support in order to learn or function effectively in a classroom with
non-disabled peers, so they provide special services (for example,
teaching assistants) and procedures for making individualized
educational plans for students with disabilities.

Children with Disabilities: Legislation

Since the 1970s, political and social attitudes have moved
increasingly toward including people with disabilities in a wide
variety of "regular" activities. In the United States, the shift is
illustrated clearly in the Federal legislation that was enacted during
this time. Three major laws were passed that guaranteed the rights
of persons with disabilities, and of children and students with
disabilities in particular. The third law has had the biggest impact on
education.

   Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Section 504: This law, the first of its
kind, required that individuals with disabilities be accommodated
in any program or activity that receives Federal funding (PL 93-112,
1973). Although this law was not intended specifically for education,
in practice, it has protected students' rights in some extra-
curricular activities (for older students) and in some child care or
after-school care programs (for younger students). If those
programs receive Federal funding of any kind, the programs are
not allowed to exclude children or youths with disabilities, and
they have to find reasonable ways to accommodate the individuals'
disabilities.

   Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (or ADA): This legislation
also prohibited discrimination on the basis of disability, just as
Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act had done (PL 101-336, 1990).
Although the ADA also applies to all people (not just to students),

756 | Learning Differences
its provisions are more specific and "stronger" than those of Section
504. In particular, ADA extends to all employment and jobs, not
just those receiving Federal funding. It also specifically requires
accommodations to be made in public facilities such as buses,
restrooms, and telephones. ADA legislation is therefore responsible
for some of the "minor" renovations in schools that you may have
noticed in recent years, like wheelchair-accessible doors, ramps,
restrooms, and public telephones with volume controls.

   Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (or IDEA): As its name
implied, this legislation was more focused on education than either
Section 504 or ADA. It was first passed in 1975 and has been
amended several times since, including most recently in 2004 (PL
108-446, 2004). To be eligible under IDEA, a student must be
adversely affected in oral expression, listening comprehension,
written expression, basic reading skills, reading fluency skills,
reading comprehension, mathematics calculation, or mathematics
problem-solving. In its current form, the law guarantees the
following rights related to education for anyone with a disability
from birth to age 21. The first two influence schooling in general, but
the last three affect the work of classroom teachers rather directly:

   Free, appropriate education: An individual or an individual's
      family should not have to pay for education simply because the
      individual has a disability, and the educational program should
      be truly educational; i.e., not merely care-taking or babysitting
      the person.

   Due process: In case of disagreements between an individual
      with a disability and the schools or other professionals, there
      must be procedures for resolving the disagreements that are
      fair and accessible to all parties, including the person himself
      or herself or the person's representative.

   Fair evaluation of performance in spite of disability: Tests or
      other evaluations should not assume test-taking skills that a
      person with a disability cannot reasonably be expected to
      have, such as holding a pencil, hearing or seeing questions,

                                                                     Learning Differences | 757
      working quickly, or understanding and speaking orally.
      Evaluation procedures should be modified to allow for these
      differences. This provision of the law applies both to
      evaluations made by teachers and to school-wide or "high-
      stakes" testing programs.
   Education in the "least restrictive environment": Education for
      someone with a disability should provide as many educational
      opportunities and options for the person as possible, both in
      the short term and in the long term. In practice, this
      requirement has meant including students in regular
      classrooms and school activities as much as possible, though
      often not totally.
   An individualized educational program: Given that every
      disability is unique, instructional planning for a person with a
      disability should be unique or individualized as well. In
      practice, this provision has led to classroom teachers planning
      individualized programs jointly with other professionals (like
      reading specialists, psychologists, or medical personnel) as
      part of a team.

Students are eligible for the rights afforded under the IDEA if their
academic achievement is being impacted due to a learning disability,
autism spectrum disorder, visual or hearing impairment, orthopedic
impairment, traumatic brain injury, speech or language impairment,
intellectual disability, emotional disturbance, or other health
impairment.

     Center for Parent Information and Resources

          Read more on evaluating children for disability and the
                      categories of disability under IDEA.

758 | Learning Differences
Learning Disabilities

A Learning Disability (or LD) is a specific impairment of academic
learning that interferes with a specific aspect of schoolwork, and
that reduces a student's academic performance significantly. An
LD shows itself as a major discrepancy between a student's ability
and some feature of achievement: The student may be delayed in
reading, writing, listening, speaking, or doing mathematics, but not
in all of these at once. A learning problem is not considered a
learning disability if it stems from physical, sensory, or motor
handicaps, or from generalized intellectual impairment. It is also
not an LD if the learning problem really reflects the challenges of
learning English as a second language. Genuine LDs are the learning
problems left over after these other possibilities are accounted for
or excluded. Typically, a student with an LD has not been helped by
teachers' ordinary efforts to assist the student when he or she falls
behind academically, though what counts as an "ordinary effort,"
of course, differs among teachers, schools, and students. Most
importantly, though, an LD relates to a fairly specific area of
academic learning. A student may be able to read and compute well
enough, for example, but not be able to write. LDs are by far the
most common form of special educational need, accounting for half
of all students with special needs in the United States and anywhere
from 5 to 20% of all students, depending on how the numbers are
estimated (United States Department of Education, 2005; Ysseldyke
& Bielinski, 2002). Students with LDs are so common, in fact, that
most teachers regularly encounter at least one per class in any given
school year, regardless of the grade level they teach.

   These difficulties are identified in school because this is when
children's academic abilities are being tested, compared, and
measured. Consequently, once academic testing is no longer
essential in that person's life (as when they are working rather than
going to school), these disabilities may no longer be noticed or

                                                                    Learning Differences | 759
relevant, depending on the person's job and the extent of the
disability.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=106#oembed-1

Video 7.2.1. Common Learning Disabilities defines what makes
something a learning disability and explains some of the most
common learning disabilities.

   Dyslexia is one of the most commonly diagnosed disabilities and
involves having difficulty in the area of reading. This diagnosis is
used for a number of reading difficulties. Common characteristics
are difficulty with phonological processing, which includes the
manipulation of sounds, spelling, and rapid visual/verbal
processing. Additionally, the child may reverse letters, have
difficulty reading from left to right, or may have problems
associating letters with sounds. It appears to be rooted in
neurological problems involving the parts of the brain active in
recognizing letters, verbally responding, and manipulating sounds.
Recent studies have identified a number of genes that are linked
to developing dyslexia (National Institute of Neurological Disorders
and Stroke, 2016). Treatment typically involves altering teaching
methods to accommodate the person's particular problematic area.

   Dysgraphia, a writing disability, is often associated with dyslexia
(Carlson, 2013). There are different types of dysgraphia, including
phonological dysgraphia, when the person cannot sound out words
and write them phonetically. Orthographic dysgraphia is
demonstrated by those individuals who can spell regularly spelled
words, but not irregularly spelled ones. Some individuals with

760 | Learning Differences
dysgraphia experience difficulties in motor control and experience
trouble forming letters when using a pen or pencil.

   Dyscalculia refers to problems in math. Cowan and Powell (2014)
identified several terms used when describing difficulties in
mathematics, including dyscalculia, mathematical learning
disability, and mathematics disorder. All three terms refer to
students with average intelligence who exhibit poor academic
performance in mathematics. When evaluating a group of third
graders, Cowan and Powell (2014) found that children with
dyscalculia demonstrated problems with working memory,
reasoning, processing speed, and oral language, all of which are
referred to as domain-general factors. Additionally, problems with
multi-digit skills, including number system knowledge, were also
exhibited.

   LDs are by far the most common form of special educational need,
accounting for half of all students with special needs in the United
States and anywhere from 5 to 20 percent of all students, depending
on how the numbers are estimated (United States Department of
Education, 2005; Ysseldyke & Bielinski, 2002). Students with LDs are
so common, in fact, that most teachers regularly encounter at least
one per class in any given school year, regardless of the grade level
they teach.

Assisting Students with Learning Disabilities

There are various ways to assist students with learning disabilities,
depending not only on the nature of the disability, of course, but
also on the concepts or theories of learning to guide you. Let's take
Irma, for example. Irma is a tenth-grader who adds multiple-digit
numbers as if they were single-digit numbers stuck together: 42
+ 59 equals 911 rather than 101, though 23 + 54 correctly equals
77. Stated more formally, Irma adds two-digit numbers without
carrying digits forward from the one's column to the tens column,

                                                                     Learning Differences | 761
or from the tens to the hundreds column. Example 1 shows the
effect that her strategy has on one of her homework papers. What
is going on here and how could a teacher help Irma?

     Example 1: Irma's math homework about
   two-digit addition

        Look at Irma's homework below:

                Directions: Add the following numbers.
                  42 + 59 = 911
                  23 + 54 = 77
                  11 + 48 = 59
                  47 + 23 = 610
                  97 + 64 = 1511
                  41 + 27 = 68

        Three out of the six problems are done correctly, even
     though Irma seems to use an incorrect strategy
     systematically on all six problems.

Behaviorism: Reinforcement for Wrong Strategies

One possible approach comes from the behaviorist theory. Irma
762 | Learning Differences
may persist with the single-digit strategy because it has been
reinforced a lot in the past. Maybe she was rewarded so much for
adding single-digit numbers (3 + 5, 7 + 8, etc.) correctly that she
generalized this skill to two-digit problems--in fact over generalized
it. This explanation is plausible because she would still get many
two-digit problems right, as you can confirm by looking at it. In
behaviorist terms, her incorrect strategy would still be reinforced,
but now only on a "partial schedule of reinforcement." Partial
schedules are especially slow to extinguish, so Irma persists
seemingly indefinitely with treating two-digit problems as if they
were single-digit problems.

   From the point of view of behaviorism, changing Irma's behavior
is tricky since the desired behavior (borrowing correctly) rarely
happens and therefore cannot be reinforced very often. It might
therefore help the teacher to reward behaviors that compete
directly with Irma's inappropriate strategy. The teacher might
reduce credit for simply finding the correct answer, for example,
and increase credit for a student showing her work--including the
work of carrying digits forward correctly. Or the teacher might
make a point of discussing Irma's math work with Irma frequently,
so as to create more occasions when she can praise Irma for
working problems correctly.

Metacognition and Responding Reflectively

Part of Irma's problem may be that she is thoughtless about doing
her math: the minute she sees numbers on a worksheet, she stuffs
them into the first arithmetic procedure that comes to mind. Her
learning style, that is, seems too impulsive and not reflective
enough. Her style also suggests a failure of metacognition
(remember that idea?), which is her self-monitoring of her own
thinking and its effectiveness. As a solution, the teacher could
encourage Irma to think out loud when she completes two-digit
problems--literally get her to "talk her way through" each problem.

                                                                    Learning Differences | 763
If participating in these conversations was sometimes impractical,
the teacher might also arrange for a skilled classmate to take her
place some of the time. Cooperation between Irma and the
classmate might help the classmate as well, or even improve overall
social relationships in the classroom.

Constructivism, Mentoring, and the Zone of Proximal
Development

Perhaps Irma has in fact learned how to carry digits forward, but has
not learned the procedure well enough to use it reliably on her own;
so she constantly falls back on the earlier, better-learned strategy
of single-digit addition. In that case, her problem can be seen in
constructivist terms. In essence, Irma has lacked appropriate
mentoring from someone more expert than herself, someone who
can create a "zone of proximal development" in which she can
display and consolidate her skills more successfully. She still needs
mentoring or "assisted coaching" more than independent practice.
The teacher can arrange some of this in much the way she
encourages her to be more reflective, either by working with Irma
herself or by arranging for a classmate or even a parent to volunteer
to do so. In this case, however, whoever serves as a mentor should
not only listen but also actively offer Irma help. The help has to
be just enough to ensure that Irma completes two-digit problems
correctly--neither more nor less. Too much help may prevent Irma
from taking responsibility for learning the new strategy, but too
little may cause her to take the responsibility prematurely.

764 | Learning Differences
Autism Spectrum Disorder

Autism spectrum disorder is probably the most misunderstood and
puzzling of neurodevelopmental disorders. Children with this
disorder show signs of significant disturbances in three main areas:
(a) deficits in social interaction, (b) deficits in communication, and
(c) repetitive patterns of behavior or interests. These disturbances
appear early in life and cause serious impairments in functioning
(APA, 2013).

   The student with autism spectrum disorder might exhibit deficits
in social interaction by not initiating conversations with others or
turning their heads away when spoken to. They may not make eye
contact with others and seem to prefer being alone rather than with
others. In a certain sense, it is almost as though these individuals
live in a personal and isolated social world others are simply not
privy to or able to penetrate.

                                                  Communication deficits can
                                               range from a complete lack of
                                               speech to one-word responses
                                               (e.g., saying "Yes" or "No" when
                                               replying to questions or
                                               statements that require additional
                                               elaboration), echoed speech (e.g.,
                                               parroting what another person
                                               says, either immediately or
                                               several hours or even days later),
to difficulty maintaining a conversation because of an inability to
reciprocate others' comments. These deficits can also include
problems in using and understanding nonverbal cues (e.g., facial
expressions, gestures, and postures) that facilitate normal
communication.

                                                                                                   | 765
   Figure 7.2.1. Dr. Temple Grandin, advocate for individuals with
autism.

   Repetitive patterns of behavior or interests can be exhibited in a
number of ways. The child might engage in stereotyped, repetitive
movements (rocking, head-banging, or repeatedly dropping an
object and then picking it up), or she might show great distress
at small changes in routine or the environment. For example, the
child might throw a temper tantrum if an object is not in its proper
place or if a regularly- scheduled activity is rescheduled. In some
cases, the person with autism spectrum disorder might show highly
restricted and fixated interests that appear to be abnormal in their
intensity. For instance, the child might learn and memorize every
detail about something, even though doing so serves no apparent
purpose. Importantly, autism spectrum disorder is not the same
thing as intellectual disability, although these two conditions can
occur together. The DSM-5 specifies that the symptoms of autism
spectrum disorder are not caused or explained by intellectual
disability.

   The qualifier "spectrum" in autism spectrum disorder is used to
indicate that individuals with the disorder can show a range, or
spectrum, of symptoms that vary in their magnitude and severity:
Some severe, others less severe. The previous edition of the DSM
included a diagnosis of Asperger's disorder, generally recognized
as a less severe form of autistic disorder; individuals diagnosed
with Asperger's disorder were described as having average or high
intelligence and a strong vocabulary, but exhibiting impairments in
social interaction and social communication, such as talking only
about their special interests (Wing, Gould, & Gillberg, 2011).
However, because research has failed to demonstrate that
Asperger's disorder differs qualitatively from autistic disorder, the
DSM-5 does not include it. Some individuals with autism spectrum
disorder, particularly those with better language and intellectual
skills, can live and work independently as adults. However, most
do not because the symptoms remain sufficient to cause serious
impairment in many realms of life (APA, 2013).

766 |
                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=106#oembed-2

Video 7.2.2. What is Autism Spectrum Disorder? explains the range of
behaviors and symptoms associated with autism spectrum disorder.

   Currently, estimates indicate that nearly 1 in 88 children in the
United States have autism spectrum disorder; the disorder is 5
times more common in boys (1 out of 54) than girls (1 out of 252)
(CDC, 2012). Rates of autistic spectrum disorder have increased
dramatically since the 1980s. For example, California saw an
increase of 273% in reported cases from 1987 through 1998 (Byrd,
2002); between 2000 and 2008, the rate of autism diagnoses in the
United States increased by 78% (CDC, 2012). Although it is difficult
to interpret this increase, it is possible that the rise in prevalence
is the result of the broadening of the diagnosis, increased efforts
to identify cases in the community, and greater awareness and
acceptance of the diagnosis. In addition, mental health professionals
are now more knowledgeable about autism spectrum disorder and
are better equipped to make the diagnosis, even in subtle cases
(Novella, 2008).

   The exact causes of autism spectrum disorder remain unknown
despite massive research efforts over the last two decades (Meek,
Lemery-Chalfant, Jahromi, & Valiente, 2013). Autism appears to be
strongly influenced by genetics, as identical twins show
concordance rates of 60%- 90%, whereas concordance rates for
fraternal twins and siblings are 5%-10% (Autism Genome Project
Consortium, 2007). Many different genes and gene mutations have
been implicated in autism (Meek et al., 2013). Among the genes
involved are those important in the formation of synaptic circuits
that facilitate communication between different areas of the brain

                                                                                                    | 767
(Gauthier et al., 2011). A number of environmental factors are also
thought to be associated with increased risk for autism spectrum
disorder, at least in part, because they contribute to new mutations.
These factors include exposure to pollutants, such as plant
emissions and mercury, urban versus rural residence, and vitamin D
deficiency (Kinney, Barch, Chayka, Napoleon, & Munir, 2009).

   There is no scientific evidence that a link exists between autism
and vaccinations (Hughes, 2007). Indeed, a recent study compared
the vaccination histories of 256 children with autism spectrum
disorder with that of 752 control children across three time periods
during their first two years of life (birth to 3 months, birth to 7
months, and birth to 2 years) (DeStefano, Price, & Weintraub, 2013).
At the time of the study, the children were between 6 and 13 years
old, and their prior vaccination records were obtained. Because
vaccines contain immunogens (substances that fight infections), the
investigators examined medical records to see how many
immunogens children received to determine if those children who
received more immunogens were at greater risk for developing
autism spectrum disorder. The results of this study clearly
demonstrated that the number of immunogens from vaccines
received during the first two years of life was not at all related to the
development of autism spectrum disorder.

Other Health Impairment: ADHD

Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) is not a learning
disability but can be considered as an `other health impairment' if
it is impacting academic performance. Individuals with ADHD show
a constant pattern of inattention and/or hyperactive and impulsive
behavior that interferes with normal functioning (American
Psychological Association (APA), 2013). Some of the signs of
inattention include great difficulty with, and avoidance of, tasks
that require sustained attention (such as conversations or reading),

768 |
failure to follow instructions (often resulting in failure to complete
schoolwork and other duties), disorganization (difficulty keeping
things in order, poor time management, sloppy and messy work),
lack of attention to detail, becoming easily distracted, and
forgetfulness. Hyperactivity is characterized by excessive
movement, and includes fidgeting or squirming, leaving one's seat
in situations when remaining seated is expected, having trouble
sitting still (e.g., in a restaurant), running about and climbing on
things, blurting out responses before another person's question or
statement has been completed, difficulty waiting one's turn for
something, and interrupting and intruding on others. Frequently,
the hyperactive child comes across as noisy and boisterous. The
child's behavior is hasty, impulsive, and seems to occur without
much forethought; these characteristics may explain why
adolescents and young adults diagnosed with ADHD receive more
traffic tickets and have more automobile accidents than do others
their age (Thompson, Molina, Pelham, & Gnagy, 2007).

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=106#oembed-3

Video 7.2.3. What is ADHD? explains the types and symptoms of
ADHD.

   ADHD occurs in about 5% of children (APA, 2013). On average,
boys are 3 times more likely to have ADHD than girls; however,
such findings might reflect the greater propensity of boys to engage
in aggressive and antisocial behavior and thus incur a greater
likelihood of being referred to psychological clinics (Barkley, 2006).
Children with ADHD face severe academic and social challenges.
Compared to their non-ADHD counterparts, children with ADHD

                                                                                                   | 769
have lower grades and standardized test scores and higher rates of
expulsion, grade retention, and dropping out (Loe & Feldman, 2007).
They also are less well-liked and more often rejected by their peers
(Hoza et al., 2005).

Differences in Perceptions: ADHD Versus High
Activity

It is important to note that classrooms are places that make heavy
demands on not showing ADHD-like behaviors: students are often
supposed to sit for long periods, avoid interrupting others, finish
tasks after beginning them, and keep their minds (and materials)
organized. Ironically, therefore, classroom life may sometimes
aggravate ADHD without the teacher intending for it to do so. A
student with only a mild or occasional tendency to be restless, for
example, may fit in well outdoors playing soccer but feel unusually
restless indoors during class. It also should not be surprising that
teachers sometimes mistake a student who is merely rather active
for a student with ADHD, since any tendency to be physically active
may contribute to problems with classroom management. The
tendency to "over-diagnose" is more likely for boys than for girls
(Maniadaki, et al., 2003), presumably because gender role
expectations cause teachers to be especially alert to high activity
in boys. Over-diagnosis is also especially likely for students who
are culturally or linguistically non-Anglo (Chamberlain, 2005),
presumably because cultural and language differences may
sometimes lead teachers to misinterpret students' behavior. To
avoid making such mistakes, it is important to keep in mind that in
true ADHD, restlessness, activity, and distractibility are widespread
and sustained. A student who shows such problems at school but
never at home, for example, may not have ADHD; he may simply not
be getting along with his teacher or classmates.

770 |
Is the Prevalence of ADHD Increasing?

Many people believe that the rates of ADHD have increased in
recent years, and there is evidence to support this contention. In
a recent study, investigators found that the parent-reported
prevalence of ADHD among children (4-17 years old) in the United
States increased by 22% during a 4-year period, from 7.8% in 2003
to 9.5% in 2007 (CDC, 2010). ADHD may be over-diagnosed by
doctors who are too quick to medicate children as behavior
treatment. There is also greater awareness of ADHD now than in
the past. Nearly everyone has heard of ADHD, and most parents and
teachers are aware of its key symptoms. Thus, parents may be quick
to take their children to a doctor if they believe their child possesses
these symptoms, or teachers may be more likely now than in the
past to notice the symptoms and refer the child for evaluation.

   ADHD can persist into adolescence and adulthood (Barkley,
Fischer, Smallish, & Fletcher, 2002). A recent study found that 29.3%
of adults who had been diagnosed with ADHD decades earlier still
showed symptoms (Barbaresi et al., 2013). Somewhat troubling, this
study also reported that nearly 81% of those whose ADHD persisted
into adulthood had experienced at least one other comorbid
disorder, compared to 47% of those whose ADHD did not persist.
Additional concerns when an adult has ADHD include worse
educational attainment, lower socioeconomic status, less likely to
be employed, more likely to be divorced, and more likely to have
non-alcohol-related substance abuse problems (Klein et al., 2012).

   Family and twin studies indicate that genetics play a significant
role in the development of ADHD. Burt (2009), in a review of 26
studies, reported that the median rate of concordance for identical
twins was .66, whereas the median concordance rate for fraternal
twins was .20. The specific genes involved in ADHD are thought
to include at least two that are important in the regulation of the
neurotransmitter dopamine (Gizer, Ficks, & Waldman, 2009),
suggesting that dopamine may be important in ADHD. Indeed,

                                                                                                    | 771
medications used in the treatment of ADHD, such as
methylphenidate (Ritalin) and amphetamine with
dextroamphetamine (Adderall), have stimulant qualities and elevate
dopamine activity. People with ADHD show less dopamine activity
in key regions of the brain, especially those associated with
motivation and reward (Volkow et al., 2009), which provides support
to the theory that dopamine deficits may be a vital factor in the
development this disorder (Swanson et al., 2007).

   Brain imaging studies have shown that children with ADHD
exhibit abnormalities in their frontal lobes, an area in which
dopamine is in abundance. Compared to children without ADHD,
those with ADHD appear to have smaller frontal lobe volume, and
they show less frontal lobe activation when performing mental
tasks. Recall that one of the functions of the frontal lobes is to
inhibit our behavior. Thus, abnormalities in this region may go a
long way toward explaining the hyperactive, uncontrolled behavior
of ADHD.

   Many parents attribute their child's hyperactivity to sugar. A
statistical review of 16 studies, however, concluded that sugar
consumption has no effect at all on the behavioral and cognitive
performance of children (Wolraich, Wilson, & White, 1995).
Additionally, although food additives have been shown to increase
hyperactivity in non-ADHD children, the effect is rather small
(McCann et al., 2007). Numerous studies, however, have shown a
significant relationship between exposure to nicotine in cigarette
smoke during the prenatal period and ADHD (Linnet et al., 2003).
Maternal smoking during pregnancy is associated with the
development of more severe symptoms of the disorder (Thakur et
al., 2013).

   Recommended treatment for ADHD includes behavioral
interventions, cognitive behavioral therapy, parent and teacher
education, recreational programs, and lifestyle changes, such as
getting more sleep (Clay, 2013). For some children, medication is
prescribed. Parents are often concerned that stimulant medication
may result in their child acquiring a substance use disorder.

772 |
However, research using longitudinal studies has demonstrated that
children diagnosed with ADHD who received pharmacological
treatment had a lower risk for substance abuse problems than those
children who did not receive medication (Wilens, Fararone,
Biederman, & Gunawardene, 2003). The risk of substance abuse
problems appears to be even greater for those with ADHD who
are un-medicated and also exhibit antisocial tendencies (Marshal &
Molina, 2006).

Teaching students with ADHD

Research also shows that ADHD can be reduced for many students
if they take certain medications, of which the most common
is methylphenidate, commonly known by the name Ritalin (Wilens,
2005; Olfson, 2003). This drug and others like it act by stimulating
the nervous system, which reduces symptoms by helping a student
pay better attention to the choices he or she makes and to the
impact of actions on others. Unfortunately, the medications do not
work on all students with ADHD, especially after they reach
adolescence, and its long-term effects are uncertain (Breggin, 1999).
In any case, Ritalin and similar drugs have certain practical
problems. Drugs cost money, for one thing, which is a problem
for a family without much money, to begin with, or for a family
lacking medical insurance that pays for medications--a particularly
common situation in the United States. For another thing, drugs
must be taken regularly in order to be effective, including on
weekends. Keeping a regular schedule can be difficult if parents'
own schedules are irregular or simply differ from the child's, for
example, because of night shifts at work or because parents are
separated and share custody of the child.

   In any case, since teachers are not doctors and medications are
not under teachers' control, it may be more important simply to
provide an environment where a student with ADHD can organize

                                                                                                    | 773
choices and actions easily and successfully. Clear rules and
procedures, for example, can reduce the "noise" or chaotic quality in
the child's classroom life significantly. The rules and procedures can
be generated jointly with the child; they do not have to be imposed
arbitrarily, as if the student were incapable of thinking about them
reasonably. Sometimes a classmate can be enlisted to model slower,
more reflective styles of working, but in ways that do not imply
undue criticism of the student with ADHD. The more reflective
student can complete a set of math problems, for example, while
explaining what he or she is thinking about while doing the work.
Sometimes the teacher can help by making lists of tasks or of steps
in long tasks. Use visual cues to help remind students of what they
should be doing. It can help to divide focused work into small,
short sessions rather than grouping it into single, longer sessions.
Whatever the strategies that you use, they should be consistent,
predictable, and generated by the student as much as possible.
Students can also benefit from explicit teaching of self-monitoring
skills. By having these qualities, the strategies can strengthen the
student's self-direction and ability to screen out the distractions
of classroom life. The goal for teachers, in essence, is to build the
student's metacognitive capacity, while at the same time, of course,
treating the student with respect.

     How Difficult Can This be-The F.A.T. City
   Workshop

                          One or more interactive elements has been

774 |
                          excluded from this version of the text. You can
              view them online here:
              https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=106#o
              embed-4

        Video 7.2.4. How Difficult Can This Be-The F.A.T. City
     Workshop is a simulation provided by Rick Lavoie. While the
     recording is dated, this award-winning video remains one
     of the most powerful means for conveying the experience
     of the learning disabled child to educators and parents.
     Individuals with learning disabilities often express that this
     video accurately articulates their schooling experience.

CC licensed content, Original

   Learning Differences. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van Hoose.
      Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College. Retrieved
      from: . License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-
      ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Adolescent Psychology. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      adolescent. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and

                                                                                                    | 775
      Rosemary Sutton. . Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Specific attribution
   What is ADHD? . Provided by: Khan Academy. Retrieved from:
      https://youtu.be/4ilxbRBM860. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
All rights reserved content
   Common Learning Disabilies. Authored by: Dr. Andrea
      Huebner. Provided by: Mayo Clinic. Retrieved from:
      https://youtu.be/ov0W3IhxlMM. License: All Rights Reserved
   How Difficult Can This Be--The F.A.T. City Workshop.
      Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/Q3UNdbxk3xs. License: All
      Rights Reserved

776 |
Behavior Disorders

Behavior disorders are a diverse group of conditions in which a
student chronically performs highly inappropriate behaviors. A
student with this condition might seek attention, for example, by
acting out disruptively in class. Other students with the condition
might behave aggressively, be distractible and overly active, seem
anxious or withdrawn, or seem disconnected from everyday reality.
As with learning disabilities, the sheer range of signs and symptoms
defies concise description. But the problematic behaviors do have
several general features in common (Kauffman, 2005; Hallahan &
Kauffman, 2006):

   they tend to be extreme
   they persist for extended periods of time
   they tend to be socially unacceptable (e.g. unwanted sexual

      advances or vandalism against school property)
   they affect schoolwork
   they have no other obvious explanation (e.g. a health problem

      or temporary disruption in the family)

The variety among behavioral disorders means that estimates of
their frequency also tend to vary among states, cities, and
provinces. It also means that in some cases, a student with a
behavioral disorder may be diagnosed with a psychological disorder,
such as oppositional defiance disorder, conduct disorder, ADHD,
or bipolar disorder. In other cases, a behavioral problem may be
serious enough to warrant intervention, but the student does not
have another disorder label. In any case, available statistics suggest
that only about one to two percent of students, or perhaps less,
have true behavioral disorders--a figure that is only about one-half
or one-third of the frequency for intellectual disabilities (Kauffman,
2005). Because of the potentially disruptive effects of behavioral
disorders, however, students with this condition are of special

                                                                        Behavior Disorders | 777
concern to teachers. Just one student who is highly aggressive or
disruptive can interfere with the functioning of an entire class, and
challenge even the best teacher's management skills and patience.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=107#oembed-1

Video 7.4.1. Disruptive, Impulse Control, and Conduct
Disorders discusses a few of the psychological diagnoses that are
behavior disorders.

     Children's Mental Health Disorder Fact Sheet for
   the Classroom

         The Children's Mental Health Disorder Fact Sheet for the
      Classroom provides a list and description of psychological
     disorders that teachers may encounter with their students,
     as well as educational implications, instructional strategies,

                        and classroom accommodations.

Strategies for Teaching Students with Behavioral
Disorders

The most common challenges of teaching students with behavioral

778 | Behavior Disorders
disorders have to do with classroom management. Three important
ideas discussed there, however, also deserve special emphasis here:
(1) identifying circumstances that trigger inappropriate behaviors,
(2) teaching of interpersonal skills explicitly, and (3) disciplining a
student fairly.

Identifying Circumstances that Trigger
Inappropriate Behaviors

Dealing with disruption is more effective if you can identify the
specific circumstances or event that triggers it, rather than focusing
on the personality of the student doing the disruption. A wide
variety of factors can trigger inappropriate behavior (Heineman,
Dunlap, & Kincaid, 2005):

   physiological effects--including illness, fatigue, hunger, or side
      effects from medications

   physical features of the classroom--such as the classroom
      being too warm or too cold, the chairs being exceptionally
      uncomfortable for sitting, or seating patterns that interfere
      with hearing or seeing

   instructional choices or strategies that frustrate
      learning--including restricting students' choices unduly, giving
      instructions that are unclear, choosing activities that are too
      difficult or too long, or preventing students from asking
      questions when they need help

By identifying the specific variables often associated with disruptive
behaviors, it is easier to devise ways to prevent the behaviors, either
by avoiding the triggers if this is possible or by teaching the student
alternative but quite specific ways of responding to the triggering
circumstance.

                                                                       Behavior Disorders | 779
Teaching Interpersonal Skills Explicitly

Because of their history and behavior, some students with behavior
disorders have had little opportunity to learn appropriate social
skills. Simple courtesies (like remembering to say please or thanks)
may not be totally unknown, but maybe unpracticed and seem
unimportant to the student, as might body language (like eye
contact or sitting up to listen to a teacher rather than slouching and
looking away). These skills can be taught in ways that do not make
them part of the punishment, make them seem "preachy," or put a
student to shame in front of classmates. Depending on the age or
grade level of the class, one way is by reading or assigning books and
stories in which the characters model good social skills. Another
is through games that require courteous language to succeed; one
that I recall from my own school days, for example, was called
"Mother, May I?" (Sullivan & Strang, 2002). Still, another is through
programs that link an older student or adult from the community as
a partner to the student at risk for behavior problems; a prominent
example of such a program in the United States is Big Brothers Big
Sisters of America, which arranges for older individuals to act as
mentors for younger boys and girls (Tierney, Grossman, & Resch,
1995; Newburn & Shiner, 2006).

   In addition, strategies based on behaviorist theory have proved
effective for many students, especially if the student needs
opportunities simply to practice social skills that he has learned
only recently and may still feel awkward or self-conscious in using
(Algozzine & Ysseldyke, 2006). Behaviorist techniques include the
use of positive reinforcement, extinction, generalization, and the
like. In addition to these, teachers can arrange for contingency
contracts, which are agreements between the teacher and a
student about exactly what work the student will do, how it will
be rewarded, and what the consequences will be if the agreement
is not fulfilled (Wilkinson, 2003). An advantage of all such behaviorist
techniques is their precision and clarity: there is little room for

780 | Behavior Disorders
misunderstanding about just what your expectations are as the
teacher. The precision and clarity, in turn, make it less tempting or
necessary for you, as a teacher, to become angry about infractions
of rules or a student's failure to fulfill contracts or agreements since
the consequences tend already to be relatively obvious and clear.
"Keeping your cool" can be especially helpful when dealing with
behavior that is by nature annoying or disrupting.

Fairness in Disciplining

Many strategies for helping a student with a behavior disorder may
be spelled out in the student's individual educational plan, such
as discussed earlier in this chapter. The plan can (and indeed is
supposed to) serve as a guide in devising daily activities and
approaches with the student. Keep in mind, however, that since
an IEP is akin to a legal agreement among a teacher, other
professionals, a student, and the student's parents, departures from
it should be made only cautiously and carefully, if ever. Although
such departures may seem unlikely, a student with a behavior
disorder may sometimes be exasperating enough to make it
tempting to use stronger or more sweeping punishments than usual
(for example, isolating a student for extended times). In case you are
tempted in this direction, remember that every IEP also guarantees
the student and the student's parents due process before an IEP
can be changed. In practice, this means consulting with everyone
involved in the case--especially parents, other specialists, and the
student himself--and reaching an agreement before adopting new
strategies that differ significantly from the past.

   Instead of "increasing the volume" of punishments, a better
approach is to keep careful records of the student's behavior and
of your own responses to it, documenting the reasonableness of
your rules or responses to any major disruptions. By having the
records, collaboration with parents and other professionals can be

                                                                        Behavior Disorders | 781
more productive and fair-minded, and increase others' confidence
in your judgments about what the student needs in order to fit in
more comfortably with the class. In the long term, more effective
collaboration leads both to better support and to more learning for
the student (as well as to better support for you as a teacher!).
CC licensed content, Original

   Behavior Disorders. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van Hoose.
      Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College. Retrieved
      from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/chapter/
      behavior-disorders/%20u200e. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Specific attribution
   Childrenu2019s Mental Health Disorder Fact Sheet for the
      Classroom. Provided by: Iowa Department of Education .
      Retrieved from: https://educateiowa.gov/sites/files/ed/
      documents/MHClassroomFactSheet.pdf. License: All Rights
      Reserved

All rights reserved content
   Disruptive, Impulse Control, and Conduct Disorders. Provided
      by: Osmosis. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/
      XH46Nm1QOcg. License: All Rights Reserved

782 | Behavior Disorders
Physical Disabilities and
Sensory Impairments

A few students have serious physical, medical, or sensory challenges
that interfere with their learning. Usually, physical and medical
challenges are medical conditions or diseases that require ongoing
medical care. The sensory challenges are usually a loss either in
hearing or in vision, or more rarely in both. Whatever the
specific problem, it is serious enough to interfere with activities in
regular classroom programs and to qualify the student for special
education services or programs

   Physical challenges that are this serious are relatively infrequent
compared to some of the other special needs discussed in this
chapter, though they are of course important in the lives of the
students and their families, as well as important for teachers to
accommodate. Only about one percent of US students have a
hearing loss serious enough to be served by special programs for
such students (United States Department of Education, 2005). Only
about half that number have visual impairments that lead them
to be served by special programs. For two reasons, though, these
figures are a bit misleading. One reason is that many more students
have vision or hearing problems that are too mild (such as wearing
eyeglasses for "ordinary" nearsightedness). Another is that some
students with serious sensory impairments may also have other
disabilities and therefore not be counted in statistics about sensory
impairments.

Hearing Loss

A child can acquire a hearing loss for a variety of reasons, ranging

                                                             Physical Disabilities and Sensory
                                                                                Impairments | 783
from disease early in childhood, to difficulties during childbirth, to
reactions to toxic drugs. In the classroom, however, the cause of the
loss is virtually irrelevant because it makes little difference in how
to accommodate a student's educational needs. More important
than the cause of the loss is its extent. Students with only mild
or moderate loss of hearing are sometimes called hearing
impaired or hard of hearing; only those with nearly complete loss
are called deaf. As with other sorts of disabilities, the milder the
hearing loss, the more likely you are to encounter the student in a
regular classroom, at least for part of the day.

Signs of Hearing Loss

Although determining whether a student has a hearing loss may
seem straightforward ("Just give a hearing test!"), the assessment is
often not clear-cut if it takes the student's daily experiences into
account. A serious or profound hearing loss tends to be noticed
relatively quickly and therefore often receives special help (or at
least receives additional diagnosis) sooner. Mild or moderate
hearing loss is much more common, however, and is more likely to
be overlooked or mistaken for some other sort of learning problem
(Sherer, 2004). Students with a mild hearing loss sometimes have
somewhat depressed (or lowered) language and literacy
skills--though not always, and in any case, so do some students
without any loss. They may also seem not to listen or attend to a
speaker because of trouble in locating the source of sounds--but
then again, sometimes students without loss also fail to listen,
though for entirely different reasons. Students with hearing loss
may frequently give incorrect answers to questions--but so do
certain other students with normal hearing. In addition, partial
hearing loss can be hidden if the student teaches himself or herself
to lip read, for example, or is careful in choosing which questions
to answer in a class discussion. And so on. Systematic hearing tests

784 | Physical Disabilities and Sensory Impairments
given by medical or hearing specialists can resolve some of these
ambiguities. But even they can give a misleading impression since
students' true ability to manage in class depends on how well they
combine cues and information from the entire context of classroom
life.

   In identifying a student who may have a hearing loss, therefore,
teachers need to observe the student over an extended period of
time and in as many situations as possible. In particular, look for a
persistent combination of some of the following, but look for them
over repeated or numerous occasions (Luckner & Carter, 2001):

   delayed language or literacy skills, both written and oral
   some ability (usually partial) to read lips
   less worldly knowledge than usual because of lack of

      involvement with oral dialogue and/or delayed literacy
   occasionally, tendency to social isolation because of

      awkwardness in communication

Teaching Students with Hearing Loss

In principle, adjustments in teaching students with hearing loss are
relatively easy to make though they do require deliberate actions or
choices by the teacher and by fellow students. Interestingly, many
of the strategies make good advice for teaching all students!

   Take advantage of the student's residual hearing. Seat the
      student close to you if you are doing the talking, or close to key
      classmates if the students are in a workgroup. Keep competing
      for noise, such as unnecessary talking or whispering, to a
      minimum (because such noise is especially distracting to
      someone with a hearing loss). Keep instructions concise and to
      the point. Ask the student occasionally whether he or she is
      understanding.

                                 Physical Disabilities and Sensory Impairments | 785
   Use visual cues liberally. Make charts and diagrams wherever
      appropriate to illustrate what you are saying. Look directly at
      the student when you are speaking to him or her (to facilitate
      lip reading). Gesture and point to keywords or objects--but
      within reason, not excessively. Provide handouts or readings to
      review visually the points that you make orally.

   Include the student in the community of the classroom.
      Recruit one or more classmates to assist in "translating" oral
      comments that the student may have missed. If the student
      uses American Sign Language (ASL) at home or elsewhere, then
      learn a few basic, important signs of ASL yourself ("Hello"
      "thank you" "How are you?"). Teach them to classmates as well.

Visual Impairment

Students with visual impairments have difficulty seeing even with
corrective lenses. Most commonly the difficulty has to do with
refraction (the ability to focus), but some students may also
experience a limited field of view (called tunnel vision) or be overly
sensitive to light in general. As with hearing loss, labels for visual
impairment depend somewhat on the extent and nature of the
problem. Legal blindness means that the person has significant
tunnel vision or else visual acuity (sharpness of vision) of 20/200
or less, which means that he or she must be 20 feet away from an
object that a person with normal eyesight can see at 200 feet. Low
vision means that a person has some vision usable for reading, but
often needs a special optical device such as a magnifying lens for
doing so. As with hearing loss, the milder the impairment, the more
likely that a student with a vision problem will spend some or even
all the time in a regular class.

786 | Physical Disabilities and Sensory Impairments
Signs of Visual Impairment

Students with visual impairments often show some of the same
signs as students with simple, common nearsightedness. The
students may rub their eyes a lot, for example, blink more than
usual, or hold books very close to read them. They may complain of
itchiness in their eyes, or of headaches, dizziness, or even nausea
after doing a lot of close eye work. The difference between the
students with visual impairment and those with "ordinary"
nearsightedness is primarily a matter of degree: the ones with
impairment show the signs more often and more obviously. If the
impairment is serious enough or has roots in certain physical
conditions or diseases, they may also have additional symptoms,
such as crossed eyes or swollen eyelids. As with hearing loss, the
milder forms ironically can be the most subtle to observe and
therefore the most prone to being overlooked at first. For classroom
teachers, the best strategy may be to keep track of a student whose
physical signs happen in combination with learning difficulties, and
for whom the combination persists for many weeks.

Teaching Students with Visual Impairment

In general, advice for teaching students with mild or moderate
visual impairment parallels the advice for teaching students with
hearing loss, though with obvious differences because of the nature
of the students' disabilities.

   Take advantage of the student's residual vision. If the student
      still has some useful vision, place him or her where he can
      easily see the most important parts of the classroom--whether
      that is you, the chalkboard, a video screen, or particular fellow
      students. Make sure that the classroom, or at least the
      student's part of it, is well lit (because good lighting makes

                                  Physical Disabilities and Sensory Impairments | 787
      reading easier with low vision). Make sure that handouts,
      books, and other reading materials have good, sharp contrast
      (also helpful with a visual impairment).
   Use non-visual information liberally. Remember not to expect
      a student with visual impairment to learn information that is
      by nature only visual, such as the layout of the classroom, the
      appearance of photographs in a textbook, or of story lines in a
      video. Explain these to the student somehow. Use hands-on
      materials wherever they will work, such as maps printed in
      three-dimensional relief or with different textures. If the
      student knows how to read Braille (an alphabet for the blind
      using patterns of small bumps on a page), allow him to do so.
   Include the student in the community of the classroom. Make
      sure that the student is accepted as well as possible into the
      social life of the class. Recruit classmates to help explain visual
      material when necessary. Learn a bit of basic Braille and
      encourage classmates to do the same, even if none of you ever
      become as skilled with it as the student himself or herself.

CC licensed content, Original

   Physical-Disabilities and Sensory Impairments. Authored by:
      Nicole Arduini-Van Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley
      Community College. Retrieved from:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/chapter/physical-
      disabilities-sensory-impairments/%20u200e. License: CC BY-
      NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

788 | Physical Disabilities and Sensory Impairments
Teaching Students with
Disabilities

                                                                         Teaching Students with
                                                                                  Disabilities | 789
Universal Design for Learning

Universal design for learning (UDL) is a set of principles for
designing curricula that provides all individuals with equal
opportunities to learn. UDL is designed to serve all learners,
regardless of ability, disability, age, gender, or cultural and linguistic
background. UDL provides a blueprint for designing goals, methods,
materials, and assessments to reach all students including those
with diverse needs. Grounded in research of learner differences and
effective instructional settings, UDL principles call for varied and
flexible ways to:

   Present or access information, concepts, and ideas (the "what"
      of learning),

   Plan and execute learning tasks (the "how" of learning), and
   Get engaged--and stay engaged--in learning (the "why" of

      learning)

UDL is different from other approaches to curriculum design in that
educators begin the design process expecting the curriculum to be
used by a diverse set of students with varying skills and abilities.
UDL is an approach to learning that addresses and redresses the
primary barrier to learning: inflexible, one-size-fits-all curricula
that raise unintentional barriers. Learners with disabilities are the
most vulnerable to such barriers, but many students without
disabilities also find that curricula are poorly designed to meet
their learning needs. UDL helps meet the challenges of diversity
by recommending the use of flexible instructional materials,
techniques, and strategies that empower educators to meet
students' diverse needs. A universally designed curriculum is shaped
from the outset to meet the needs of the greatest number of users,
making costly, time-consuming, and after-the-fact changes to the

                                                                                                    | 791
curriculum unnecessary. The UDL framework is grounded in three
principles

   Multiple means of representation - using a variety of methods
      to present information, and provide a range of means to
      support

   Multiple means of action and expression -providing learners
      with alternative ways to act skillfully and demonstrate what
      they know

   Multiple means of engagement - tapping into learners'
      interests by offering choices of content and tools; motivating
      learners by offering adjustable levels of challenge.

Students Benefit from UDL

Students benefit from two major aspects of UDL: (1) its emphasis on
a flexible curriculum, and (2) the variety of instructional practices,
materials, and learning activities. All students, including those
learning English, older students, and those with disabilities
appreciate the multifaceted ways content is presented, as well as
options for demonstrating what they know. UDL helps educators
meet the challenge of serving those with special needs while
enhancing learning for all.

Incorporate UDL in the Classroom

Instructors may want to try the following strategies (Rose & Meyer,
2002):

   Use multiple strategies to present content. Enhance
      instruction through the use of case studies, music, role play,

792 |
   cooperative learning, hands-on activities, field trips, guest
   speakers, Web-based communications, and educational
   software. Example: Students can role-play important events
   in American history to give them a better understanding of the
   events and people involved. Also, offer a choice of learning
   contexts by providing opportunities for individual, pair, and
   group work as well as distance learning, peer learning,
   and fieldwork.
 Use a variety of materials. To present, illustrate, and reinforce
   new content, use materials such as online resources, videos,
   podcasts, PowerPoint presentations, realia, manipulatives, and
   e-books.
 Provide cognitive support. Give students organizing clues; for
   example: "I have explained the four main points, and now I am
   going to summarize them." Present background information for
   new concepts using pictures, artifacts, videos, and other
   materials that are not lecture-based. Scaffold student learning
   (provide temporary support to reduce the complexity of a task)
   by providing a course syllabus, outlines, summaries, study
   guides, and copies of PowerPoint slides.
 Teach to a variety of learning styles. Build movement into
   learning. Give instructions both orally and in writing to engage
   students auditorily
   and visually. Consider using large visual aids for slides,
   graphics, and charts.
 Provide flexible opportunities for assessment. Allow students
   to demonstrate their learning in multiple ways that include
   visual and oral presentation, rather than only written
   assessment.

                 One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                 from this version of the text. You can view them online

                                                                                                 | 793
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=109#oembed-1

Video 7.6.1. UDL at a Glance explains universal design for learning
and the UDL guidelines.

     CAST: Universal Design for Learning

          For more information, read about research, guidelines,
          and suggestions at the Universal Design for Learning

                                         website.

Alternative Assessments

In the context of students with disabilities, assessment refers to
gathering information about a student in order both to identify the
strengths of the student and to decide what special educational
support, if any, the student needs. In principle, of course, these
are tasks that teachers have for all students: assessment is a
major reason why we give tests and assignments, for example, and
why we listen carefully to the quality of students' comments during
class discussions. For students with disabilities, however, such
traditional or conventional strategies of assessment often seriously
underestimate the students' competence (Koretz & Barton, 2003/
2004; Pullin, 2005). Depending on the disability, a student may have
trouble with (a) holding a pencil, (b) hearing a question clearly, (c)

794 |
focusing on a picture, (d) marking an answer in time even when
he or she knows the answer, (e) concentrating on a task in the
presence of other people, or (f) answering a question at the pace
needed by the rest of the class. Traditionally, teachers have assumed
that all students either have these skills or can learn them with
just modest amounts of coaching, encouragement, and willpower.
For many other students, for example, it may be enough to say
something like: "Remember to listen to the question carefully!" For
students with disabilities, however, a comment like this may not
work and may even be insensitive. A student with visual impairment
does not need to be reminded to "look closely at what I am writing
on the board"; doing so will not cause the student to see the
chalkboard more clearly--though the reminder might increase the
student's anxiety and self-consciousness.

   There are a number of strategies for modifying assessments in
ways that attempt to be fair and that at the same time recognize
how busy teachers usually are. One is to consider supplementing
conventional assignments or tests with portfolios, which are
collections of a student's work that demonstrate a student's
development over time, and which usually include some sort of
reflective or evaluative comments from the student, the teacher,
or both (Carothers & Taylor, 2003; Wesson & King, 1996). Another
is to devise a system for observing the student regularly, even if
briefly, and informally recording notes about the observations for
later consideration and assessment. A third strategy is to recruit
help from teaching assistants, who are sometimes present to help
a student with a disability; an assistant can often conduct a brief
test or activity with the student, and later report on and discuss the
results with you.

   If you reflect on these strategies, you may realize that they may
sometimes create issues about fairness. If a student with a disability
demonstrates competence one way but other students demonstrate
it another, should they be given similar credit? On the other hand,
is it fair for one student to get a lower mark because the student

                                                                                                   | 795
lacks an ability--such as normal hearing--that teachers cannot, in
principle, ever teach?

Response to Intervention

Response to intervention (RTI) is an approach to academic
intervention that provides early, systematic, and appropriately
intensive assistance to children who are at risk for or are already
underperforming compared to their peers. RTI seeks to promote
academic success through universal screening, early intervention,
frequent progress monitoring, and increasingly intensive research-
based instruction or interventions for children who continue to
have difficulty.

   RTI was proposed as an alternative to the ability-achievement
discrepancy model, which requires children to exhibit a significant
discrepancy between their ability (often measured by IQ testing)
and academic achievement (as measured by their grades and
standardized testing). Methods to identify students with specific
learning disabilities have been controversial for decades. Opponents
of the ability-achievement discrepancy model have charged that
this method leads to over-diagnosing low-performing students with
having a learning disability. Proponents of RTI claim that the
process brings more clarity to the diagnostic process and helps

differentiate low-performing and leading disabled students. In the
process of identifying learning disabilities, RTI
differs from the formerly standard
"ability-achievement discrepancy" approach in
that decisions are based on outcomes of targeted
interventions rather than mathematical
discrepancies between scores achieved on
standardized assessments.

   RTI now refers to an education framework that involves research-
based instruction and interventions, regular monitoring of student

796 |
progress, and the subsequent use of these data over time to make
a variety of educational decisions, including, but not limited to
learning disabilities. To facilitate this broadened conception of RTI,
there was a shift to labeling this as one of the approaches of a
Multi-Tier System of Supports (MTSS) occurring in schools and the
professional literature.

   In the RTI process, service delivery is typically divided into three
levels (tiers) of support, with the intensity of interventions
increasing with each level.

   Tier 1 is focused specifically on the core curriculum, with
instruction and interventions targeting all students. Approximately
80% to 85% of the general student body should be able to meet
grade-level norms without additional assistance beyond the first
tier. Students who consistently do not perform within the expected
level of performance are then provided with additional
supplementary interventions at Tier 2, which typically involves
small group instruction. Approximately 3% to 6% of students will
continue to have difficulties after Tier 2 interventions; these
students will then receive Tier 3 individualized intervention
services, which is the most intense level of intervention (often one-
on-one) provided in the regular education environment. Through
RTI, educators can get enough evidence-based data to eliminate the
possibility that poor academic performance is due to inadequate
instruction. Therefore, it is argued that RTI is a more powerful
process to identify whether a student has a learning disability.

     Response to Intervention Action Network

             For more information on Response to Intervention,
     including interventions, the theoretical basis for the model,

                                                                                                    | 797
      and research on the process, the Response to Intervention
                    Action Network is an excellent source.

Least Restrictive Environment

The IDEA legislation calls for placing students with disabilities in
the least restrictive environment (or LRE), defined as the
combination of settings that involve the student with regular
classrooms and school programs as much as possible. The precise
combination is determined by the circumstances of a particular
school and of the student. A kindergarten child with a mild cognitive
disability, for example, may spend the majority of time in a regular
kindergarten class, working alongside and playing with non-
disabled classmates and relying on a teacher assistant for help
where needed. An individual with a similar disability in high school,
however, might be assigned primarily to classes specially intended
for slow learners, but nonetheless, participate in some school-wide
activities alongside non-disabled students. The difference in LREs
might reflect teachers' perceptions of how difficult it is to modify
the curriculum in each case; rightly or wrongly, teachers are apt to
regard adaptation as more challenging at "higher" grade levels. By
the same token, a student with a disability that is strictly physical
might spend virtually all his or her time in regular classes
throughout the student's school career; in this case, adjustment of
the curriculum would not be an issue.

   For you, the policy favoring the least restrictive environment
means that if you continue teaching long enough, you will very
likely encounter a student with a disability in one or more of your
classes, or at least have one in a school-related activity for which
you are responsible. It also means that the special educational needs
of these students will most often be the "mildest." Statistically, the

798 |
most frequent forms of special needs are learning disabilities, which
are impairments in specific aspects of learning, especially in
reading. Learning disabilities account for about half of all special
educational needs--as much as all other types put together.
Somewhat less common are speech and language disorders, cognitive
disabilities, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorders (or ADHD).
Because of their frequency and the likelihood that you will meet
students for whom these labels have been considered, I describe
them more fully later in this chapter, along with other disability
conditions that you will encounter much less frequently.

Individual Educational Plan

The third way that IDEA legislation and current educational
approaches affect teachers is by requiring teachers and other
professional staff to develop an annual individual educational
plan (or IEP) for each student with a disability. The plan is created
by a team of individuals who know the student's strengths and
needs; at a minimum, it includes one or more classroom teachers,
a "resource" or special education teacher, and the student's parents
or guardians. Sometimes, too, the team includes a school
administrator (like a vice-principal) or other professionals from
outside the school (like a psychologist or physician), depending on
the nature of the child's disability. An IEP can take many forms,
but it always describes a student's current social and academic
strengths as well as the student's social or academic needs. It also
specifies educational goals or objectives for the coming year, lists
special services to be provided, and describes how progress toward
the goals will be assessed at the end of the year. Exhibit 3 shows
a simple, imaginary IEP. (But keep in mind that the actual visual
formats of IEP plans vary widely among states, provinces, and
school jurisdictions.) This particular plan is for a student named
Sean, a boy having difficulties with reading. IEPs, like the one in

                                                                                                   | 799
the figure, originally served mainly students in the younger grades,
but more recently they have been extended and modified to serve
transition planning for adolescents with disabilities who are
approaching the end of their public schooling (West, et al., 1999).
For these students, the goals of the plan often include activities (like
finding employment) to extend beyond schooling.

            Figure 7.6.1. A sample individual education plan (IEP).
   If you have a student with an IEP, you can expect two
consequences for teaching. The first is that you should expect to
make definite, clear plans for the student, and to put the plans in
writing. This consequence does not, of course, prevent you from
800 |
taking advantage of unexpected or spontaneous classroom events
as well in order to enrich the curriculum. But it does mean that
an educational program for a student with a disability cannot
consist only of the unexpected or spontaneous. The second
consequence is that you should not expect to construct an
educational plan alone, as is commonly done when planning regular
classroom programs. When it comes to students with disabilities,
expect instead to plan as part of a team. Working with others
ensures that everyone who is concerned about the student has a
voice. It also makes it possible to improve the quality of IEPs by
pooling ideas from many sources--even if, as you might suspect, it
also challenges professionals to communicate clearly and cooperate
respectfully with team members in order to serve a student as well
as possible.

     Guide to Special Education

        The Advocates for Children of New York's Guide to
     Special Education provides an overview of special
     education services, the rights of students with disabilities,
     and the rights of parents of a child with a disability,
     including the process for identifying students with
     disabilities and how to plan for special education services.

        For more information about special education services
     for younger children, refer to Advocates for Children's
     Guide to Early Intervention and Guide to Preschool Special
     Education Services.
     .

CC licensed content, Original

                               | 801
   Teaching Students with Disabilities. Authored by: Nicole
      Arduini-Van Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community
      College. Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      edpsy/chapter/teaching-studentu2026ith-
      disabilities/%20u200e. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously
   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution
   Universal Design for Learning. Provided by: The Literacy
      Information and Communication System (LINCS), U.S.
      Department of Education. Retrieved from:
      https://lincs.ed.gov/sites/default/files/2_TEAL_UDL.pdf.
      License: CC0: No Rights Reserved
   Response to Intervention. Provided by: Wikipedia. Retrieved
      from: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
      Response_to_intervention#cite_ref-4. License: CC BY:
      Attribution

802 |
Gender Differences in the
Classroom

Gender roles are the patterns of behaviors, attitudes, and
expectations associated with a particular sex--with being either
male or female. For clarity, psychologists sometimes
distinguish gender differences, which are related to social roles,
from sex differences, which are related only to physiology and
anatomy. Using this terminology, gender matters in teaching more
than sex.

   Although there are many exceptions, boys and girls do differ
on average in ways that parallel conventional gender stereotypes,
and that affects how the sexes behave at school and in class. The
differences have to do with physical behaviors, styles of social
interaction, academic motivations, behaviors, and choices. They
have a variety of sources--primarily parents, peers, and the media.
Teachers are certainly not the primary cause of gender role
differences, but sometimes teachers influence them by their
responses to and choices made on behalf of students.

Physical Differences in Sex and Gender Roles

Physically, boys tend to be more active than girls, and by the same
token more restless if they have to sit for long periods. They are
also more prone than girls to rely on physical aggression if they
are frustrated (Espelage & Swearer, 2004). Both tendencies are
inconsistent with the usual demands of classroom life, of course,
and make it a little more likely that school will be a difficult
experience for boys, even for boys who never actually get in trouble
for being restless or aggressive.

                                                                      Gender Differences in the
                                                                                   Classroom | 803
   During the first two or three years of elementary school, gross
motor skills develop at almost the same average rate for boys and
girls. As a group, both sexes can run, jump, throw a ball, and the like
with about equal ease, though there are of course wide significant
differences among individuals of both sexes. Toward the end of
elementary school, however, boys pull ahead of girls at these skills
even though neither sex has begun yet to experience puberty. The
most likely reason is that boys participate more actively in formal
and informal sports because of expectations and support from
parents, peers, and society (Braddock, Sokol-Katz, Greene, &
Basinger-Fleischman, 2005; Messner, Duncan, & Cooky, 2003).
Puberty eventually adds to this advantage by making boys taller and
stronger than girls, on average, and therefore more suited at least
for sports that rely on height and strength.

   In thinking about these differences, keep in mind that they refer
to average trends and that there are numerous individual
exceptions. Every teacher knows of individual boys who are not
athletic, for example, or of particular girls who are especially
restless in class. The individual differences mean, among other
things, that it is hard to justify providing different levels of support
or resources to boys than to girls for sports, athletics, or physical
education. The differences also suggest, though, that individual
students who contradict gender stereotypes about physical abilities
may benefit from emotional support or affirmation from teachers,
simply because they may be less likely than usual to get such
affirmation from elsewhere.

Social Differences in Gender Roles

When relaxing socially, boys more often gravitate to large groups.
Whether on the playground, in a school hallway, or on the street,
boys' social groups tend literally to fill up a lot of space and often
include significant amounts of roughhousing as well as organized

804 | Gender Differences in the Classroom
and "semi-organized" competitive games or sports (Maccoby, 2002).
Girls, for their part, are more likely to seek and maintain one or two
close friends and to share more intimate information and feelings
with these individuals. To the extent that these gender differences
occur, they can make girls less visible or noticeable than boys, at
least in leisure play situations where children or youth choose their
companions freely. As with physical differences, however, keep in
mind that differences in social interactions do not occur uniformly
for all boys and girls. There are boys with close friends,
contradicting the general trend, and girls who play primarily in large
groups.

   Differences in social interaction styles happen in the classroom
as well. Boys, on average, are more likely to speak up during a class
discussion--sometimes even if not called on, or even if they do not
know as much about the topic as others in the class (Sadker, 2002).
When working on a project in a small co-ed group, furthermore
they have a tendency to ignore girls' comments and contributions to
the group. In this respect, co-ed student groups parallel interaction
patterns in many parts of society, where men also have a tendency
to ignore women's comments and contributions (Tannen, 2001).

Academic and Cognitive Differences in Gender

On average, girls are more motivated than boys to perform well in
school, at least during elementary school. By the time girls reach
high school, however, some may try to downplay their own
academic ability in order to make themselves more likable to both
sexes (Davies, 2005). Even if this occurs, though, it does not affect
their grades: from kindergarten through twelfth grade, girls earn
slightly higher average grades than boys (Freeman, 2004). This fact
does not lead to similar achievement, however, because as
youngsters move into high school, they tend to choose courses
or subjects conventionally associated with their gender--math and

                                             Gender Differences in the Classroom | 805
science for boys, in particular, and literature and the arts for girls.
By the end of high school, this difference in course selection makes
a measurable difference in boys' and girls' academic performance in
these subjects.

   But again, consider my caution about stereotyping: there are
individuals of both sexes whose behaviors and choices run counter
to the group trends. (I have made this point as well in "Preparing for
Licensure: Interpreting Gender-Related Behavior" by deliberately
concealing the gender of a student described.) Differences within
each gender group generally are far larger than any differences
between the groups. A good example is the "difference" in the
cognitive ability of boys and girls. Many studies have found none
at all. A few others have found small differences, with boys slightly
better at math and girls slightly better at reading and literature.
Still, other studies have found the differences not only are small
but have been getting smaller in recent years compared to earlier
studies. Collectively the findings of cognitive abilities are virtual
"non-findings," and it is worth asking why gender differences have
therefore been studied and discussed so much for so many years
(Hyde, 2005). How do teachers influence gender roles?

   Teachers often intend to interact with both sexes equally and
frequently succeed at doing so. Research has found, though, that
they do sometimes respond to boys and girls differently, perhaps
without realizing it. Three kinds of differences have been noticed.
The first is the overall amount of attention paid to each sex; the
second is the visibility or "publicity" of conversations; the third is
the type of behavior that prompts teachers to support or criticize
students.

Attention Paid

In general, teachers interact with boys more often than with girls
by a margin of 10 to 30 percent, depending on the grade level of the

806 | Gender Differences in the Classroom
students and the personality of the teacher (Measor & Sykes, 1992).
One possible reason for the difference is related to the greater
assertiveness of boys that I already noted; if boys are speaking up
more frequently in discussions or at other times, then a teacher
may be "forced" to pay more attention to them. Another possibility
is that some teachers may feel that boys are especially prone to
getting into mischief, so they may interact with them more
frequently to keep them focused on the task at hand (Erden &
Wolfgang, 2004). Still another possibility is that boys, compared to
girls, may interact in a wider variety of styles and situations, so there
may simply be richer opportunities to interact with them. This last
possibility is partially supported by another gender difference in
classroom interaction, the amount of public versus private talk.

Public Talk Versus Private Talk

Teachers have a tendency to talk to boys from a greater physical
distance than when they talk to girls (Wilkinson & Marrett, 1985).
The difference may be both a cause and an effect of general gender
expectations, expressive nurturing is expected more often of girls
and women, and a businesslike task orientation is expected more
often of boys and men, particularly in mixed-sex groups (Basow &
Rubenfeld, 2003; Myaskovsky, Unikel, & Dew, 2005). Whatever the
reason, the effect is to give interactions with boys more "publicity."
When two people converse with each other from across the
classroom, many others can overhear them; when they are at each
other's elbows, though, few others can overhear.

Distributing Praise and Criticism

In spite of most teachers' desire to be fair to all students, it turns

                                              Gender Differences in the Classroom | 807
out that they sometimes distribute praise and criticism differently
to boys and girls. The differences are summarized in Table 1. The
tendency is to praise boys more than girls for displaying
knowledge correctly but to criticize girls more than boys for
displaying knowledge incorrectly (Golombok & Fivush, 1994;
Delamont, 1996). Another way of stating this difference is by what
teachers tend to overlook: with boys, they tend to
overlook wrong answers, but with girls, they tend to overlook
the right answers. The result (which is probably unintended) is a
tendency to make boys' knowledge seem more important and boys
themselves more competent. A second result is the other side of
this coin: a tendency to make girls' knowledge less visible and girls
themselves less competent.

Table 7.7.1. Gender differences in how teachers praise and criticize
students

Type of response  Boys                     Girls
from teacher

Praises           Correct knowledge        "Good" or
                                           compliant
                                           behavior

Overlooks or      "Good" or compliant      Misbehavior;
ignores
                  behavior; incorrect knowledge correct knowledge

Criticizes        Misbehavior              Incorrect
                                           knowledge

Gender differences also occur in the realm of classroom behavior.
Teachers tend to praise girls for "good" behavior, regardless of its
relevance to the content or to the lesson at hand, and tend to
criticize boys for "bad" or inappropriate behavior (Golombok &
Fivush, 1994). This difference can also be stated in terms of what
teachers overlook: with girls, they tend to overlook behavior that
is not appropriate, but with boys, they tend to overlook behavior
that is appropriate. The net result, in this case, is to make girls seem
better than they may really be, and also to make their "goodness"
seem more important than their academic competence. By the same

808 | Gender Differences in the Classroom
token, the teacher's patterns of response imply that boys are more
"bad" than they may really be.

   At first glance, the gender differences in interaction can seem
discouraging and critical of teachers because they imply that
teachers as a group are biased about gender. But this conclusion is
too simplistic for a couple of reasons. One is that like all differences
between groups, interaction patterns are trends, and as such, they
hide a lot of variation within them. The other is that the trends
suggest what often tends in fact to happen, not what can in fact
happen if a teacher consciously sets about to avoid interaction
patterns like the ones I have described. Fortunately for us all,
teaching does not need to be unthinking; we have choices that we
can make, even during a busy class!

                                             Gender Differences in the Classroom | 809
Cultural Differences in the
Classroom

Culture is the system of attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors that
constitute the distinctive way of life of a people. Although
sometimes the term is also used to refer specifically to the artistic,
intellectual, and other "high-brow" aspects of life, I use it here
more broadly to refer to everything that characterizes a way of
life--baseball games as well as symphony concerts, and McDonald's
as well as expensive restaurants. In this broad sense, culture is
nearly synonymous with ethnicity, which refers to the common
language, history, and future experienced by a group within society.
Culture has elements that are obvious, like unique holidays or
customs, but also features that are subtle or easy for outsiders
to overlook, like beliefs about the nature of intelligence or about
the proper way to tell a story. When a classroom draws students
from many cultures or ethnic groups, therefore, the students bring
to it considerable diversity. Teachers need to understand that
diversity--understand how students' habitual attitudes, beliefs, and
behaviors differ from each other, and especially how they differ
from the teacher's.

   But this kind of understanding can get complicated. To organize
the topic, therefore, I will discuss aspects of cultural diversity
according to how directly they relate to language differences
compared to differences in other social and psychological features
of culture. The distinction is convenient, but it is also a bit arbitrary
because, as you will see, the features of a culture overlap and
influence each other.

810 | Cultural Differences in the
Classroom
Bilingualism: Language Differences in the
Classroom

Although monolingual speakers often do not realize it, the majority
of children around the world are bilingual, meaning that they
understand and use two languages (Meyers-Scotton, 2005). Even in
the United States, which is a relatively monolingual society, more
than 47 million people speak a language other than English at home,
and about 10 million of these people were children or youths in
public schools (United States Department of Commerce, 2003). The
large majority of bilingual students (75 percent) are Hispanic, but the
rest represent more than a hundred different language groups from
around the world. In larger communities throughout the United
States, it is therefore common for a single classroom to contain
students from several language backgrounds at once.

   In classrooms as in other social settings, bilingualism exists in
different forms and degrees. At one extreme are students who speak
both English and another language fluently; at the other extreme
are those who speak only limited versions of both languages. In
between are students who speak their home (or heritage) language
much better than English, as well as others who have partially lost
their heritage language in the process of learning English (Tse,
2001). Commonly, too, a student may speak a language satisfactorily
but be challenged by reading or writing it--though even this pattern
has individual exceptions. Whatever the case, each bilingual student
poses unique challenges to teachers.

Balanced or Fluent Bilingualism

The student who speaks both languages fluently has a definite
cognitive advantage. As you might suspect and as research has
confirmed, a fully fluent bilingual student is in a better position than

                                              Cultural Differences in the Classroom | 811
usual to express concepts or ideas in more than one way, and to be
aware of doing so (Jimenez, et al. 1995; Francis, 2006). The question:
"What if a dog were called a cat?" is less likely to confuse even a
very young bilingual child. Nor will the follow-up question: "Could
the `cat' meow?" confuse them. Such skill in reflecting on language
is a form of metacognition, which is defined as using language as
an object of thought. Metacognition can be helpful for a variety of
academic purposes, such as writing stories and essays, or
interpreting complex text materials.

Unbalanced Bilingualism

Unfortunately, the bilingualism of many students is "unbalanced" in
the sense that they are either still learning English, or else they have
lost some earlier ability to use their original, heritage language--or
occasionally a bit of both. The first sort of student--sometimes
called an English language learner (ELL) or limited English
learner (LEL)--has received the greatest attention and concern
from educators, since English is the dominant language of
instruction and skill and obviously helps prepare a student for life
in American society. ELL students essentially present teachers with
this dilemma: how to respect the original language and culture of
the student while also helping the student to join more fully in the
mainstream--i.e. English-speaking--culture? Programs to address
this question have ranged from total immersion in English from a
young age (the "sink or swim" approach) to phasing in English over
a period of several years (sometimes called an additive approach to
bilingual education). In general, evaluations of bilingual programs
have favored the more additive approaches (Beykont, 2002). Both
languages are developed and supported, and students ideally
become able to use either language permanently, though often for
different situations or purposes. A student may end up using English
in the classroom or at work, for example, but continue using Spanish

812 | Cultural Differences in the Classroom
at home or with friends, even though he or she is perfectly capable
of speaking English with them.

Language Loss

What about the other kind of imbalance, in which a student is
acquiring English but losing ability with the student's home or
heritage language? This sort of bilingualism is quite common in the
United States and other nations with immigrant populations (Tse,
2001). Imagine this situation: First-generation immigrants arrive,
and they soon learn just enough English to manage their work
and daily needs but continue using their original language at home
with family and friends from their former country. Their children,
however, experience strong expectations and pressure to learn and
use English, and this circumstance dilutes the children's experience
with the heritage language. By the time the children become adults,
they are likely to speak and write English better than their heritage
language, and may even be unable or unwilling to use the heritage
language with their own children (the grandchildren of the original
immigrants).

   This situation might not at first seem like a problem for which
we, as teachers, need to take responsibility, since the children
immigrants, as students, are acquiring the dominant language of
instruction. In fact, however, things are not that simple. Research
finds that language loss limits students' ability to learn English as
well or as quickly as they otherwise can. Having a large vocabulary
in a first language, for example, has been shown to save time in
learning vocabulary in a second language (Hansen, Umeda &
McKinney, 2002). But students can only realize the savings if their
first language is preserved. Preserving the first language is also
important if a student has impaired skills in all languages and
therefore needs intervention or help from a speech-language
specialist. Research has found, in such cases, that the specialist

                                             Cultural Differences in the Classroom | 813
can be more effective if the specialist speaks and uses the first
language as well as English (Kohnert, et al., 2005). Generally, though
also more indirectly, minimizing language loss helps all bilingual
students' education because preservation tends to enrich students'
and parents' ability to communicate with each other. With two
languages to work with, parents can stay "in the loop" better about
their children's educations and support the teacher's work--for
example, by assisting more effectively with homework (Ebert, 2005).

   Note that in the early years of schooling, language loss can be
minimized to some extent by the additive or parallel-track bilingual
programs that I mentioned above. For a few years, though not
forever, young students are encouraged to use both of their
languages. In high school, in addition, some conventional foreign
language classes-- notably in Spanish--can be adjusted to include
and support students who are already native speakers of the
language alongside students who are learning it for the first time
(Tse, 2001). But for heritage languages not normally offered as
"foreign" languages in school, of course, this approach will not work.
Such languages are especially at risk of being lost.

Cultural Differences in Language Use

Cultures and ethnic groups differ not only in languages but also
in how languages are used. Since some of the patterns differ from
those typical of modern classrooms, they can create
misunderstandings between teachers and students (Cazden, 2001;
Rogers, et al., 2005). Consider these examples: In some cultures,
it is considered polite or even intelligent not to speak unless you
have something truly important to say. "Chitchat," or talk that simply
affirms a personal tie between people, is considered immature or
intrusive (Minami, 2002). In a classroom, this habit can make it
easier for a child to learn not to interrupt others, but it can also
make the child seem unfriendly.

814 | Cultural Differences in the Classroom
 Eye contact varies by culture. In many African American and
   Latin American communities, it is considered appropriate and
   respectful for a child not to look directly at an adult who is
   speaking to them (Torres-Guzman, 1998). In classrooms,
   however, teachers often expect a lot of eye contact (as in "I
   want all eyes on me!") and may be tempted to construe a lack
   of eye contact as a sign of indifference or disrespect.

 Social distance varies by culture. In some cultures, it is
   common to stand relatively close when having a conversation;
   in others, it is more customary to stand relatively far apart
   (Beaulieu, 2004). Problems may happen when a teacher and
   student prefer different social distances. A student who
   expects a closer distance than does the teacher may seem
   overly familiar or intrusive, whereas one who expects a longer
   distance may seem overly formal or hesitant.

 Wait time varies by culture. Wait time is the gap between the
   end of one person's comment or question and the next
   person's reply or answer. In some cultures, the wait time is
   relatively long--as long as three or four seconds (Tharp &
   Gallimore, 1989). In others it is a "negative" gap, meaning that it
   is acceptable, even expected, for a person to interrupt before
   the end of the previous comment. In classrooms the wait time
   is customarily about one second; after that, the teacher is
   likely to move on to another question or to another student. A
   student who habitually expects a wait time longer than one
   second may seem hesitant, and not be given many chances to
   speak. A student who expects a "negative" wait time, on the
   other hand, may seem overeager or even rude.

 In most non-Anglo cultures, questions are intended to gain
   information, and it is assumed that a person asking the
   question truly does not have the information requested
   (Rogoff, 2003). In most classrooms, however, teachers regularly
   ask test questions, which are questions to which the teacher
   already knows the answer and that simply assess whether a
   student knows the answer as well (Macbeth, 2003). The

                                           Cultural Differences in the Classroom | 815
      question: "How much is 2 + 2?" for example, is a test question. If
      the student is not aware of this purpose, he or she may
      become confused, or think that the teacher is surprisingly
      ignorant! Worse yet, the student may feel that the teacher is
      trying deliberately to shame the student by revealing the
      student's ignorance or incompetence to others.

Cultural Differences in Attitudes and Beliefs

In addition to differences in language and in practices related to
language, cultural groups tend to differ in various other attitudes
and beliefs. Complete descriptions of the details of the differences
have filled entire books and encyclopedias (see, for example, Birx,
2005). For teachers, however, one of the most important differences
centers on personal beliefs about identity--the sense of self or of
"who you are." A number of other cultural beliefs and practices can
be understood as resulting from how members of a culture think
about personal identity.

   In white, middle-class American culture, the self tends to be
thought of as unique and independent--a unitary, living source of
decisions, choices, and actions that stands (or should eventually
stand) by itself (Greenfield, et al., 2003; Rogoff, 2003). This view of
the self is assumed by educators, for example, when students are
expected to take responsibility for their own successes or failures,
or when students are evaluated individually rather than as a group
or team. As teachers, most of us subscribe to the idea that all
students are unique and therefore take steps to individualize or
differentiate instruction. Across a variety of circumstances,
teachers tend to believe in an independent self.

   Yet many non-white cultures tend to believe in something closer
to an interdependent self, or a belief that it is relationships and
responsibilities, and not uniqueness and autonomy, that defines
a person (Greenfield, 1994; Greenfield, et al., 2003). From this

816 | Cultural Differences in the Classroom
perspective, the most worthy person is not the one who is unusual
or who stands out in a crowd. Such a person might actually be
regarded as lonely or isolated. The worthy person is instead the
one who gets along well with family and friends, and who meets
obligations to them reliably and skillfully. At some level, of course,
we all value interpersonal skill and to this extent think of ourselves
as interdependent. And individuals within any given society will
vary in their attitudes about personal identity. The cultural
difference between individual and interdependent self is one of
average tendency or emphasis, with many non-white cultures
emphasizing interdependence significantly more than white
middle-class society does, on average, and more than many schools
in particular.

   There can be consequences of the difference in how the students
respond to school. Here are some of the possibilities--though keep
in mind that there are also differences among students as
individuals, whatever their background. The following are
tendencies, not simple predictions:

   Preference for activities that are cooperative rather than
      competitive: Many activities in school are competitive, even
      when teachers try to de-emphasize the competition. Once
      past the first year or second year of school, students often
      become attentive to who receives the highest marks on an
      assignment, for example, or who is the best athlete at various
      sports or whose contributions to class discussion the most
      verbal recognition from the teacher (Johnson & Johnson, 1998).
      Suppose, in addition, that a teacher deliberately organizes
      important activities or assignments competitively (as in "Let's
      see who finishes the math sheet first."). Classroom life can then
      become explicitly competitive, and the competitive
      atmosphere can interfere with cultivating supportive
      relationships among students or between students and the
      teacher (Cohen, 2004). For students who give priority to these
      relationships, competition can seem confusing at best and

                                             Cultural Differences in the Classroom | 817
      threatening at worst. What sort of sharing or helping with
      answers, the student may ask, is truly legitimate? If the teacher
      answers this question more narrowly than does the student,
      then what the student views as cooperative sharing may be
      seen by the teacher as laziness, "freeloading," or even cheating.
   Avoidance of standing out publicly: Even when we, as teachers,
      avoid obvious forms of competition, we may still interact
      frequently with students one at a time while allowing or
      inviting many others to observe the conversation. An especially
      common pattern for such conversations is sometimes called
      the IRE cycle, an abbreviation for the teacher initiating, a
      student responding, and the teacher then evaluating the
      response (Mehan, 1979). What is sometimes taken for granted
      is how often IRE cycles are witnessed publicly, and how much
      the publicity can be stressful or embarrassing for students who
      do not value standing out in a group but who do value
      belonging to the group. The embarrassment can be especially
      acute if they feel unsure about whether they have the correct
      knowledge or skill to display. To keep such students from
      "clamming up" completely, therefore, teachers should consider
      limiting IRE cycles to times when they are truly productive. IRE
      conversations may often work best when talking with a
      student privately, or when confirming knowledge that the
      student is likely to be able to display competently already, or
      when "choral" speaking (responding together in unison) is
      appropriate.
   Interpersonal time versus clock time: In order to function, all
      schools rely on fairly precise units of time as measured on
      clocks. Teachers typically allot a fixed number of minutes to
      one lesson or class, another fixed number of minutes for the
      next, another for recess or lunchtime, and so on. In more ways
      than one, therefore, being on time becomes especially valued
      in schools, as it is in many parts of society. Punctuality is not
      always conducive, however, to strong personal relationships,
      which develop best when individuals do not end joint activities

818 | Cultural Differences in the Classroom
      unilaterally or arbitrarily but allow activities to "finish
      themselves," so to speak--to finish naturally. If personal
      relationships are a broad, important priority for a student,
      therefore, it may take effort and practice by the student to
      learn the extent to which schools and teachers expect
      punctuality. Punctuality includes the obvious, like showing up
      for school when school is actually scheduled to begin. But it
      also includes subtleties, like starting and finishing tasks when
      the teacher tells students to do so, or answering a question
      promptly at the time it is asked rather than sometime later
      when the discussion has already moved on. Oppositional
      cultural identity

Oppositional Cultural Identity

                                             Cultural Differences in the Classroom | 819
In some cases, dominant cultural attitudes can oppress or alienate
particular students to the point where they feel they have no choice
but to put themselves on the margins of mainstream activity. Such
students may develop an oppositional cultural identity, meaning
that they define themselves not by who they are, but by how
they differ from or oppose mainstream culture (Ogbu & Davis, 2003;
Carter, 2005). Instead of aspiring to do well in school, for example,
or to get along well with teachers, the students may aspire not to do
well and not to be liked by teachers. Obviously, this sort of attitude
poses problems for teachers who try to motivate the students, it
also poses problems for the student's long-term success in life.
Oppositional identity is especially likely in so-called involuntary
minorities--groups that emigrated to or joined a society against
their will and who may have been given few resources with which
to participate in society. In the United States, for example, African-
Americans and American Indians may have been involuntary
minorities originally, although many present-day individuals from
these groups may now feel very much a part of American culture.
As cultural groups, however, their experiences have been quite
different than so-called voluntary minorities--groups that chose to
emigrate to society in order to create better lives for themselves.
The latter groups are more likely to work actively to fit into their
newfound culture. Learning to fit into a new culture is a challenging
task itself, but on the whole, it is an easier task for teachers to work
with than oppositional motivation.

Accommodating Cultural Diversity in Practice

                                                                                                    | 821
As the comments in the previous section imply, accommodating
cultural diversity involves more than adding cultural content to
the curriculum--more than celebrating Mexican holidays in an
American social studies class, for example, and more than
discussing the history of slavery of African-Americans. These are
useful actions, but they are only a starting point for
truly multicultural education (Banks, 2009). In addition, it is
important to engage students in exploring the culturally-based
assumptions of whatever subject they are studying. In studying the
"Westward Movement" (the settlement of the American West), for
example, it is important to point out that this movement was
"westward" only from the point of view of the white Americans living
in the eastern United States. To the indigenous American Indians,
the "west" was the center of their world; to the Mexicans, it was
"north"; to the Asian laborers living in California, it was "east."

   James Banks has proposed five features of a fully multicultural
educational program (2009). The first two of these were mentioned
in the paragraph above, but not the next three:

   Integrating cultural content into the curriculum wherever
      possible.

   Stimulating knowledge construction to help students
      understand cultural assumptions.

   Flexible teaching strategies that give all students access and
      success with learning. If some students prefer to learn
      cooperatively rather than independently, for example, then
      teachers should make provisions for cooperative learning
      activities.

   Encourage prejudice reduction among all students. This can and
      should happen even in classes that do not seem culturally
      diverse on the surface. Such classes always have diversity, even
      if it is not visible immediately: students' families will vary in
      their financial circumstances, students themselves will vary in
      their gender preferences, and students will vary in their

                                                                                                   | 823
      attitudes about religion, politics, and many other issues.
   Encourage the entire school to be aware of cultural diversity and

      its effects. What is the racial composition of the school staff?
      What are their attitudes? What school policies favor particular
      students unfairly?
Of all of these strategies, the most important is the third: being
flexible about the choice of teaching strategies. By allowing for
various styles of learning, teachers can accommodate a wide range
of students, whatever their cultural backgrounds and whatever
cultural background the teacher herself may have. And flexibility
has an added advantage: honoring students' individuality, it avoids
the danger of stereotyping students' learning needs on the basis of
their cultural background.
CC licensed content, Shared previously
   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

824 |
Chapter Summary: Student

Diversity

Students differ in a multitude of ways, both individually and as
groups. Individually, for example, students have a preferred learning
style as well as preferred cognitive or thinking styles. They also have
unique profiles or intelligence or competence that affect how and
what they learn most successfully.

   In addition to individual diversity, students tend to differ
according to their gender, although there are numerous individual
exceptions. Motor abilities, as well as motivation and experience
with athletics, gradually differentiate boys and girls, especially when
they reach and begin high school. Socially, boys tend to adopt
relationships that are more active and wide-ranging than do girls.
Academically, girls tend to be a bit more motivated to receive
slightly higher marks in school. Teachers sometimes contribute to
gender role differences-- perhaps without intention--by paying
attention to boys more frequently and more publicly in class, and by
distributing praise and criticism in ways differentiated by sex.

   Students also differ according to the cultures, language, and
ethnic groups of their families. Many students are bilingual, with
educational consequences that depend on their fluency in each of
their two languages. If they have more difficulty with English, then
programs that add their first language together with English have
proved to be helpful. If they have more difficulty with their first
language, they are at risk for language loss, and the consequences
are also negative even if more hidden from teachers' views.

   In addition to language differences as such, students differ
according to culture in how language is used or practiced--in taking
turns speaking, in eye contact, social distance, wait time, and the
use of questions. Some of these differences in practice stem from
cultural differences in attitudes about self-identity, with non-Anglo

                                                                    Chapter Summary: Student
                                                                                     Diversity | 825
culturally tending to support a more interdependent view of the
self than Anglo culture or the schools. Differences in attitudes and
in the use of language have several consequences for teachers.
In particular--where appropriate--they should consider using
cooperative activities, avoid highlighting individuals'
accomplishments or failures, and be patient about students'
learning to be punctual. Students with an oppositional identity may
prove hard to reach, but flexibility in teaching strategies can be
very helpful in reaching a wide range of students, regardless of their
cultural backgrounds.

   Since the 1970s support for people with disabilities has grown
significantly, as reflected in the United States by three key pieces
of legislation: the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, and the Individuals with Disabilities
Education Act (IDEA). The support has led to new educational
practices, including alternative assessments for students with
disabilities, placement in the least restrictive environment, and
individual educational plans.

   There are several commonly used categories of disabilities.
Although all of them risk stereotyping or oversimplifying children,
they can also be helpful in gaining a preliminary understanding
of their strengths and needs. For the purposes of education, the
most frequent category is learning disabilities, which is difficulty
with specific aspects of academic work. The high prevalence of
learning disabilities makes this category especially ambiguous as
a description of particular students. Assistance for students with
learning disabilities can be framed in terms of behaviorist
reinforcement, metacognitive strategies, or constructivist
mentoring.

   Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a problem with
sustaining attention and controlling impulses. It can often be
controlled with medications, but usually, it is also important for
teachers to provide a structured environment for the student as
well.

   Intellectual disabilities (or mental retardation) are general

826 | Chapter Summary: Student Diversity
limitations in cognitive functioning as well as in the tasks of daily
living. Contemporary experts tend to classify individuals with these
disabilities according to the amount and frequency of support they
need from others. Teachers can assist these students by giving more
time and practice than usual, by including adaptive and functional
skills among the student's learning goals, and by finding ways to
include the student in the daily life of the classroom.

   Behavioral disorders are conditions in which students chronically
perform highly inappropriate behaviors. Students with these
problems present challenges for classroom management, which
teachers can meet by identifying circumstances that trigger
inappropriate behaviors, by teaching interpersonal skills explicitly,
and by making sure that punishments or disciplinary actions are fair
and have been previously agreed upon.

   Physical and sensory disabilities are significant limitations in
health, hearing, or vision. The signs both of hearing loss and of
vision loss can be subtle, but can sometimes be observed over a
period of time. Teaching students with either a hearing loss or a
vision loss primarily involves making use of the students' residual
sensory abilities and ensuring that the student is included in and
supported by the class as well as possible.

                                              Chapter Summary: Student Diversity | 827
Glossary

828 | Glossary
References

                                                                                  References | 829
Algozzine, R. & Ysseldyke, J. (2006). Teaching students with emotional
disturbance: A practical guide for every teacher. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Corwin Press.

  American Association on Mental Retardation.
(2002). Definition, classification, and system of
supports, 10th edition. Washington, D.C.: Author.

                                                                                                    | 831
Banks, J. (2009). Teaching strategies for ethnic studies, 8th edition.
   Boston: Pearson Education.

Basow, S. & Rubenfeld, K. (2003). "Troubles talk": Effects of gender
and gender-typing. Sex Roles, 48(3/4), 183-188.
Beaulieu, C. (2004). Intercultural study of personal space: A case

   study. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 34(4), 794-805.
   Beykont, Z. (Ed.). (2002). The power of culture: Teaching across
language difference. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education Publishing
Group.
Biklen, S. & Kliewer, C. (2006). Constructing competence: Autism,
   voice and the "disordered" body. International Journal of Inclusive
   Education, 10(2/3), 169-188.
   Birx, H. J. (2005). Encyclopedia of human anthropology. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
   Bogdan, D. (2006). Who may be literate? Disability and resistance
to the cultural denial of competence. American Educational
Research Journal, 43(2), 163-192.
   Braddock, J., Sokol-Katz, J., Greene, A., & Basinger-Fleischman,
L. (2005). Uneven playing fields: State variations in boys' and girls'
access to and participation in high school interscholastic
sports. Sociological Spectrum, 25(2), 231-250.
   Carothers, D. & Taylor, R. (2003). Use of portfolios for students
with autism. Focus on Autism and Other Developmental Disorders,
18(2), 121-124.
   Cater, P. (2005). Keepin' it real: School success beyond black and
white. New York: Oxford University Press.

Cazden, C. (2001). Classroom discourse, 2nd edition. Portsmouth, NH:
   Heineman Publishers.

Cohen, E. (2004). Teaching cooperative learning: The challenge for
   teacher education. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
   Davies, J. (2005). Expressions of gender: An analysis of pupils'

gendered discourse styles in small group classroom
discussions. Discourse and Society, 14(2), 115-132.

                                                                                                   | 833
Davis, G. & Rimm, S. (2004). Education of the gifted and talented, 5th
   edition. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.

Delamont, S. (1996). Women's place in education. Brookfield, MA:
   Avebury Publishers.

Ebert, J. (2005). Linguistics: Tongue tied. Nature, 438, 148-149.
Erden, F. & Wolfgang, C. (2004). An exploration of the differences in

   teachers' beliefs related to discipline when dealing with male and
   female students. Early Child Development and Care, 174(1), 3-11.
Espelage, D. & Swearer, S. (2004). Bullying in American schools: A
   socio-ecological perspective on prevention and intervention.
   Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Evans, C. (2004). Exploring the relationship between cognitive style
   and teaching style. Educational psychology, 24(4), 509-530.
   Francis, N. (2006). The development of secondary discourse
ability and metalinguistic awareness in second language learners.
International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 16, 37-47.
   Freeman, D. (2004). Trends in educational equity of girls and
women. Washington, D.C.: United States Department of Education,
National Center for Educational Statistics.

Friend, M. (2007). Special education: Contemporary perspectives for
school professionals, 2nd edition. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.

   Golombok, S. & Fivush, R. (1994). Gender development. New York:
Cambridge University Press.

   Green, S., Davis, C., Karshmer, E., March, P. & Straight, B. (2005).
Living stigma: The impact of labeling, stereotyping, separation,
status loss, and discrimination in the lives of individuals with
disabilities and their families. Sociological Inquiry, 75(2), 197-215.
Greenfield, P. (1994). Independence and interdependence as cultural

   scripts. In P. Greenfield & R. Cocking (Eds.), Cross-cultural roots of
   minority child development, pp. 1-40. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Greenfield, P., Keller, H., Fuligni, A., & Maynard, A. (2003). Cultural
   pathways through universal development. Annual Review of
   Psychology, 54, 461-490.

834 |
Hallahan, D. & Kauffman, J. (2006). Exceptional learners: Introduction
   to special education, 10th edition. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.

Hansen, L., Umeda, Y., & McKinney, M. (2002). Savings in the
   relearning of second language vocabulary: The effects of time and
   proficiency. Language Learning, 52, 653-663.

Heineman, M., Dunlap, G., & Kincaid, D. (2005). Positive support
   strategies for students with behavioral disorders in regular
   classrooms. Psychology in the Schools, 42(8), 779-794.

Hyde, J. (2005). The gender similarities hypothesis. American
   Psychologist, 60(6), 581-592.

Jimenez, R., Garcia, G., & Pearson. D. (1995). Three children, two
   languages, and strategic reading: Case studies in bilingual/
   monolingual reading. American Educational Research Journal,
   32(1), 67-97.

Johnson, D. & Johnson, R. (1998). Learning together and alone:
   Cooperative, competitive, and individualistic learning, 5th edition.
   Boston: Allyn & Bacon.

Kauffman, J. (2005). Characteristics of children with emotional and
   behavioral disorders, 8th edition. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson/
   Merrill Prentice Hall.

Kohnert, K., Yim, D., Nett, K., Kan, P., & Duran, L. (2005). Intervention
   with linguistically diverse preschool children. Language, Speech,
   and Hearing Services in Schools, 36, 251-263.
   Koretz, D. & Barton, K. (2003/2004). Assessing students with

disabilities: Issues and evidence. Assessment and Evaluation, 9(1 & 2),
29-60.

   Loo, R. (2004). Kolb's learning styles and learning preferences: Is
there a linkage? Educational psychology, 24(1), 99-108.

   Luckner, J. L. & Carter, K. (2001). Essential Competencies for
Teaching Students with Hearing Loss and Additional Disabilities.
146(1), 7-15.
Macbeth, D. (2003). Hugh Mehan's "Learning Lessons" reconsidered:

   On the differences between naturalistic and critical analysis of
   classroom discourse. American Educational Research Journal,
   40(1), 239-280.

                                                                                                   | 835
Maccoby, E. (2002). Gender and social exchange: A developmental
   perspective. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Measor, L. & Sykes, P. (1992). Gender and schools. New York: Cassell.
Mehan, H. (1979). Learning lessons: social organization in the

   classroom. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Messner, M., Dunca, M., & Cooky, C. (2003). Silence, sports bras, and

   wrestling porn. Journal of Sport and Social Issues, 27(1), 38-51.
Meyers-Sutton, C. (2005). Multiple voices: An introduction to

   bilingualism. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers.
Minami, M. (2002). Culture-specific language styles: The development

   of oral narrative and literacy. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.
Myaskovsky, L, Unikel, E., & Dew, M. (2005). Effects of gender

   diversity on performance and interpersonal behavior in small
   work groups. Sex Roles, 52(9/10), 645-657.

836 |
Newburn, T. & Shiner, M. (2006). Young people, mentoring and
social inclusion. Youth Justice, 6(1), 23-41.

   Ogbu, J. & Davis, A. (2003). Black American students in an affluent
suburb: A study of academic disengagement. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

   Pritchard, A. (2005). Ways of learning: Learning theories and
learning styles in the classroom. London, UK: David Fulton.
Public Law 93-112, 87 Stat. 394 (Sept. 26, 1973). Rehabilitation Act of

   1973. Washington, D.C.: United States Government Printing Office.
Public Law 101-336, 104 Stat. 327 (July 26, 1990). Americans with

   Disabilities Act of 1990. Washington, D.C.: United States
   Government Printing Office.
Public Law 108-446, 118 Stat. 2647 (December 3, 2004). Individuals
   with Disabilities Education Improvement Act. Washington, D.C.:
   United States Government Printing Office.
Pullin, D. (2005). When one size does not fit all: The special
   challenges of accountability testing for students with
   disabilities. Yearbook of the National Society for Studies in
   Education, 104(2), 199.
Rogers, R., Malancharuvil-Berkes, E., Mosely, M., Hui, D., & O'Garro,
   G. (2005). Critical discourse analysis in education: A review of the
   literature. Review of Educational Research, 75(3), 365-416.
Rogoff, B. (2003). The culture of human development. New York:
   Oxford University Press.
Sadker, D. (2002). An educator's primer on the gender war. Phi Delta
   Kappan, 84(3), 235-240.
   Schalock, R. & Luckasson, R. (2004). American Association on
Mental Retardation's Definition, Classification, & System of Supports,
10th edition. Journal of Policy and Practice in Intellectual Disabilities,
1(3/4), 136-146.
Schiever, S. & Maker, C. (2003). New directions in enrichment and
   acceleration. In N. Colangelo & G. Davis (Eds.), Handbook fo gifted
   education, 3rd edition (pp. 163-173). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
   Sherer, M. (2004). Connecting to learn: Educational and assistive

                                                                                                    | 837
technology for people with disabilities. Washington, D.C.: American
Psychological Association.

   Snell, M., Janney, R., Elliott, J., Beck, M., Colley, K., & Burton, C.
(2005). Collaborative teaming: Teachers' guide to inclusive practices.
Baltimore, MD: Brookes Publishing Co.

   Stahl, S. (2002). Different strokes for different folks? In L.
Abbeduto (Ed.), Taking sides: Clashing on controversial issue sin
educational psychology (pp. 98-107). Guilford, CT: McGraw Hill.
Steiner, H. & Carr, M. (2003). Cognitive development in gifted

   children: Toward a more precise understanding of emerging
   differences in intelligence. Educational Psychology Review, 15,
   215-246.
Sullivan, A. K. & Strang, H. R. (2002/2003). Bibliotherapy in the
   Classroom: Using Literature to Promote the Development of
   Emotional Intelligence. Childhood Education 79(2), 74-80.
   Tannen, D. (2001). You just don't understand: Men and women in
conversation. New York: Quill.
Tierney, J., Grossman, J., & Resch, N. (1995). Making a difference:
   An impact study of big brothers big sisters. Philadelphia: Public/
   Private Ventures.
Tharp, R. & Gallimore, R. (1989). Rousing minds to life. New York:
   Cambridge University Press.
Torres-Guzman, M. (1998). Language culture, and literacy in Puerto
   Rican communities. In B. Perez (Ed.), Sociocultural contexts of
   language and literacy. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Tse, L. (2001). Why don't they learn English? New York: Teachers'
   College Press.
United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census.
   (2003). American community survey. Washington, D.C.: Author.
United States Department of Education. (2005). 27th Annual Report
   to Congress on the implementation of the Individuals with
   Disabilities Education Act. Washington, D.C.: Author.
Wesson, C. & King, R. (1996). Portfolio assessment and special
   education students. Teaching Exceptional Children, 28(2), 44-48.
West, L., Corbey, S., Boyer-Stephens, A., Jones, B. Miller, R., &

838 |
   Sarkees-Wircenski, M. (1999). Integrating transition planning into
   the IEP process, 2nd edition. Alexandria, VA: Council for
   Exceptional Children.
Wilkinson, L. (2003). Using behavioral consultation to reduce
   challenging behavior in the classroom. Psychology in the Schools,
   47(3), 100-105.
   Wilkinson, L. & Marrett, C. (Eds.). (1985). Gender influences in
classroom interaction. Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Ysseldyke, J. & Bielinski, J. (2002). Effect of different methods of
   reporting and reclassification on trends in test scores for students
   with disabilities. Exceptional Children, 68(2), 189-201.
Zhang, L. & Sternberg, R. (2005). Three-fold model of intellectual
   styles. Educational psychology review, 17(1).
Zhang, L. & Sternberg, R. (2006). The nature of intellectual styles.
   Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum

                                                                                                   | 839
INSTRUCTION

     Theme: Instructional Practices

        Overview of Content:
          Instructional Planning and Methods
        Learning Objectives:
          Define learning objectives and why they are

             important
          Describe goals of learning and direct instruction,

             pros and cons
          Explain how discovery learning and expository

             teaching foster learning
          Describes techniques based on cognitive

             apprenticeships

                                                                                  Instruction | 841
Instructional Management

Educational psychologists focus much attention on identifying what
successful teachers do to promote student learning. By analyzing
the classroom behavior of effective teachers, researchers have
identified certain regularly occurring patterns of teacher behavior.
These patterns of expert practice are evident regardless of whether
the subject is reading, science, social studies, math, art, or any other
subject.

   Successful teachers demonstrate a pattern of expert practice that
we will refer to as instructional management. This includes two
broad components of teaching skill: (1) expertise in planning for
instruction and (2) expertise in delivering instruction. Before
teaching a lesson, successful teachers make important planning
decisions about their goals and objectives. These goals and
objectives give learners a purpose or reason for the activities they
were pursuing. They also made it easier to gauge the learners'
progress. Finally, successful teachers and their learners are able to
achieve their goals and objectives because of expert patterns of
practice in delivering instruction.

   As you will learn in this chapter, the effective delivery of
instruction includes four general categories of teaching skills: (1)
structuring, (2) modeling, (3) coaching, and (4) fading. One of the
goals as a beginning teacher will be to build successful patterns of
practice in the classroom. These will involve the learning climate
created, the classroom management procedures established, the
goals and objectives selected, and the teaching
activities of structuring, modeling, coaching, and fading employed
to achieve a positive impact on your learners.

   By carefully studying this chapter and observing patterns of
expert practice during your field placements and student teaching,
you will be able to build successful patterns of practice. When these
activities become enriched with an understanding of learner

                                                            Instructional Management | 843
assessment (to be discussed in the future modules), you will have
acquired the patterns of expert practice of an effective teacher.
CC licensed content, Original

   Instructional Management. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/
      chapter/instructional-management/%20u200e. License: CC
      BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously
   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Gary D. Borich and
      Martin L. Tombari. License: CC BY: Attribution

844 | Instructional Management
Instructional Planning

Instructional planning, the systematic selection of educational
goals and objectives, and their design for use in the classroom. We
will divide this purpose into four parts, and discuss them one at
a time. First is the problem of selecting general goals to teach;
where can a teacher find these, and what do they look like? Second
is the problem of transforming goals into specific objectives, or
statements concrete enough to guide daily activity in class; what
will students actually do or say in order to learn what a teacher
wants them to learn? The third is the problem of balancing and
relating goals and objectives to each other; since we may want
students to learn numerous goals, how can we combine or integrate
them so that the overall classroom program does not become
fragmented or biased? Fourth is the challenge of relating
instructional goals to students' prior experiences and knowledge.

The Relevance of Educational Goals

Educational goals provide a sense of mission and purpose. The more
aware you are of your mission and purpose in teaching an area of
content, the more you will be able to inspire your students to learn
it. Your ability to articulate goals conveys to learners your sense of
purpose, from which they can make a commitment to learning. This
is why goals are important--they energize and motivate students to
become actively engaged in and committed to the learning process.
Goals help teachers articulate "Why am I teaching this?"

   At the most general or abstract level, the goals of education
include important philosophical ideas like "developing individuals
to their fullest potential" and "preparing students to be productive
members of society." Few teachers would disagree with these ideas
in principle, though they might disagree about their wording or

                                                                  Instructional Planning | 845
about their relative importance. As a practical matter, however,
teachers might have trouble translating such generalities into
specific lesson plans or activities for the next day's class. What does
it mean, concretely, to "develop an individual to his or her fullest
potential"? Does it mean, for example, that a language arts teacher
should ask students to write an essay about their personal interests,
or does it mean that the teacher should help students learn to
write as well as possible on any topic, even ones that are not of
immediate interest? What exactly should a teacher do, from day to
day, to "prepare students to be productive members of society" as
well? Answers to questions like these are needed to plan instruction
effectively. But the answers are not obvious simply by examining
statements of general educational goals.

   Goal statements, although written for the teacher, are expressed
from the learner's point of view. In other words, goals identify what
your students will learn from your instruction. For example, the
statement "The teacher will show students examples of logical
arguments" would fail as an educational goal because it describes
what you will do, not what your students will learn. "Learners will
acquire the ability to construct a convincing argument" qualifies
as a goal statement because it identifies what is expected of your
students.

   How do you choose goals for learners? What is the best way
to find proper goals, given the diversity and complexity that exist
across subjects and grades? Several approaches to formulating
educational goals have been developed to help you. One approach
comes from the work of Tyler (1974).

Tyler's Goal Development Approach

Tyler's approach to generating educational goals has had a major
influence on curriculum development over the past three decades.
Tyler believes that as society becomes more complex there are

846 | Instructional Planning
more things for people to learn. But the time available to learn
this ever-expanding amount of knowledge and skills continually
decreases. Consequently, educators must make informed choices
about which goals are worth teaching. Tyler identified five factors
to consider when a teacher establishes priorities for what students
should learn. First, goals must include:

   the subject matter we know enough about to teach (subject
      matter mastery)

   societal concerns, which represent what is valued in both the
      society at large and the local community

   personal interests of the students, and the abilities and
      knowledge they bring to school.

Second, these goals must be refined to match
   your school and community's educational philosophy
   what instructional theory and research tell us can be taught.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=117#oembed-1

Video 8.2.1. The Tyler Method for Curriculum Design reviewed.

                                                                   Instructional Planning | 847
National and State Learning Standards

Some (but not all) of the work of transforming such general
purposes into more precise teaching goals and even more precise
objectives has been performed by broad US organizations that
represent educators and other experts about particular subjects or
types of teaching (Riley, 2002). The groups have proposed national
standards, which are summaries of what students can reasonably be
expected to learn at particular grade levels and in particular subject
areas. In the United States, in addition, all state governments create
state standards that serve much the same purpose: they express
what students in the state should (and hopefully can) learn at all
grade levels and in all subjects.

   Because they focus on grade levels and subject areas, general
statements of educational standards tend to be a bit more specific
than the broader philosophical goals we discussed above. As a rule
of thumb, too, state standards tend to be more comprehensive
than national standards, both in coverage of grade levels and of
subjects. The difference reflects the broad responsibility of states
in the United States for all aspects of public education; national
organizations, in contrast, usually assume responsibility only for a
particular subject area or a particular group of students. Either type
of standard provides a first step, however, toward transforming the
grandest purposes of schooling (like developing the individual or
preparing for society) into practical classroom activities. But they
provide a first step only. Most statements of standards do not make
numerous or detailed suggestions of actual activities or tasks for
students, though some might include brief classroom
examples--enough to clarify the meaning of a standard, but not
enough to plan an actual classroom program for extended periods
of time. For these latter purposes, teachers rely on more detailed

                                                                                                   | 849
documents, the ones often          called  curriculum
frameworks and curriculum guides.

National and State Curriculum Standards

   Education World maintains a comprehensive list of
national and state curriculum standards, including
Common Core standards, voluntary national education
standards for the major subject areas, national standards
for specific populations, and state standards by subject.

Curriculum Frameworks and Curriculum guides

The terms curriculum framework and curriculum guide sometimes
are used almost interchangeably, but for convenience, we will use
them to refer to two distinct kinds of documents. The more general
of the two is the curriculum framework, which is a document that
explains how content standards can or should be organized for
a particular subject and at various grade levels. Sometimes this
information is referred to as the scope and sequence of a
curriculum. A curriculum framework document is like a standards
statement in that it does not usually provide a lot of detailed
suggestions for daily teaching. It differs from a standards statement,
though, in that it analyzes each general standard in a curriculum
into more specific skills that students need to learn, often a dozen
or more per standard. The language or terminology of a framework
statement also tends to be somewhat more concrete than a
standards statement, in the sense that it is more likely to name
behaviors of students--things that a teacher might see them do or
hear them say. Sometimes, but not always, it may suggest ways for

850 |
assessing whether students have in fact acquired each skill listed in
the document. Exhibit 1 shows a page from a curriculum framework
published by the California State Board of Education (Curriculum
Development and Supplemental Materials Committee, 1999). In this
case, the framework explains the state standards for learning to
read, and the excerpt in Exhibit 1 illustrates how one particular
standard, that "students speak and write with a command of English
conventions appropriate to this grade level," is broken into nine
more specific skills. Note that the excerpt names observable
behaviors of students (what they do or say); we will discuss this
feature again, more fully, in the next part of this chapter, because it
is helpful in classroom planning. In spite of this feature, though, the
framework document does not lay out detailed activity plans that a
teacher could use on a daily basis.

                                                                                                    | 851
     Exhibit 1: An Excerpt from Reading/Language
   Arts Framework for California Public Schools

852 |
Comments     Written and oral English
           language conventions, third
           grade

  More       Students write and speak with
general    a command of standard English
standards  conventions appropriate to this
statement  grade level.

                                            | 853
                 Sentence Structure

  More              1.1 Understand and be able to use
specific or      complete and correct declarative,
concrete         interrogative, imperative, and exclamatory
framework        sentences in writing and speaking.
statements 
(stated as          Grammar
relatively
specific skills     1.2 Identify subjects and verbs that are in
or behaviors)    agreement and identify and use pronouns,
                 adjectives, compound words, and articles
                 correctly in writing and speaking.

                    1.3 Identify and use past, present, and
                 future verb tenses properly in writing and
                 speaking.

                    1.4 Identify and use subjects and verbs
                 correctly in speaking and writing simple
                 sentences.

                    Punctuation

                    1.5 Punctuate dates, city and state, and
                 titles of books correctly.

                    1.6 Use commas in dates, locations, and
                 addresses and for items in a series.

                    Capitalization

                    1.7 Capitalize geographical names,
                 holidays, historical periods, and special
                 events correctly.

                    Spelling

                    1.8 Spell correctly one-syllable words that
                 have blends, contractions, compounds,
                 orthographic patterns, and common
                 homophones.

                    1.9 Arrange words in alphabetical order

Teachers' need for detailed activity suggestions is more likely to
854 |
be met by a curriculum guide, a document devoted to graphic
descriptions of activities that foster or encourage the specific skills
explained in a curriculum framework document. The descriptions
may mention or list curriculum goals served by an activity, but
they are also likely to specify materials that a teacher needs, time
requirements, requirements for grouping students, drawings or
diagrams of key equipment or materials, and sometimes even
suggestions for what to say to students at different points during
the activity. In these ways, the descriptions may resemble lesson
plans. Since classroom activities often support more than one
specific skill, activities in a curriculum guide may be organized
differently than they might be in a framework document. Instead
of highlighting only one standard at a time, as the framework
document might, activities may be grouped more loosely--for
example, according to the dominant purpose or goal of an activity
("Activities that encourage the practice of math facts") or according
to a dominant piece of equipment or material ("Ten activities with
tin cans"). Exhibit 2 shows a description of a kindergarten-level
activity about "autumn leaves" that might appear in a curriculum
guide. Note that the activity meets several educational objectives
at once--tracing shapes, knowledge of leaves and of colors, and
descriptive language skill. Each of these skills may reflect a different
curriculum standard.

     EXHIBIT 2: SAMPLE CURRICULUM GUIDE
   ACTIVITY

        Curriculum guides provide graphic descriptions of
     activities that can be used fairly directly in the classroom.
     Although they are relevant to standards and framework

                                                                                                   | 855
     statements, they often are not organized around standards
     and objectives as such.

                Activity: Autumn Leaves
                Level: Kindergarten
                Themes and Curriculum Connections: trees,
             autumn, color naming, color comparisons, size
             comparisons, functions of leaves, growth, the life
             cycle. See also Standards #xx-yy.
                Best time to do it: Fall (October), or whenever
             leaves are available
                Materials needed: (1) small paper (6  6 inches);
             (2) access to leaves; (3) white glue; (4) felt pens
             or colored pencils
                What to do: Give one piece of the small paper
             to each child. Invite children to color the sheet
             so that the entire sheet is decorated. Invite
             children to choose one leaf. Place leaf under the
             colored (decorated) paper and trace the shape of
             the leaf lightly in pencil. Then invite children to
             cut out the colored paper in the shape that has
             been traced of the leaf.
                Cautions: (1) Some children may need
             individual help with tracing or cutting. (2) Try to
             use leaves that are still somewhat pliable,

856 |
             because some very old leaves (dried out) may
             crumble when traced.

                Things to talk about: Are some leaves bigger
             than others? Do they change shape as they grow,
             or only their size? How do leaves benefit trees?
             How many different colors can real leaves be?

From Educational Goals to Classroom
Accomplishments

Broad educational goals can provide direction for unit and lesson
planning, communicate the importance of your instruction to
administrators and parents, and energize your learners to higher
levels of commitment and performance. They can also provide a
practical framework around which to organize and sequence your
instruction. While goals answer the question "Why am I teaching
this?" they do not specify what or how you will teach on any given
day. Goals give you little direction as to what strategies you might
use to achieve them and do not indicate when--or even if--they
are met. A satisfactory answer to these questions requires the
preparation of lesson objectives.

                                                                                                    | 857
Objectives: Giving Goals a Direction

As we have seen, identifying educational goals is the first step in
unit and lesson planning. In the course of your teaching, you will
be responsible for preparing and managing extended sequences of
instruction, called units or modules, and day-by-day activities,
called lessons. Units comprise interrelated sequences of lessons,
which may cover one, two, or more weeks of instruction. Lessons
represent the content for a single class day.

   Content outlines are useful for identifying topics to be covered in
a unit or lesson. However, they typically do not provide information
about the more
fundamental issue of what your students must do with what they
have learned. In other words, will you expect your students to recall
important facts, such as definitions of weathering and erosion? Or
will you expect your students to master such concepts as fault, plate
tectonics, and continental drift? Or is the purpose of your unit to
teach students to acquire important generalizations concerning the
relationship between plate tectonics, faults,
and earthquakes and use these generalizations to problem solve?

   Deciding what you want your students to accomplish during a
lesson or unit of instruction requires answering the following
questions:

   What knowledge or content (facts, concepts, principles, rules)
      is essential for learner understanding of the subject matter?

   What intellectual skills are necessary for the learner to use this
      knowledge or content?

   What habits of mind or attitudes are important for learners to
      perform successfully with this knowledge or content?

In the next section, we will explore a method for making decisions
about curriculum, goals, and objectives.

858 |
                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=117#oembed-2

CC licensed content, Original

   Instructional Planning. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/
      chapter/instructional-planning/. License: Public Domain: No
      Known Copyright

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Gary Borich. License:
      CC BY: Attribution

CC licensed content, Specific attribution

   The Tyler Method for Curriculum Design. Authored by:
      Lamont Shipley. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/
      zenN0RZvLBk. License: All Rights Reserved

   Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/Wb6JCyQ_A8c. License:
      Public Domain: No Known Copyright

                                                                                                   | 859
Understanding by Design

Understanding by design offers a framework for designing courses
and content units called "Backward Design." Instructors typically
approach course design in a "forward design" manner, meaning they
consider the learning activities (how to teach the content), develop
assessments around their learning activities, then attempt to draw
connections to the learning goals of the course. In contrast, the
backward design approach has instructors consider the learning
goals of the course first. These learning goals embody the
knowledge and skills instructors want their students to have learned
when they leave the course. Once the learning goals have been
established, the second stage involves consideration of assessment.
The backward design framework suggests that instructors should
consider these overarching learning goals and how students will be
assessed prior to consideration of how to teach the content. For
this reason, backward design is considered a much more intentional
approach to course design than traditional methods of design.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=118#oembed-1

Video 8.3.1. Understanding by Design explained by creator Grant
Wiggins. This is the first of 2 videos of this lecture. The second video
follows the end of this one.

   This teaching guide will explain the benefits of incorporating
backward design. Then it will elaborate on the three stages that
backward design encompasses. Finally, an overview of a backward

860 | Understanding by Design
design template is provided with links to blank template pages for
convenience.

The Benefits of Using Backward Design

       Our lessons, units, and courses should be logically inferred
       from the results sought, not derived from the methods, books,
       and activities with which we are most comfortable.
       Curriculum should lay out the most effective ways of
       achieving specific results... in short, the best designs derive
       backward from the learnings sought (Wiggins & McTighe,
       1998).

In Understanding by Design, Wiggins and McTighe argue that
backward design is focused primarily on student learning and
understanding. When teachers are designing lessons, units, or
courses, they often focus on the activities and instruction rather
than the outputs of the instruction. Therefore, it can be stated
that teachers often focus more on teaching rather than learning.
This perspective can lead to the misconception that learning is
the activity when, in fact, learning is derived from a careful
consideration of the meaning of the activity.

   As previously stated, backward design is beneficial to instructors
because it innately encourages intentionality during the design
process. It continually encourages the instructor to establish the
purpose of doing something before implementing it into the
curriculum. Therefore, backward design is an effective way of
providing guidance for instruction and designing lessons, units, and
courses. Once the learning goals, or desired results, have been
identified, instructors will have an easier time developing
assessments and instruction around grounded learning outcomes.

   The incorporation of backward design also lends itself to
transparent and explicit instruction. If the teacher has explicitly

                                                              Understanding by Design | 861
defined the learning goals of the course, then they have a better
idea of what they want the students to get out of learning activities.
Furthermore, if done thoroughly, it eliminates the possibility of
doing certain activities and tasks for the sake of doing them. Every
task and piece of instruction has a purpose that fits in with the
overarching goals and goals of the course.

   As the quote below highlights, teaching is not just about engaging
students in the content. It is also about ensuring students have
the resources necessary to understand. Student learning and
understanding can be gauged more accurately through a backward
design approach since it leverages what students will need to know
and understand during the design process in order to progress.

   "In teaching students for understanding, we must grasp the key idea
that we are coaches of their ability to play the `game' of performing
with understanding, not tellers of our understanding to them on the
sidelines."

The Three Stages of Backward Design

"Deliberate and focused instructional design requires us as teachers
and curriculum writers to make an important shift in our thinking
about the nature of our job. The shift involves thinking a great deal,
first, about the specific learnings sought, and the evidence of such
learnings, before thinking about what we, as the teacher, will do or
provide in teaching and learning activities."

862 | Understanding by Design
                     Figure 8.3.1. Stages of backward design.

Stage One: Identify Desired Results

In the first stage, the instructor must consider the learning goals of
the lesson, unit, or course. Wiggins and McTighe provide a useful
process for establishing curricular priorities. They suggest that the
instructor ask themselves the following three questions as they
progressively focus on the most valuable content:

   What should participants hear, read, view, explore or otherwise
encounter?

   This knowledge is considered knowledge worth being familiar with.
Information that fits within this question is the lowest priority

                                                              Understanding by Design | 863
content information that will be mentioned in the lesson, unit, or
course.

   What knowledge and skills should participants master?
   The knowledge and skills at this substage are considered important
to know and do. The information that fits within this question could
be the facts, concepts, principles, processes, strategies, and methods
students should know when they leave the course.
   What are big ideas and important understandings participants
should retain?
   The big ideas and important understandings are referred to as
enduring understandings because these are the ideas that instructors
want students to remember sometime after they've completed the
course.

     Figure 8.3.2. Curriculum priorities to consider when planning
                                           goals.

   The figure above illustrates the three ideas. The first question
864 | Understanding by Design
listed above has instructors consider the knowledge that is worth
being familiar with which is the largest circle, meaning it entails the
most information. The second question above allows the instructor
to focus on more important knowledge, the knowledge, and skills
that are important to know and do. Finally, with the third question,
instructors begin to detail the enduring understandings,
overarching learning goals, and big ideas that students should
retain. By answering the three questions presented at this stage,
instructors will be able to determine the best content for the
course. Furthermore, the answers to question #3 regarding
enduring understandings can be adapted to form concrete, specific
learning goals for the students; thus, identifying the desired results
that instructors want their students to achieve.

Stage Two: Determine Acceptable Evidence

The second stage of backward design has instructors consider the
assessments and performance tasks students will complete in order
to demonstrate evidence of understanding and learning. In the
previous stage, the instructor pinpointed the learning goals of the
course. Therefore, they will have a clearer vision of what evidence
students can provide to show they have achieved or have started to
attain the goals of the course. Consider the following two questions
at this stage:

 1. How will I know if students have achieved the desired results?
2. What will I accept as evidence of student understanding and

      proficiency?

At this stage, it is important to consider a wide range of assessment
methods in order to ensure that students are being assessed over
the goals the instructor wants students to attain. Sometimes, the
assessments do not match the learning goals, and it becomes a

                                                              Understanding by Design | 865
frustrating experience for students and instructors. Use the list
below to help brainstorm assessment methods for the learning goals
of the course.

   Term papers.
   Short-answer quizzes.
   Free-response questions.
   Homework assignments.
   Lab projects.
   Practice problems.
   Group projects.
   Among many others...

Stage Three: Plan Learning Experiences and
Instruction

The final stage of backward design is when instructors begin to
consider how they will teach. This is when instructional strategies
and learning activities should be created. With the learning goals
and assessment methods established, the instructor will have a
clearer vision of which strategies would work best to provide
students with the resources and information necessary to attain the
goals of the course. Consider the questions below:

 1. What enabling knowledge (facts, concepts, principles) and
      skills (processes, procedures, strategies) will students need in
      order to perform effectively and achieve desired results?

2. What activities will equip students with the needed knowledge
      and skills?

3. What will need to be taught and coached, and how should it
      best be taught, in light of performance goals?

4. What materials and resources are best suited to accomplish
      these goals?

866 | Understanding by Design
Leverage the various instructional strategies listed below:
   Large and/or group discussion
   Interactive lecturing and think-pair-shares
   Flipped classroom
   Cooperative learning (including team-based and project-based
      learning)
   Guided note-taking
   Guided inquiry for problem-solving

The Backward Design Template

A link to the blank backward design template is provided here
(https://jaymctighe.com/resources/), and it is referred to as UbD
Template 2.0. The template walks individuals through the stages
of backward design. However, if you need the template with
descriptions of each section, see the figure below. There is also
a link to the document containing the template with descriptions
provided below which can be downloaded for free.

                                                              Understanding by Design | 867
       Figure 8.3.3. Backward design template with descriptions.

     What is Backward Design?

        Chapter 1: What is Backward Design? in Understanding
     by Design by Grant Wiggins and Jay McTighe provides more
     details about how the backward design process.

868 | Understanding by Design
CC licensed content, Original
   Understanding by Design. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/
      chapter/understanding-by-design/. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously
   Understanding by Design. Authored by: Ryan S. Bowen.
      Provided by: Vanderbilt University . Retrieved from:
      https://cft.vanderbilt.edu/guides-sub-pages/understanding-
      by-design/. License: CC BY-NC: Attribution-NonCommercial

                                                              Understanding by Design | 869
Learning Objectives

Given curriculum frameworks and guides, how do you choose and
formulate actual learning objectives? Basically, there are two
approaches: either start by selecting content or topics that you
want students to know (the cognitive approach) or start with what
you want students to do (the behavioral approach). In effect, the
cognitive approach moves from the general to the specific, and
the behavioral approach does the opposite. Each approach has
advocated, as well as inherent strengths and problems. In practice,
teachers often combine or alternate between them in order to give
students some of the advantages of each.

From General to Specific: Selecting Content
Topics

The cognitive approach assumes that teachers normally have a
number of long-term, general goals for students, and it begins with
those goals. It also assumes that each student work toward long-
term, general goals along different pathways and using different
styles of learning. Because of these assumptions, it is necessary
to name indicators, which are examples of specific behaviors by
which students might show success at reaching a general learning
goal. But it is neither desirable nor possible for a list of indicators
to be complete--only for it to be representative (Gronlund, 2004).
Consider this example from teaching middle-school biology. For
this subject you might have a general goal like the following, with
accompanying indicators:

870 | Learning Objectives
     Example: Goals to Indicators

        Goal: The student will understand the nature and purpose
     of photosynthesis.

        Indicators:

         1. explains the purpose of photosynthesis and steps in
             the process

        2. diagrams steps in the chemical process
        3. describes how plant photosynthesis affects the

             animal world
        4. writes a plan for how to test leaves for the presence

             of photosynthesis
        5. makes an oral presentation and explains how the

             experiment was conducted

Using a strictly cognitive approach to planning, therefore, a
teacher's job has two parts. First, she must identify, find, or choose
a manageable number of general goals--perhaps just a half dozen
or so. (Sometimes these can be taken or adapted from a curriculum
framework document such as discussed earlier.) Then the teacher
must think of a handful of specific examples or behavioral indicators
for each goal--just a half dozen or so of these as well. The behavioral
indicators clarify the meaning of the general goal but are not meant
to be the only way that students might show success at learning.
Then, at last, thoughtful planning for individual lessons or activities
can begin. This approach works especially well for learning goals
that are relatively long-term--goals that take many lessons, days,
or weeks to reach. During such long periods of teaching, it is
impossible to specify the exact, detailed behaviors that every
student can or should display to prove that he or she has reached

                                                                       Learning Objectives | 871
a general goal. It is possible, however, to specify general directions
toward which all students should focus their learning and explain
the nature of the goals with a sample of well-chosen indicators or
examples (Popham, 2002).

   The cognitive, general-to-specific approach is reasonable on the
face of it, and in fact, probably describes how many teachers think
about their instructional planning. But critics have argued that
indicators used as examples may not in fact clarify the general
goal enough; students, therefore, end up unexpectedly--as Casey
Stengel said at the start of this chapter--"someplace else." Given
the general goal of understanding photosynthesis described above,
for example, how are we to know whether the five indicators that
are listed really allow a teacher to grasp the full meaning of the
goal? Put differently, how else might a student show understanding
of photosynthesis, and how is a teacher to know that a student's
achievement is s a legitimate display of understanding? To some
educators, grasping the meaning of goals from indicators is not
as obvious as it should be, and in any case, is prone to
misunderstanding. The solution, they say, is not to start planning
with general goals, but with specific behaviors that identify
students' success.

From Specific to General: Behavioral Objectives

Compared to the cognitive approach, the behavioral approach to
instructional planning reverses the steps in planning. Instead of
starting with general goal statements accompanied by indicator
examples, it starts with the identification of specific
behaviors--concrete actions or words--that students should
perform or display as a result of instruction (Mager, 2005).
Collectively, the specific behaviors may describe a more general
educational goal, but unlike the indicators used in the cognitive
approach, they are not a mere sampling of the possible specific

872 | Learning Objectives
outcomes. Instead, they represent all the intended specific
outcomes. Consider this sampling of behavioral objectives:

     Example: Objectives to Steps

        Objectives: Learning to use in-line roller blade skates
     (beginning level)

         1. Student ties boots on correctly.
        2. Student puts on safety gear correctly, including

             helmet, knee and elbow pads.
        3. Student skates 15 meters on level ground without

             falling.
        4. Student stops on demand within a three-meter

             distance, without falling.

The objectives listed are not merely a representative sample of how
students can demonstrate success with roller-blading. Instead, they
are behaviors that every student should acquire in order to meet
the goal of using roller blades as a beginner. There simply are no
other ways to display learning of this goal; getting 100 percent on
a written test about rollerblading, for example, would not qualify as
success with this goal, though it might show success at some other
goal, such as verbal knowledge about rollerblading. Even adding
other skating behaviors (like "Student skates backward" or "Student
skates in circles") might not qualify as success with this particular
goal, because it could reasonably be argued that the additional
skating behaviors are about skating at an advanced level, not a
beginning level.

   In the most commonly used version of this approach, originated
by Robert Mager (1962, 2005), a good behavioral objective should
have three features. First, it should specify a behavior that can

                                                                      Learning Objectives | 873
in fact be observed. In practice, this usually means identifying
something that a student does or says, not something a student
thinks or feels. Compare the following examples; the one on the left
names a behavior to be performed, but the one on the right names
a thinking process that cannot, in principle, be seen:

Behavioral Objective                    Not Behavioral Object

The student will make a list of         The student will understand the
animal species that live in the         difference between fish and
water but breathe air and a             mammals that live in the water.
separate list of species that live in
the water but do not require air to
breathe.

The second feature of a good behavioral objective is that it describes
the conditions of performance of the behavior. What are the special
circumstances to be provided when the student performs the
objective? Consider these two examples:

Special Condition of                    A Special Condition of
Performance is Specified                Performance is Not Specified

Given a list of 50 species, the         After three days of instruction, the
student will circle those that live in  student will identify species that
water but breathe air and               live in water but breathe air, as well
underline those that live in water      as species that live in water but do
but do not breathe air.                 not breathe air.

The objective on the left names a special condition of
performance--that the student will be given a particular kind of
list to work from--which is not part of the instruction itself. The
objective on the right appears to name a condition--"three days
of instruction." But the condition really describes what the teacher
will do (she will instruct), not something specific to students'
performance.

   The third feature of a good behavioral objective is that it specifies
a minimum level or degree of acceptable performance. Consider
these two examples:

874 | Learning Objectives
Specifies Minimum Level                Does Not Specify Minimum Level

Given a list of 50 species, the        The student will circle names of
student will circle all of those that  species that live in water but
live in water but breathe air and      breathe air and underline those
underline all of those that live in    that live in water but do not
water but do not breathe air. The      breathe air.
student will do so within fifteen
minutes.

The objective on the left specifies a level of performance--100
percent accuracy within 15 minutes. The objective on the right
leaves this information out (and incidentally it also omits the
condition of performance mentioned on the left).

   Behavioral objectives have obvious advantages because of their
clarity and precision. They seem especially well suited for learning
that by their nature they can be spelled out explicitly and fully,
such as when a student is learning to drive a car, to use safety
equipment in a science laboratory, or install and run a particular
computer program. Most of these goals, as it happens, also tend
to have relatively short learning cycles, meaning that they can be
learned as a result of just one lesson or activity, or of just a short
series of them at most. Such goals tend not to include the larger,
more abstract goals of education. In practice, both kinds of
goals--the general and the specific--form a large part of education
at all grade levels.

Finding the Best in Both Approaches

When it comes to teaching and learning the large or major goals,
then, behavioral objectives can seem unwieldy. How, a teacher
might ask, can you spell out all of the behaviors involved in a general
goal like becoming a good citizen? How could you name in advance
the numerous conditions under which good citizenship might be
displayed, or the minimum acceptable level of good citizenship
expected in each condition? Specifying these features seems

                                                                      Learning Objectives | 875
impractical at best, and at times even undesirable ethically or
philosophically. (Would we really want any students to become
"minimum citizens"?) Because of these considerations, many
teachers find it sensible to compromise between the cognitive and
behavioral approaches. Here are some features that are often part
of a compromise:

   When planning, think about BOTH long-term, general goals
      AND short-term, immediate objectives. A thorough, balanced
      look at most school curricula shows that they are concerned
      with the general as well as the specific. In teaching elementary
      math, for example, you may want students to learn general
      problem-solving strategies (a general goal), but you may also
      want them to learn specific math facts (a specific objective). In
      teaching Shakespeare's plays in high school, you may want
      students to be able to compare the plays critically (a general
      goal), but doing so may require that they learn details about
      the characters and plots of the major plays (a specific
      objective). Since general goals usually take longer to reach than
      specific objectives, instructional planning has to include both
      time frames.

   Plan for what students do, not what the teacher does. This idea
      may seem obvious, but it is easy to overlook it when devising
      lesson plans. Consider that example again about teaching
      Shakespeare. If you want students to learn the details about
      Shakespeare's plays, it is tempting to plan objectives like
      "Summarize the plot of each play to students," or "Write and
      hand out to students an outline of the plays." Unfortunately,
      these objectives describe only what the teacher does, and
      makes the assumption (often unwarranted) that students will
      remember what the teacher says or puts in writing for them. A
      better version of the same objective should focus on the
      actions of students, not of teachers--for example, "Students
      will write a summary, from memory, of each of the major plays
      of Shakespeare." This version focuses on what students do

876 | Learning Objectives
      instead of what the teacher does. (Of course, you may still have
      to devise activities that help students to reach the objective,
      such as providing guided practice in writing summaries of
      plays.)
   To ensure diversity of goals and objectives when planning,
      consider organizing goals and objectives by using a systematic
      classification scheme of educational objectives. At the
      beginning of this section, we stated that there is a need, when
      devising goals and objectives, for both the specific and the
      general. Actually, a more accurate statement is that there is a
      need for goals and objectives that refer to a variety of cognitive
      processes and that have varying degrees of specificity or
      generality. One widely used classification scheme that does so,
      for example, is one proposed 50 years ago by Benjamin Bloom
      (1956) and revised recently by his associates (Anderson &
      Krathwohl, 2001). We describe this system, called a taxonomy
      of objectives, in the next section.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=119#oembed-1

Video 8.4.1. 4Ms tells us that a great lesson objective should be
manageable, measurable, made first, and most important on the
path to mastery.

Taxonomies of Educational Objectives

When educators have proposed taxonomies of educational

                                                                      Learning Objectives | 877
objectives, they have tended to focus on one of three areas or
domains of psychological functioning: either students' cognition
(thought), students' feelings and emotions (affect), or students'
physical skills (psychomotor abilities). Of these three areas, they
have tended to focus the most attention on cognition. The
taxonomy originated by Benjamin Bloom, for example, deals entirely
with cognitive outcomes of instruction.

Bloom's Taxonomy

In its original form, Bloom's Taxonomy of educational objectives
referred to forms of cognition or thinking, which we discussed in
a previous chapter. To reiterate, the table below summarizes the
levels and offers two kinds of examples--simple ones based on the
children's story Goldilocks and the Three Bears, and complex ones
more typical of goals and objectives used in classrooms. The levels
form a loose hierarchy from simple to complex thinking, at least
when applied to some subjects and topics. When planning for these
subjects it can, therefore, be helpful not only for ensuring diversity
among learning objectives but also for sequencing materials. In
learning about geography, for example, it may sometimes make
sense, to begin with, information about specific places or societies
(knowledge and comprehension), and work gradually toward
comparisons and assessments among the places or societies
(analysis and synthesis).

878 | Learning Objectives
Table 8.4.1. Bloom's taxonomy of objectives: cognitive domain

Type or level of learning Simple example Classroom example

Knowledge: recall of        "Name three            "List all of the planets of
information, whether it is  things that            the solar system.""State
simple or complex in        Goldilocks did in      five key features of life in
nature                      the house of the       the middle ages."
                            three bears."

Comprehension: grasping     "Explain why           "Convert the following
the meaning of              Goldilocks             arithmetic word
information, by             preferred the          problem to a
interpreting it or          little bear's chair."  mathematical
translating it from one                            equation.""Describe how
form to another                                    plants contribute to the
                                                   welfare of animal life."

Application: using          "Predict some of       "Illustrate how positive
information in new,         the things             reinforcement might
concrete situations         Goldilocks might       affect the behavior of a
                            have used if she       pet dog.""Use examples
                            had entered your       from the plot to
                            house."                illustrate the theme of
                                                   novel."

Analysis: breaking          "Select the part of    "Compare the behavior
information into its        Goldilocks and         of domestic dogs with
components to               the Three Bears        the behavior of
understand its structure    where you think        wolves.""Diagram the
                            Goldilocks felt        effects of weather
                            most                   patterns on plant
                            comfortable."          metabolism."

Synthesis: putting parts    "Tell how the          "Design an experiment
of information together     story would have       to test the effects of
into a coherent whole       been different if it   gravity on root
                            had been three         growth.""Write an
                            fishes."               account of how humans
                                                   would be different if life
                                                   had originated on Mars
                                                   instead of Earth."

Evaluation: judging the     "Justify this          "Appraise the relevance
value of information for a  statement:             of the novel for modern
particular purpose          Goldilocks was a       life.""Assess the value of
                            bad girl."             information processing
                                                   theory for planning
                                                   instruction."

Such a sequence does not work well, however, for all possible topics
or subjects. To learn certain topics in mathematics, for example,
students may sometimes need to start with general ideas (like

                                                                      Learning Objectives | 879
"What does it mean to multiply?") than with specific facts (like "How
much is 4  6?") (Egan, 2005). At other times, though, the reverse
sequence may be preferable. Whatever the case, a taxonomy of
cognitive objectives, like Bloom's, can help to remind teachers to set
a variety of objectives and to avoid relying excessively on just one
level, such as the simple recall of factual knowledge (Notar, et al.,
2004).

Bloom's Taxonomy Revised

A few years ago two of Benjamin Bloom's original colleagues, Linda
Anderson and David Krathwohl, revised his taxonomy so as to clarify
its terms and make it more complete (Anderson & Krathwohl, 2001;
Marzano, 2006). The resulting categories are summarized and
compared to the original categories in Table 1. As the chart shows,
several categories of objectives have been renamed and a second
dimension added that describes the kind of thinking or cognitive
processing that may occur. The result is a much richer taxonomy
than before since every level of the objectives can now take four
different forms. Remembering, for example, can refer to four
different kinds of memory: memory for facts, for concepts, for
procedures, or for metacognitive knowledge. The tables below give
examples of each of these kinds of memory.

880 | Learning Objectives
Table 8.4.2. Bloom's taxonomy of cognitive objectives--revised

Original term from Bloom's  Revised term emphasizing
Taxonomy (1956)             cognitive processing (2001)

Knowledge                   Remembering

Comprehension               Understanding

Application                 Applying

Analysis                    Analyzing

Evaluation                  Evaluating

Synthesis                   Creating

Table 8.4.3. New additions to Bloom's taxonomy

New Dimension: Types of     Example of Cognitive Process
Knowledge Learned (2001)    Remembering Combined with
                            Possible Types of Knowledge

factual knowledge           Memory for facts: recalling the
                            names of each part of a living cell

conceptual knowledge        Memory for concepts: recalling the
                            functions of each part of a living
                            cell

procedural knowledge        Memory for procedures: recalling
                            how to view a cell under a
                            microscope

metacognitive knowledge     Memory for
                            metacognition: recalling not the
                            names of the parts, but
                            a technique for remembering the
                            names of the parts of a living cell

The revision to Bloom's Taxonomy distinguishes between cognitive
processes (left-hand column in table 2) and types of knowledge
learned (right-hand column in table 3). The original version has
terms similar to the cognitive processing terms in the revised
version. According to the revised version, any type of knowledge
(from the right-hand column in table 3) can, in principle, occur with
any type of cognitive processing (left-hand column in table 2).

                                                Learning Objectives | 881
Taxonomies of Affective and Psychomotor Objectives

Although taxonomies related to affect, or the feelings and emotions
of students, are used less commonly than cognitive taxonomies
for planning instruction, various educators have constructed them.
One of the most widely known was also published by colleagues of
Benjamin Bloom and classifies effect according to how committed
a student feels toward what he is learning (Krathwohl, Bloom, &
Masia, 1964/1999). Table 8.4.4 summarizes the categories and gives
brief examples. The lowest level, called receiving, simply involves
a willingness to experience new knowledge or activities. Higher
levels involve embracing or adopting experiences in ways that are
increasingly organized and that represent increasingly stable forms
of commitment.

Table 8.4.4. Taxonomies of objectives: affective domain and
psychomotor domain

Affective Domain                   Psychomotor Domain

Receiving: Willingness to attend to Imitation: repeating a simple

particular experience              action that has been demonstrated

Responding: willingness to         Manipulation: practice of an action
participate actively in an         that has been imitated but only
experience                         learned partially

Valuing: perception of experience  Precision: quick, smooth execution
as worthwhile                      of an action that has been
                                   practiced

Organization: coordination of      Articulation: execution of an action
valued experiences into partially  not only with precision, but also
coherent wholes                    with modifications appropriate to
                                   new circumstances

Characterization by a value        Naturalization: incorporation of an
complex: coordination of valued    action into the motor repertoire,
experiences and of organized sets  along with experimentation with
of experiences into a single       new motor actions
comprehensive value hierarchy

Taxonomies related to abilities and skills that are physical, or
psychomotor, have also been used less widely than affective

882 | Learning Objectives
taxonomies, with the notable exception of one area of teaching
where they are obviously relevant: physical education. As you might
expect, taxonomic categories of motor skills extend from simple,
brief actions to complex, extended action sequences that combine
simpler, previously learned skills smoothly and automatically
(Harrow, 1972; Simpson, 1972). One such classification scheme is
shown in Table 4. An example of a very basic psychomotor skill
might be imitating the action of throwing a ball when modeled
by someone else; an example of the latter might be performing
a 10-minute gymnastics routine that the student has devised for
himself or herself. Note, though, that many examples of
psychomotor skills also exist outside the realm of physical
education. In a science course, for example, a student might need to
learn to operate laboratory equipment that requires using delicate,
fine movements. In art classes, students might learn to draw, and
in music they might learn to play an instrument (both are partly
motor skills). Most first graders are challenged by the motor skills
of learning to write. For students with certain physical disabilities,
furthermore, motor skill development is an important priority for
the student's entire education.

     The Learning Objectives Builder

         This Learning Objectives Builder can assist teachers with
           composing learning objectives according to Bloom's
                                        taxonomy.

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/

                                                                      Learning Objectives | 883
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Specific attribution

   Teach Like a Champion Technique 7--4Ms. Provided by: Kaizen
      Teaching. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/2dP5lGmO8UU.
      License: All Rights Reserved

884 | Learning Objectives
Differentiated Instruction

So far in this discussion, we have ignored the obvious variety among
students. Yet their diversity is a reality that every teacher
recognizes. Whatever goals and plans we make, some students learn
the material sooner or better than others. For any given goal or
objective, some students need more time than others in order to
learn. And any particular teaching strategy will prove more effective
with some students than others. Effective teaching
requires differentiated instruction--providing different materials,
arrangements, and strategies to different students. The
differentiation can include unique structural arrangements in the
school, such as special tutoring for individuals or special classes
for small groups needing particular extra help. Differentiation can
also include extra attention or coaching within a classroom for
individual students or small groups (Tomlinson, 2006; Goddard,
Goddard, & Tschannen-Moran, 2007).

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=120#oembed-1

Video 8.5.1. Differentiating Instruction: It's Not as Hard as You
Think provides an introduction to differentiation in instruction.

   Differentiation is commonly used in "heterogeneous
grouping"--an educational strategy in which students of different
abilities, learning needs, and levels of academic achievement are
grouped together. In heterogeneously grouped classrooms, for
example, teachers vary instructional strategies and use more
flexibly designed lessons to engage student interests and address

                                                             Differentiated Instruction | 885
distinct learning needs--all of which may vary from student to
student. The basic idea is that the primary educational
objectives--making sure all students master essential knowledge,
concepts, and skills--remain the same for every student, but
teachers may use different instructional methods to help students
meet those expectations.

   Teachers who employ differentiated instructional strategies will
usually adjust the elements of a lesson from one group of students
to another so that those who may need more time or a different
teaching approach to grasp a concept get the specialized assistance
they need, while those students who have already mastered a
concept can be assigned a different learning activity or move on to
a new concept or lesson.

   In more diverse classrooms, teachers will tailor lessons to address
the unique needs of special-education students, high-achieving
students, and English-language learners, for example. Teachers also
use strategies such as formative assessment--periodic, in-process
evaluations of what students are learning or not learning--to
determine the best instructional approaches or modifications
needed for each student.

   Differentiation techniques may also be based on specific student
attributes, including interest (what subjects inspire students to
learn), readiness (what students have learned and still need to learn),
or learning style (the ways in which students tend to learn the
material best)

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=120#oembed-2

Video 8.5.2. Differentiating Instruction: How to Plan Your

886 | Differentiated Instruction
Lessons provides suggestions for including differentiation in lesson
planning.

The Debate on Equity

Differentiation plays into ongoing debates about equity and
"academic tracking" in public schools. One major criticism of the
approach is related to the relative complexities and difficulties
entailed in teaching diverse types of students in a single classroom
or educational setting. Since effective differentiation requires more
sophisticated and highly specialized instructional methods,
teachers typically need adequate training, mentoring,
and professional development to ensure they are using
differentiated instructional techniques appropriately and
effectively.

   Some teachers also argue that the practical realities of using
differentiation--especially in larger classes comprising students
with a wide range of skill levels, academic preparation, and learning
needs--can be prohibitively difficult or even infeasible. Yet other
educators argue that this criticism stems, at least in part, from a
fundamental misunderstanding of the strategy. In her book How to
Differentiate Instruction in Mixed-Ability Classrooms, the educator
and writer Carol Ann Tomlinson, who is considered an authority
on differentiation, points out a potential source of confusion,
"Differentiated instruction is not the `Individualized Instruction' of
the 1970s."

  In other words, differentiation is the practice of

varying instructional techniques in a classroom to effectively teach
as many students as possible, but it does not entail the creation

of distinct courses of study for every student (i.e.,
individualized instruction). The conflation of

"differentiated instruction" and "individualized instruction" has
likely contributed to ongoing confusion and debates about

                                                              Differentiated Instruction | 887
differentiation, particularly given that the terms are widely and
frequently used interchangeably (Myths and Misconceptions, n.d).

Differentiated Instruction and Implication for
Universal Design for Learning

To differentiate instruction is to recognize students' varying
background knowledge, readiness, language, preferences in
learning, and interests; and to react responsively. As Tomlinson
notes in her recent book Differentiated Classroom: Responding to the
Needs of All Learners (2014), teachers in a differentiated classroom
begin with their current curriculum and engaging instruction. Then
they ask, what will it take to alter or modify the curriculum and
instruction so that each learner comes away with the knowledge,
understanding, and skills necessary to take on the next important
phase of learning. Differentiated instruction is a process of teaching
and learning for students of differing abilities in the same class.
Teachers, based on characteristics of their learners' readiness,
interest, and learning profile, may adapt or manipulate various
elements of the curriculum (content, process, product, affect/
environment). These are illustrated in the table below which
presents the general principles of differentiation by showing the
key elements of the concept and the relationships among those
elements.

   Table 8.5.1. Principles of differentiation by key elements

888 | Differentiated Instruction
     Adapted with permission from Carol Tomlinson: Differentiation
   Central Institutes on Academic Diversity in the Curry School of

        Education at the University of Virginia (September 2014).

Identifying Components/Features

While Tomlinson and most recognize there is no magic or recipe
for making a classroom differentiated, they have identified guiding
principles, considered the "Pillars that Support Effective

                                                             Differentiated Instruction | 889
Differentiation": Philosophy, Principles, and Practices. The premise
of each is as follows:

   The Philosophy of differentiation is based on the following tenets:

   recognizing diversity is normal and valuable,
   understanding every student has the capacity to learn,
   taking responsibility to guide and structure student success,
   championing every student entering the learning environment

      and assuring equity of access

The Principles identified that shape differentiation include

   creating an environment conducive to learning
   identifying a quality foundational curriculum
   informing teaching and learning with assessments
   designing instruction based on assessments collected
   creating and maintaining a flexible classroom

Teacher Practices are also essential to differentiation, highlighted as

   proactive planning to address student profiles
   modifying instructional approaches to meet student needs
   teaching up (students should be working just above their

      individual comfort levels)
   assigning respectful tasks responsive to student

      needs--challenging, engaging, purposeful
   applying flexible grouping strategies (e.g., stations, interest

      groups, orbital studies)

Content

   Several elements and materials are used to support instructional
      content. These include acts, concepts, generalizations or
      principles, attitudes, and skills. The variation seen in a

890 | Differentiated Instruction
      differentiated classroom is most frequently in the manner in
      which students gain access to important learning. Access to
      content is seen as key.
   Align tasks and objectives to learning goals. Designers of
      differentiated instruction view the alignment of tasks with
      instructional goals and objectives as essential. Goals are most
      frequently assessed by many state-level, high-stakes tests and
      frequently administered standardized measures. Objectives are
      frequently written in incremental steps resulting in a
      continuum of skills-building tasks. An objectives-driven menu
      makes it easier to find the next instructional step for learners
      entering at varying levels.
   Instruction is concept-focused and principle-
      driven. Instructional concepts should be broad-based, not
      focused on minute details or unlimited facts. Teachers must
      focus on the concepts, principles, and skills that students
      should learn. The content of instruction should address the
      same concepts with all students, but the degree of complexity
      should be adjusted to suit diverse learners.
   Clarify key concepts and generalizations. Ensure that all
      learners gain powerful understandings that can serve as the
      foundation for future learning. Teachers are encouraged to
      identify essential concepts and instructional foci to ensure that
      all learners comprehend.

Process

   Flexible grouping is consistently used. Strategies for flexible
      grouping are essential. Learners are expected to interact and
      work together as they develop knowledge of new content.
      Teachers may conduct whole-class introductory discussions of
      content big ideas followed by small group or paired work.
      Student groups may be coached from within or by the teacher

                                                              Differentiated Instruction | 891
      to support the completion of assigned tasks. Grouping of
      students is not fixed. As one of the foundations of
      differentiated instruction, grouping and regrouping must be a
      dynamic process, changing with the content, project, and
      ongoing evaluations.
   Classroom management benefits students and teachers. To
      effectively operate a classroom using differentiated
      instruction, teachers must carefully select organization and
      instructional delivery strategies. In her text, How to
      Differentiate Instruction in Mixed-Ability Classrooms (2001),
      Carol Tomlinson identifies 17 key strategies for teachers to
      successfully meet the challenge of designing and managing
      differentiated instruction.
   Emphasize critical and creative thinking as a goal in lesson
      design. The tasks, activities, and procedures for students
      should require that they understand and apply meaning.
      Instruction may require support, additional motivation; and
      varied tasks, materials, or equipment for different students in
      the classroom.

Products

   Initial and ongoing assessment of student readiness and growth
      are essential. Meaningful pre-assessment naturally leads to
      functional and successful differentiation. Incorporating pre-
      and ongoing assessment informs teachers so that they can
      better provide a menu of approaches, choices, and scaffolds
      for the varying needs, interests, and abilities that exist in
      classrooms of diverse students. Assessments may be formal or
      informal, including interviews, surveys, performance
      assessments, and more formal evaluation procedures.

   Use assessment as a teaching tool to extend rather than merely
      measure instruction. Assessment should occur before, during,

892 | Differentiated Instruction
      and following the instructional episode; and it should be used
      to help pose questions regarding student needs and optimal
      learning.
   Students are active and responsible explorers. Teachers respect
      that each task put before the learner will be interesting,
      engaging, and accessible to essential understanding and skills.
      Each child should feel challenged most of the time.
   Vary expectations and requirements for student responses. Items
      to which students respond may be differentiated so that
      different students are able to demonstrate or express their
      knowledge and understanding in a variety of ways. A well-
      designed student product allows varied means of expression
      and alternative procedures and offers varying degrees of
      difficulty, types of evaluation, and scoring.

Affect/Environment

   Developing a learning environment. Establish classroom
      conditions that set the tone and expectations for learning.
      Provide tasks that are challenging, interesting, and worthwhile
      to students.

   Engaging all learners is essential. Teachers are encouraged to
      strive for the development of lessons that are engaging and
      motivating for a diverse class of students. Vary tasks within
      instruction as well as across students. In other words, an entire
      session for students should not consist of all lecture,
      discussion, practice, or any single structure or activity.

   Provide a balance between teacher-assigned and student-
      selected tasks. A balanced working structure is optimal in a
      differentiated classroom. Based on pre-assessment
      information, the balance will vary from class to class as well as
      lesson to lesson. Teachers should ensure that students have
      choices in their learning.

                                                             Differentiated Instruction | 893
The following instructional approach to teaching mathematics
patterns has several UDL features (see Table 8.5.2). Through the use
of clearly stated goals and the implementation of flexible working
groups with varying levels of challenge, this lesson helps to break
down instructional barriers. We have identified additional ways
to reduce barriers in this lesson even further by employing the
principles of UDL teaching methods and differentiated instruction.
We provide recommendations for employing teaching methods of
UDL to support this lesson in Table 8.5.3. Note that we are not
making generalized recommendations for making this lesson more
UDL, but instead are focusing on ways that differentiated
instruction, specifically, can help achieve this goal.

   Table 8.5.2. UDL elements in a differentiated instruction
mathematics lesson

894 | Differentiated Instruction
UDL            Differentiated Instruction Features
Guideline/
Checkpoint

Provide        The teacher provides multiple examples throughout the
multiple       lesson with multiple models, practice activities, and
examples.      additional math problems.

Highlight      The teacher highlights critical features of the
critical       mathematics by stopping and calculating, checking in
features.      with students, and modeling behavior.

Provide        The teacher supports understanding by identifying
multiple       patterns not only in text but also in the environment of
media and      the classroom, school, etc.
formats.

Support        Teachers analyze or pre-test students for key pre-skills
background     and background knowledge.
context.

Provide        In cooperative groups, students may receive feedback
ongoing,       from the teacher and from peers.
relevant
feedback.

Offer choices  Students are assigned to one of three groups tiered by
of content     difficulty; all students are working on the same task but
and tools.     with varying supports.

Offer          Varied supports in the working groups alter the level of
adjustable     independence and difficulty in solving the task.
levels of
challenge.

Source: Hall, Vue, Meyer, 2004.

Table 8.5.3. UDL strategies to further minimize lesson barriers in a
differentiated instruction lesson plan for mathematics

                                 Differentiated Instruction | 895
Barrier       UDL Strategy

Deducting/    Provide different demonstrations or models
constructing  of how to use the tools employed in the lesson. Provide
numeric       scaffolds and prompt students in use of number patterns.
functions.

Students      Provide alternative formats for students to express their
write rules   interpretation of visual and representational patterns and
for           the mathematical implications. For example, speaking,
mathematical  creating a diagram, numerical representations.
patterns.

Creating      Consider background knowledge for students entering
number        this mathematical problem. What range of supports
patterns.     could be made available to provide the informational
              knowledge so that students can focus on the
              problem-solving component?

Source: Hall, Vue, Meyer, 2004.

Training in Differentiated Instruction

          The IRIS Center of Peabody College, Vanderbilt
University provides a training module for those that wish to
learn more about Differentiated instruction: Maximizing the

                         learning of all students.

CC licensed content, Original

   Differentiated Instruction. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/
      chapter/differentiated-instruction/. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

896 | Differentiated Instruction
   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

   Instructional Methods, Strategies and Technologies to Meet
      the Needs of All Learners . Authored by: Paula Lombardi.
      Retrieved from: https://granite.pressbooks.pub/
      teachingdiverselearners/chapter/differentiated-
      instruction-2/. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Specific attribution
   Differentiating Instruction: Itu2019s Not as Hard as You Think.
      Provided by: Education Week. Retrieved from:
      https://youtu.be/h7-D3gi2lL8. License: All Rights Reserved
   Differentiating Instruction: How to Plan Your Lessons.
      Provided by: Education Week. Retrieved from:
      https://youtu.be/rumHfC1XQtc. License: All Rights Reserved

                                                              Differentiated Instruction | 897
Students as a Resource for
Instructional Goals

898 | Students as a Resource for
Instructional Goals
The discussion of instructional planning so far has described goals
and objectives as if they are selected primarily by educators and
teachers, and not by students themselves. The assumption may be
correct in many cases, but there are problems with it. One problem
is that choosing goals and objectives for students, rather than by
students, places a major burden on everyone involved in
education--curriculum writers, teachers, and students. The
curriculum writers have to make sure that they specify standards,
goals, and objectives that are truly important for students to learn
(what if it really does not matter, for example, whether a science
student learns about the periodic table of the elements?). Teachers
have to make sure that students actually become motivated to learn
the specified goals and objectives, even if the students are not
motivated initially. Students have to master pre-set goals and
objectives even if they might not have chosen them personally.
Some critics of education have argued that these requirements can
be serious impediments to learning (Kohn, 2004). The problems are
widespread and especially noticeable in two forms of teaching. One
is with the youngest students, who may especially lack patience
with an educational agenda set by others (Kohn, 1999; Seitz, 2006).
The other is with culturally diverse classrooms, where students and
their families may hold a variety of legitimate, but unconventional
expectations about what they should learn (J. Banks & C. Banks,
2005).

   In response to concerns like these, some educators advocate
planning instruction around goals set or expressed either by
students themselves or by the cultures or communities with which
students identify. Their suggestions vary in detail but can be
organized into two broad categories: (1) emergent curriculum and
(2) multicultural and anti-bias curriculum.

                                                                                                   | 899
Emergent Curriculum

An emergent curriculum is one that explicitly builds on interests
expressed by students, rather than goals set by curriculum writers,
curriculum documents, or teachers. As you might suspect,
therefore, instructional planning for an emergent curriculum does
not have the same meaning that the term has had in the chapter up
to now. Instead, since an emergent curriculum by definition unfolds
spontaneously and flexibly, students' interests may be predictable,
but usually not very far in advance (Peterson, 2002). Suppose, for
example, that a first-grade teacher plans a unit around Halloween,
and that as one of the activities for this unit she reads a book about
Halloween. In listening to the book, however, the students turn out
to be less interested in its Halloween content than in the fact that
one of the illustrations in the book shows a picture of a full moon
partially hidden by clouds. They begin asking about the moon: why
it is full sometimes but not other times, why it rises in different
places each month, and whether the moon really moves behind
clouds or whether the clouds actually do the moving. The teacher
encourages their questions and their interest in moon astronomy.
Over the next days or weeks, she arranges further activities and
experiences to encourage students' interest: she sets aside her
original plans about Halloween and finds books about the moon
and about how the solar system works. She invites a local amateur
astronomer to visit the group and talk about his observations of
the moon. Several children build models of the moon out of paper
mach. Some find books describing trips of the space shuttles to
the moon. Others make a large mural depicting a moonscape. And
so on; the original goals about Halloween are not so much rejected,
as set aside or forgotten in favor of something more immediately
interesting and motivating.

   While these activities could in principle happen because of
recommendations from a curriculum document, the key point about
emergent curriculum is that they happen for a very different reason:

900 |
these activities happen and the goals emerge because the
children want them. A teacher's challenge is therefore not to plan
activities that match predetermined curriculum goals or objectives
but to respond flexibly and sensitively as students' interests become
known and explicit. Teachers' responsiveness is facilitated by two
practices that are especially prominent when a teacher adopts an
emergent approach to curriculum. The first is careful, continuous
observation of students. The teacher watches and listens, and may
keep informal written records of students' comments and activities.
The information allows her to respond more effectively to the
interests they express, and at the same time, it provides a type
of assessment of students' progress--information about what the
students are actually learning.

   A second strategy that facilitates teachers' success is curriculum
webbing, a process of brainstorming connections among initiatives
suggested by students and ideas suggested by the teacher. In some
cases, webs can be created jointly with students by brainstorming
with them about where their current interests may lead. In other
cases, they can be created independently by the teacher's own
reflections. In still others, when a classroom has more than one
adult responsible for it, they can be created jointly with fellow
teachers or teacher assistants. The latter approach works especially
well in preschool, kindergartens, or special education classrooms,
which often have more than one adult responsible for the class
(Vartuli & Rohs, 2006).

   To some, emergent curriculum may seem like a formula for
curriculum and management disasters. But the approach has often
proved quite successful, particularly in early childhood education
and the earliest grade levels of elementary school (Seitz, 2006;
Wurm, 2005). Something akin to emergent curriculum is quite
possible, in principle, even with older students. In Chapter 8, for
example, we described a high school program in which students
began with problems and experiences that were personally relevant,
and discussed the problems with classmates to formulate research
problems which they then studied more formally and systematically

                                                                                                    | 901
(Hawkins, 2006). In essence, this strategy created an emergent
curriculum analogous to the ones described above for young
children. What the high school students studied was not
predetermined, but emerged from their own expressed interests.

Multicultural and Anti-Bias Education

Culture is an all-encompassing set of values, beliefs, practices, and
customs of a group or community--it is a total way of life. Cultures
may be shared widely, even by much if not all of an entire nation,
or they may be shared by relatively few, such as a small community
within a large city. Sometimes the term culture is even applied to
the way of life of an individual family or of a specialized group
in society; some might argue, for example, that there is a culture
of schooling shared by teachers, though not necessarily by all
students.

   Because culture by definition touches on all aspects of living, it
is likely to affect students' perspectives about school, their ways of
learning, and their motivations to learn. The differences go beyond
obvious differences in holidays, language, or food preferences. In
some cultures, for example, individuals keep good eye contact with
someone to whom they are speaking, and expect the same from
others. In other cultures, such behavior is considered intrusive or
overly aggressive, and avoiding eye contact while speaking is
considered more respectful. Or another example: in some cultures,
it is expected that individuals will be punctual (or on time), whereas
in others punctuality is considered overly compulsive, and a more
casual approach to time is the norm. Students regularly bring
differences like these to school, where they combine with
expectations from teachers and other school staff and contribute
indirectly to differences in achievement and satisfaction among
students.

   To be fully effective, therefore, instructional planning has to take

902 |
into account the diversity in students' cultural backgrounds,
whether the differences are observable or subtle. Planning also has
to work deliberately to reduce the social biases and prejudices that
sometimes develop about cultural differences. Multicultural
education and anti-bias education are two terms referring to these
purposes. Their meanings often overlap significantly, depending on
the context or on who is using the terms. Generally, though, the
first term--multicultural education-- has somewhat more to do with
understanding the differences among cultures. The latter
term--anti-bias education --has more to do with overcoming social
prejudices and biases resulting from cultural differences. For
convenience in this chapter, we will use the single
term multicultural education to refer to both understanding
differences and overcoming prejudices.

   Fully effective multicultural education has several features. The
most obvious and familiar one is content integration: the
curriculum uses examples and information from different cultures
to illustrate various concepts or ideas already contained in the
curriculum (Vavrus, 2002). In studying holidays, for example, an
elementary school teacher includes activities and information about
Kwanzaa as well as Christmas, Hanukkah, or other holidays
happening at about the same time. In studying the US Civil War,
another example, a middle-years teacher includes material written
from the perspective of African-American slaves and Southern
landowners. In teaching language arts, students learn the basic
vocabulary of any non-English languages spoken by some members
of the class.

   But there is more to multicultural education than integrating
content from diverse cultures. Among other features, it also
requires an equity pedagogy, which is an effort to allow or even
encourage, a variety of learning styles--styles in which students may
have become skillful because of their cultural backgrounds (Crow,
2005; C. Banks & J. Banks, 1995). In elementary language arts, for
example, there may be more than one "best" way to tell a story.
Should a student necessarily have to tell it alone and standing in

                                                                                                   | 903
front of the whole class, or might the student tell it jointly with
a friend or in a smaller group? In learning to write a story, is
legitimate variety also possible there? Should a written story
necessarily begin with a topic sentence that announces what the
story is about, or can it save a statement of topic for the ending
or even leave it out altogether in order to stimulate readers to
think? The best choice is related in part to the nature and purpose
of the story, of course, but partly also to differences in cultural
expectations about storytelling. Choosing a story form also points
toward another feature of multicultural education, the knowledge
construction process, which is the unstated, unconscious process
by which a cultural group creates knowledge or information. The
popular media, for example, often portray Hispanic Americans in
ways that are stereotypical, either subtly or blatantly (Lester & Ross,
2003). A fully multicultural curriculum finds a way to call these
images to the attention of students and engage them in thinking
about how and why the images oversimplify reality.

   Yet there is even more to fully multicultural education. In addition
to content integration, equity pedagogy, and knowledge
construction, it fosters prejudice reduction, or activities,
discussions, and readings that identify students' negative
evaluations of cultural groups (Jacobson, 2003; J. Banks & C. Banks,
2004). The activities and discussions can of course take a somewhat
philosophical approach--examining how students feel in general,
what experiences they remember having involving prejudice, and
the like. But the activities and discussions can also take a more
indirect and subtle form, as when a teacher periodically speaks
in a student's native language as a public sign of respect for the
student. Gestures and discussions like these are especially effective
if they contribute to the fifth element of multicultural education,
empowering the school and social structure, in which all teachers
and staff members find ways to convey respect for cultural
differences, including even during extra-curricular and sports
activities. A sports team or a debate club should not be limited
to students from one cultural background and exclude those from

904 |
another--or more subtly, accept everyone but give the more
desirable roles only to individuals with particular social
backgrounds. To the extent that cultural respect and inclusion are
school-wide, teaching and learning both become easier and more
successful, and instructional planning, in particular, becomes more
relevant to students' needs.
CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

                                                                                                   | 905
Delivering Instruction

In the previous sections, you learned about the importance of

specifying goals and objectives for your learners. We pointed out

that goals energize you and your students to achieve high degrees

of effort and learning. We discussed how objectives specify what

students are expected to do to demonstrate learning.

There is another important use for goals and objectives: they

can determine your choice of instructional methods. Simply stated,

instructional methods are patterns of practice that recur in

classrooms time and again. They include, for example, the methods

of direct (or didactic)

instruction, indirect (or inquiry) instruction, and self-directed (or

self-regulated) instruction. Each of these general methods includes

certain specific teaching skills, among which are structuring,

modeling, coaching, and fading.

For instance, if your objective is to have students acquire facts

(for example, names and dates of battles of the Civil War), rules

(for forming possessives), or action sequences (for focusing a

microscope), you will most likely use direct instruction, which

involves some questioning, clarifying, and explaining. But if your

objective is to teach concepts (for example, photosynthesis),

patterns          (global     warming),  or           abstractions

(environmental responsibility), you will most likely use indirect

instruction, which involves constructivist teaching methods. If,

however, your objective is to teach strategies for learning (for

example, a model for learning to solve equations that can be used

time and again), you will most likely adopt the method of self-

directed instruction, which incorporates the skills of metacognition

(thinking about thinking), subvocal rehearsal, guided practice, and

self-evaluation.

Regardless of the instructional method you are using, you will

want to be familiar with structuring, modeling, coaching, and fading.

906 | Delivering Instruction
In the next section, we will study the teaching skills of structuring,
modeling, coaching, and fading. We will demonstrate how
successful teachers use these skills to capture student attention,
convey purpose, communicate information, keep lessons moving at
a brisk and lively pace, and provide opportunities for transferring
what has been learned to new and different contexts.

Structuring

Structuring is the process of getting learners ready to learn by
selecting, organizing, and previewing the content to be presented.
Structuring is that part of a lesson during which the teacher exerts
the most control over the learning process. During structuring, it
is essential that the teacher be skilled at capturing the attention
of learners and focusing it on the outcome of the lesson. If not
fully alert, learners will find it difficult to remember the
information given, understand the goal of the lesson, or participate
in the instructional process--all of which are essential for learning
and transfer to occur.

   How do you gain a learner's attention? Your voice, your actions,
and your visual displays have to compete with hundreds of other
stimuli that also are vying for your learners' attention. How can
you get students to attend? What does it mean to "pay
attention"? Learners who pay attention usually demonstrate several
skills.

   They orient themselves to you and what you direct them to
      (for example, the overhead projector, the blackboard, the text).

   They focus their attention on the relevant aspects of what they
      are attending to (for example, the problem you are describing,
      the responses of another student, the picture in the text).

   They ignore distracting stimuli (for example, another student
      or the sounds of a nearby classroom).

                                                                   Delivering Instruction | 907
   They remain alert during the lesson (for example, they
      maintain their engagement with the lesson despite a desire to
      return to a more passive state).

Structuring focuses learners on the first two of the skills above.
These involve (1) focusing attention by directing the eyes, ears, and
body posture of learners to a relevant stimulus and (2) holding their
attention long enough to establish a learning set. We will explore
the third and fourth attention-gaining skills under the expert
practice of coaching. For now, let's turn to the first two skills:
focusing and holding your learners' attention.

Focusing Attention

Before you can communicate the purpose or objective of a lesson,
you must focus the eyes and ears of your learners. This is difficult at
the start of class if your learners are taking out materials, finishing
their homework, asking questions of one another, or catching up on
the latest gossip with their friends.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=122#oembed-1

Video 8.7.1. The Hook suggests techniques for getting students'
attention and motivate them to become engaged with the lessons.

   Research on attention has focused on four properties of
instructional stimuli that cause learners to make an attending
response, such as shifting one's body posture, changing

908 | Delivering Instruction
the direction of a gaze, scanning the visual field, or holding a fixed
stare (Solso, 1988). From this research, we can identify four appeals
that can be used to make instructional content more attractive to
learners. They are (1) psychophysical appeal, (2) emotional appeal,
(3) discrepancy appeal, and (4) commanding stimuli appeal.

   Psychophysical Appeal. A psychophysical appeal is any variation
in the color, size, intensity, or pitch of stimuli in your learners' visual
field that causes them to make an attending response. The most
accessible and efficient stimuli for you to vary are those coming
from your own body: your voice, gestures, posture, movement, and
facial expressions. You can most efficiently focus your learners'
attention by changing your voice inflection, moving as you talk, and
varying your posture or gestures.

   Emotional Appeal. Just as we have emotional responses
associated with our names, learners have emotional responses to
certain sights, sounds, words, and smells. The skillful teacher uses
the emotional appeal of these stimuli to focus learners' attention
by calling on them by name, commenting from time to time on a
unique article of their clothing, using words in the student's second
or native language, and introducing certain sights, sounds, and
smells that may relate to the topic of a lesson.

   Discrepancy Appeal. Our attention is often drawn to stimuli that
make a discrepancy appeal by means of the element of
surprise--something novel or unique grabs our attention. The
history teacher who dresses up in an authentic costume to illustrate
a period in history, the science teacher who creates an unusual
noise or smell at the start of an experiment, the math teacher who
begins by presenting an unsolvable problem, the language teacher
who deliberately misspells a word to be used in the day's lesson,
or the speech teacher who stages a shouting match with a student
before a lesson on listening skills to demonstrate inattention--all
are using the property of discrepancy to focus the attention of
learners.

   Commanding Stimuli Appeal. Teachers often use commanding
stimuli appeal to get learners to comply with a request. Statements

                                                                  Delivering Instruction | 909
such as "Now listen closely" or "All books and pens away," when
delivered assertively, are likely to be followed. Some teachers have
their students vote on a code word during the first week of school,
which when spoken assertively by the teacher gets everyone to stop
what they are doing and look at the teacher.

   Holding Attention. The expert practice of structuring involves
not only focusing the attention of learners but also giving them
something to focus on. This is accomplished by building a learning
set. Hunter (1982) refers to this phase of the lesson as the
anticipatory set. Its purpose is to make the goal or objective of the
lesson relevant to the learners, to put the lesson into a context the
learners can relate to, and to get their minds off other distracting
stimuli. During this time learners recall past learning by drawing a
picture, summarizing something they saw or heard, reading a short
passage, or by writing down an idea--all with the intent of relating
past with present learning.

   Anticipatory sets often take the form of advance organizers
(Ausubel, 1968). Advance organizers give learners an overview of
what is to come that helps them store, label, and package the
content for retention and later use. For example, "Listen to this
story and think of the three things the duckling did."

Activating Prior Knowledge

Another way to connect curriculum goals to students' experience
is by activating prior knowledge, a term that refers to encouraging
students to recall what they know already about new material being
learned. Various formats for activating prior knowledge are possible.
When introducing a unit about how biologists classify animal and
plant species, for example, a teacher can invite students to discuss
how they already classify different kinds of plants and animals.
Having highlighted this informal knowledge, the teacher can then
explore how the same species are classified by biological scientists,

910 | Delivering Instruction
and compare the scientists' classification schemes to the students'
own schemes. The activation does not have to happen orally, as
in this example; a teacher can also ask students to write down as
many distinct types of animals and plants that they can think of, and
then ask students to diagram or map their relationships--essentially
creating a concept map (Gurlitt, et al., 2006). Whatever the strategy
used, activation helps by making students' prior knowledge or
experience conscious and therefore easier to link to new concepts
or information.

Anticipating Preconceptions of Students

Ironically, activating students' prior knowledge can be a mixed
blessing if some of the prior knowledge is misleading or downright
wrong. Misleading or erroneous knowledge is especially common
among young students, but it can happen at any grade level. A
kindergarten child may think that the sun literally "rises" in the
morning, since she often hears adults use this expression, or that
the earth is flat because it obviously looks flat. But a high school
student may mistakenly believe that large objects (a boulder) fall
faster than small ones (a pebble), or that a heavy object dropped (not
thrown) from a moving car window will fall straight down instead of
traveling laterally alongside the car while it falls.

   Because misconceptions are quite common among students and
even among adults, teachers are more effective if they
can anticipate preconceptions of students wherever possible. The
task is twofold. First, the teacher must know or at least guess
students' preconceptions as much as possible in advance, so that
she can design learning activities to counteract and revise their
thinking. Some preconceptions have been well-documented by
educational research and therefore can in principle be anticipated
easily--though they may still sometimes take a teacher by surprise
during a busy activity or lesson (Tanner & Allen, 2005; Chiu & Lin,
2005). Table 1 lists a few of these common preconceptions. Others

                                                                    Delivering Instruction | 911
may be unique to particular students, however, and a teacher may
only be able to learn from them through experience--by listening
carefully to what students say and write and by watching what they
do. A few preconceptions may be so ingrained or tied to other, more
deeply held beliefs that students may resist giving them up, either
consciously or unconsciously. It may be hard, for example, for some
students to give up the idea that girls are less talented at math or
science than boys, even though research generally finds this is not
the case (Hyde & Linn, 2006).

Table 8.7.1 Several misconceptions about science

Misconception                What to do

Stars and constellations     Ask students to observe carefully the
appear in the same place in  locations of a bright star once a week for
the sky every night.         several weeks.

The world is flat, circular  Use a globe or ball to find countries
like a pancake.              located over the horizon; use computer
                             software (e.g. Global Earth) to illustrate
                             how a round Earth can look flat up close.

Dinosaurs disappeared at     Construct a timeline of major periods of
the same time that human     Darwinian evolution.
beings appeared and
because of human activity.

Rivers always flow from      Identify rivers that flow South to North
North to South.              (e.g. the Red River in North Dakota and
                             Canada); talk about how Southern
                             locations are not necessarily "lower."

Force is needed not only to  Explain the concept of inertia;
start an object moving, but  demonstrate inertia using low-friction
to keep it moving.           motion (e.g. with a hovercraft or dry-ice
                             puck).

Volume, weight, and size     Have students weigh objects of different
are identical concepts.      sizes or volumes, and compare the results.

Seasons happen because       Explain the tilt of Earth's axis using a globe
the Earth changes distance   and light as a model; demonstrate reduced
from the sun.                heating of surfaces by placing similar
                             surfaces outdoors at different angles to
                             the sun's rays.

Sources: Chi, 2005; D. Clark, 2006; Slotta & Chi, 2006; Owens, 2003.

The second task when anticipating preconceptions is to treat
912 | Delivering Instruction
students' existing knowledge and beliefs with respect even when
they do include misconceptions or errors. This may seem obvious
in principle, but it needs remembering when students persist with
misconceptions in spite of a teacher's efforts to teach alternative
ideas or concepts. Most of us--including most students--have
reasons for holding our beliefs, even when the beliefs do not agree
with teachers, textbooks, or other authorities, and we appreciate
having our beliefs treated with respect. Students are no different
from other people in this regard. In a high school biology class, for
example, some students may have personal reasons for not agreeing
with the theory of evolution associated with Charles Darwin. For
religious reasons, they may support explanations of the origins of
life that give a more active, interventionist role to God (Brumfiel,
2005). If their beliefs disagree with the teacher's or the textbook,
then the disagreement needs to be acknowledged respectfully. For
some students (and perhaps some teachers), expressing
fundamental disagreement respectfully may feel awkward, but it
needs to be done nonetheless.

Modeling

Once your learners' attention is on you, you have the opportunity
to model what your students are about to learn. The term modeling
can mean either a demonstration of the desired behavior or
representation of an important theory, idea, or object. Each of these
meanings can link curriculum goals with students' prior knowledge
and experience.

Modeling as a Demonstration

In the first meaning, modeling refers to performing or

                                                                   Delivering Instruction | 913
demonstrating a desired new behavior or skill, as when a teacher
or classmate demonstrates polite behaviors or the correct solution
to a math problem. In this case, we say that the teacher or
classmate models the desired behavior, either deliberately or in the
course of other ongoing activity. Students observe the modeled
behavior and (hopefully) imitate it themselves. Research repeatedly
shows that modeling desired behaviors is an effective way to learn
new behaviors, especially when the model is perceived as important
(like the teacher), similar to the learner (like a student's best friend),
or has a warm, positive relationship with the learner (like the
teacher or the student's friend) (Bandura, 2002; Gibson, 2004).
Modeling in this sense is sometimes also called observational
learning. It has many of the same properties as classic operant
conditioning, except that reinforcement during observational
learning is witnessed in others rather than experienced by the
learner directly. Watching others being reinforced is sometimes
called vicarious reinforcement. The idea is that if, for example, a
student observes a classmate who behaves politely with the teacher
and then sees that classmate receive praise for the behavior
(vicarious reinforcement), the student is more likely to imitate the
polite behavior that he saw. As in classic operant conditioning,
furthermore, if the student observes that politeness by classmates
is ignored (extinction or no reinforcement), then the student is
much less likely to imitate the politeness. Worse yet, if the student
observes that negative behaviors in others lead to positive
consequences (like attention from peers), then the student may
imitate the negative behaviors (Rebellon, 2006). Cursing and
swearing, and even bullying or vandalism, can be reinforced
vicariously, just as can more desired behaviors.

   Modeling--in this first sense of a demonstration--connects
instructional goals to students' experiences by presenting real, vivid
examples of behaviors or skills in a way that a student can practice
directly, rather than merely talk about. There is often little need,
when imitating a model, to translate ideas or instructions from the

914 | Delivering Instruction
verbal form into action. For students struggling with language and
literacy, in particular, this feature can be a real advantage.

Modeling as a Simplified Representation

In the second meaning of modeling, a model is a simplified
representation of a phenomenon that incorporates the important
properties of the phenomenon. Models in this sense may sometimes
be quite tangible, direct copies of reality; when I was in fourth grade
growing up in California, for example, we made scale models of
the Spanish missions as part of our social studies lessons about
California history. But models can also be imaginary, though still
based on familiar elements. In a science curriculum, for example,
the behavior of gas molecules under pressure can be modeled by
imagining the molecules as ping pong balls flying about and
colliding in an empty room. Reducing the space available to the gas
by making the room smaller, causes the ping pong balls to collide
more frequently and vigorously, and thereby increases the pressure
on the walls of the room. Increasing space has the opposite effect.
Creating an actual room full of ping pong balls may be impractical,
of course, but the model can still be imagined.

   Modeling in this second sense is not about altering students'
behavior, but about increasing their understanding of a newly
learned idea, theory, or phenomenon. The model itself uses objects
or events that are already familiar to students--simple balls and
their behavior when colliding--and in this way supports students'
learning of new, unfamiliar material. Not every new concept or idea
lends itself to such modeling, but many do: students can create
models of unfamiliar animals, for example, or medieval castles, or
of ecological systems. Two-dimensional models--essentially
drawings--can also be helpful: students can illustrate literature or
historical events, or make maps of their own neighborhoods. The

                                                                   Delivering Instruction | 915
choice of model depends largely on the specific curriculum goals
which the teacher needs to accomplish at a particular time.

Coaching

Coaching is that stage of the instructional process during which the
learner converts memories into actions as a result of the modeling
process. This is the aspect of instruction we usually think of as
teaching. Coaching is the most physically and mentally demanding
of the four teaching activities and typically takes up the most time
in a lesson. Effective coaching requires:

   establishing accountability
   providing opportunities for practice
   guiding practice by prompting and questioning
   motivating.

Establishing Accountability

The following extract from a student teacher's diary describes
a common teaching problem:

       School seems to mean so little for many of my kids. They can
       do the work but they just sit there and wait to be reminded
       or threatened. Take Bart. He comes into class, looks at me
       when I'm giving the class assignment, but then sits and does
       nothing until I remind him to get to work. He works for a while
       and then stops until the next reminder. What work he does is
       about 25 percent correct. During discussions he never listens
       to what anyone else is saying. I have about five or six Barts in
       every one of my eighth-grade classes. (Beth, student teacher)

916 | Delivering Instruction
This excerpt describes what many beginning teachers encounter
when it is time for practice or classwork. It is tempting to assume,
like Beth, that the problem is motivation: the students just don't
care. Research by Kounin (1970) and Emmer, Evertson, Clements,
and Worsham (1994), however, point us in another direction. They
suggest that incomplete, sloppy, or missed assignments and an "I
don't care" attitude may reflect the teacher's failure to
make learners feel accountable during the coaching stage of the
lesson.

   Accountability is the degree to which teachers communicate to
learners the classwork they are expected to complete during a
specific period of time. The more learners are told what they are
responsible for, the greater the accountability for learning. From
research by Emmer et al. (1994), we learn that there are three
aspects to accountability: (1) communication, (2) monitoring, and
(3) feedback. The accompanying box, Establishing Accountability,
details the steps you can take.

   Toward the end of Beth's student teaching, she became much
more skilled at establishing accountability. Here is an excerpt from
her cooperating teacher's evaluation of her performance during her
last week of student teaching:

       Beth, like many new teachers, tended to hide immediately
       after giving an assignment. She would sit at her desk and
       avoid even looking at students. She hoped that the students
       would begin work immediately and everyone would know
       exactly what to do. She hadn't developed the skill of
       anticipating problems and giving clear step-by-
       step directions. No sooner would she sit down than students
       would swarm to her desk with questions about what they were
       expected to do. As time passed, she learned to move about the
       room during the work activity, question learners who were
       having problems, and encourage those who were doing well.
       Now, even when the class is working quietly, she continues to
       move about the room encouraging, praising, and prompting.

                                                                   Delivering Instruction | 917
Providing Opportunities For Practice

The purpose of practice is to engage learners actively in the learning
process. During structuring and modeling, students listen, observe,
covertly
rehearse, or make brief responses to your questions as you check
for understanding. But they have not yet had the opportunity to
practice and master the skills you modeled, the information you
conveyed, or the problem-solving techniques you demonstrated.
During the coaching phase of instruction, learners begin to practice
the objectives of their lesson.

   Practice has historically been associated with drills (Ornstein,
1992) and direct instructional methods (Borich, 1996). It has been
strongly emphasized in behavioristic approaches to learning that
stress the importance of building stimulus-response connections
(Hilgard & Bower, 1981). Mastery learning and errorless learning
methods also incorporate extensive practice and drill (Bloom, 1981).

   However, practice is essential for accomplishing the goals of any
instructional method--direct, indirect, or self-directed. Depending
on the instructional method used and the desired objective, practice
can take many forms. During direct instruction, practice may take
the form of repeating multiplication tables or letters of the alphabet.
It may also involve independent seatwork and the use of workbooks.
Practice during indirect instruction may occur when the teacher
places learners in small groups to solve science or math
problems cooperatively. It may also occur when students complete
problem-solving handouts and worksheets. During self-directed
learning, practice may take the form of reciprocal teaching within
the naturally occurring dialogue of the classroom. It may
also involve completing extended projects and investigations at a
learning center, at home, or in
the library.

   Regardless of the type of practice activity used, there are several
guidelines for promoting effective practice:

918 | Delivering Instruction
 Students should understand the reasons for practice. Practice
   often turns into busy work, which can create boredom,
   frustration, and noncompliance. Learners should approach
   classroom practice with the enthusiasm experienced by an
   athlete in training. This is more likely to occur if (1) the purpose
   of the practice has been made known to learners ("We will
   need to be proficient at solving these problems in order to go
   on to our next activity") and (2) practice occurs during as well
   as after new learning ("Let's stop right here, so you can try
   some of these problems yourselves").

 Effective practice is delivered in a manner that is brief, non-
   evaluative, and supportive. Eliciting practice involves more
   than simply saying "OK. Take out your books, turn to page 78,
   and answer questions 1, 3, 7, and 9. You have 20 minutes."
   Rather, your introduction to a practice activity should
   accomplish three objectives: (1) inform the learners that they
   are going to practice something they are capable of succeeding
   at ("You've done part of this before, so this shouldn't be much
   different"), (2) dispel anxiety about doing the task through the
   use of nonevaluative and non-threatening language ("You've
   got part of it right, Anita; now, think some more and you'll have
   it"), and (3) let the learners know that
   you will be around to monitor their work and support their
   efforts ("I will be around to help, so let me know if you have a
   problem").

 Practice should be designed to ensure success. Practice makes
   perfect only when it is done correctly. If your learners are
   making many math, punctuation, or problem-solving mistakes,
   practice is making imperfect. Design your practice to produce
   as few errors as possible. For example, worksheets should be
   developed to ensure that at least 80 to 90 percent of the
   problems are completed correctly.

 Practice should be arranged to allow students to receive
   feedback. As we learned earlier in our discussion of modeling,
   feedback exerts a powerful effect on learning.

                                                                 Delivering Instruction | 919
      Develop procedures and routines for rapid checking of work so
      that learners know as soon as possible
      how well they are performing. Having peers correct one
      another's practice is an efficient way to give feedback. Also,
      having answer sheets handy so that learners can check their
      own work can be a simple and effective means of providing
      feedback.
   Practice should have the qualities of progress, challenge, and
      variety. Kounin (1970) found that the key to preventing learners
      from becoming bored was to design practice opportunities
      that allow them to see that they are making progress ("Don't
      forget to check your answers with the key on the board"). In
      addition, practice should be introduced in a challenging and
      enthusiastic manner ("This will really test your understanding
      with some new and interesting kinds of problems"). Finally,
      practice exercises should include a variety of examples and
      situations.

Guided Practice, Independent Practice, and
Homework

We typically think of practice as a solitary activity during which
learners master skills that have been explained or demonstrated by
the teacher. This type of practice is often referred to as independent
practice. However, other forms of practice involve the active
participation of both teacher and learners, whether one-to-one or
in groups. This type of practice is called guided practice. Much
of this task involves helping students to make the transition from
supervised learning to self-regulated learning--or put differently,
from practice that is relatively guided to practice that is relatively
independent.

920 | Delivering Instruction
                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=122#oembed-2

Guided Practice

When students first learn a new skill or a new set of ideas, they
are especially likely to encounter problems and make mistakes that
interfere with the very process of learning. In figuring out how
to use a new software program, for example, a student may
unknowingly press the wrong button that prevents further
functioning of the program. In translating sentences from Spanish
into English in a language class, for another example, a student
might misinterpret one particular word or grammatical feature. This
one mistake may cause many sentences to be translated incorrectly,
and so on. So students initially need guided practice--opportunities
to work somewhat independently, but with a teacher or other
expert close at hand to prevent or fix difficulties when they occur. In
general, educational research has found that guided practice helps
all learners, especially those who are struggling (Bryan & Burstein,
2004: Woodward, 2004). A first-grade child has difficulty in
decoding printed words, for example, benefits from guidance more
than one who can decode easily. But both students benefit in the
initial stages of learning, since both may make more mistakes then.
Guided practice, by its nature, sends a dual message to students: it
is important to learn new material well, but it is also important to
become able to use learning without assistance, beyond the lesson
where it is learned and even beyond the classroom.

   Guided practice is much like the concepts of the zone of proximal

                                                                   Delivering Instruction | 921
development (or ZPD) and instructional scaffolding that we
discussed in connection with Vygotsky's theory of learning. In
essence, during guided practice, the teacher creates a ZPD or
scaffold (or framework) in which the student can accomplish more
with partial knowledge or skill than the student could accomplish
alone. But whatever its name--guided practice, a ZPD, or a
scaffold--ensuring the success of guidance depends on several key
elements: focusing on the task at hand, asking questions that break
the task into manageable parts, reframing or restating the task so
that it becomes more understandable, and giving frequent feedback
about the student's progress (Rogoff, 2003). Combining the
elements appropriately takes sensitivity and improvisational
skill--even artfulness--but these very challenges are among the true
joys of teaching.

Independent Practice

As students gain facility with a new skill or new knowledge, they
tend to need less guidance and more time to consolidate (or
strengthen) their new knowledge with additional practice. Since
they are less likely to encounter mistakes or problems at this point,
they begin to benefit from independent practice--opportunities to
review and repeat their knowledge at their own pace and with fewer
interruptions. At this point, therefore, guided practice may feel less
like help than like an interruption, even if it is well-intentioned. A
student who already knows how to use a new computer program,
for example, may be frustrated by waiting for the teacher to explain
each step of the program individually. If a student is already skillful
at translating Spanish sentences into English in a language class,
it can be annoying for the teacher to "help" by pointing out minor
errors that the student is likely to catch for herself.

   By definition, the purpose of independent practice is to provide
more self-regulation of learning than what comes from guided
practice. It implies a different message for students than what is

922 | Delivering Instruction
conveyed by guided practice, a message that goes beyond the earlier
one: that it is now time to take more complete responsibility for
own learning. When all goes well, independent practice is the
eventual outcome of the zone of proximal development created
during the earlier phase of guided practice described above: the
student can now do on his or her own, what originally required
assistance from someone else. Or stated differently, independent
practice is a way of encouraging self-determination about learning.
In order to work independently, a student must set his or her own
direction and monitor his or her own success; by definition, no one
can do this for the student.

Homework

The chances are that you already have experienced many forms of
homework in your own educational career. The widespread practice
of assigning review work to do outside of school is a way of
supplementing scarce time in class and providing independent
practice for students. Homework has generated controversy
throughout most of its history in public education, partly because
it encroaches on students' personal and family-oriented time, and
partly because research finds no consistent benefits of doing
homework (Gill & Schlossman, 2004; Kohn, 2004). In spite of these
criticisms, though, parents and teachers tend to favor homework
when it is used for two main purposes. One purpose is to review and
practice material that has already been introduced and practiced at
school; a sheet of arithmetic problems might be a classic example.
When used for this purpose, the amount of homework is usually
minimal in the earliest grades, if any is assigned at all. One
educational expert recommends only ten minutes per day in first
grade at most, and only gradual increases in amount as students get
older (Cooper & Valentine, 2001).

   The second purpose of supporting homework is to convey the
idea of schoolwork being the "job" of childhood and youth. Just

                                                                   Delivering Instruction | 923
as on an adult job, students must complete homework tasks with
minimal supervision and sometimes even minimal training. Doing
the tasks, furthermore, is a way to get ahead or further along in
the workplace (for an adult) or at school (for a child). One study in
which researchers interviewed children about these ideas, in fact,
found that children do indeed regard homework as work in the same
way that adults think of a job (Cornu & Xu, 2004). In the children's
minds, homework tasks were not "fun," in spite of teachers' frequent
efforts to make them fun. Instead, they were jobs that needed doing,
much like household chores. When it came to homework, children
regarded parents as the teachers' assistants--people merely
carrying out the wishes of the teacher. Like any job, the job of doing
homework varied in stressfulness; when required at an appropriate
amount and level of difficulty, and when children reported having
good "bosses" (parents and teachers), the job of homework could
actually be satisfying in the way that many adults' jobs can be
satisfying when well-done.

Motivating Learners

Successful groups of learners, no less than successful teams of
athletes, demand that their coaches be skilled motivators. The
expert practice of coaching, therefore, requires that teachers be
skilled at motivating learners. The learning that is elicited
and strengthened during guided practice must be maintained,
generalized, and transferred outside of practice. Your knowledge of
motivation acquired and your ability to instill it in your learners will
help this take place.

924 | Delivering Instruction
Fading

Although all four teaching activities include elements of transfer
of learning, fading is the event that most directly achieves it. The
expert practice of fading, whether used during direct, indirect, or
self-directed instruction, involves two steps:

 1. The removal of any external supports required to activate
      learning (for example, prompts and reinforcers).

2. The provision of independent practice that promotes transfer.

Prompt Fading

The teaching of many action sequences, such as testing a
hypothesis, forming correct letters in handwriting, tying knots,
focusing a microscope, or dissecting a frog, frequently requires
prompts to guide correct responses. Likewise, prompts are
frequently required to help learners develop oral language
proficiency, essay writing, and problem-solving skills. These
prompts may be verbal, gestural, or physical.

   You can fade verbal prompts by gradually using fewer words or
shorter explanations, allowing more time for learner response, or
lowering the sound of your voice as the student begins to work
more skillfully and independently. We often fade gestural prompts
by gradually shortening the length of the gesture from a full arm
sweep, for example, to a short pointing response. Physical prompts
can be faded by slowly moving your assistance from hand-over-
hand to guiding the wrist, to lightly touching the forearm, to lightly
tapping the elbow. Delaying the fading of prompts can lead to
prompt dependency. Conversely, removing prompts too soon can
create frustration and anxiety in the learner.

                                                                   Delivering Instruction | 925
Reinforcer Fading

The purpose of reinforcer fading is to gradually transfer the
motivation for performing a skill from extrinsic reinforcers (such
as food, tokens, stickers, and praise) to intrinsic reinforcers. It is
more desirable and natural for learners to read because they enjoy
it than because their parents give them a dollar for every book they
read. Likewise, we want learners to keep the classroom neat and to
play sports or musical instruments for the enjoyment of the activity
rather than to obtain a grade.

Providing Independent Practice That Promotes
Transfer

The following first-person account describes one of the most
vexing problems in teaching: how to help students demonstrate
their learning in new situations and settings.

       Yesterday afternoon I had the most frustrating experience. I
       was walking to the subway after school and I ran into Gabriel,
       one of my ESL (English as a Second Language) students. We
       had just spent the last two days drilling the future tense of
       "going to," as in "What are you going to do tomorrow?" So I
       said, "Gabriel, what are you going to do tonight?" And do you
       know what he said after two days of drill and practice? "I went
       to finish my homework tonight." Not "want" ...but "went." He
       completely mixed up the past and future tenses. I don't know
       how these kids are ever going to learn this stuff. (Author,
       personal experience)

Transfer of learning is the phrase used to describe this problem.
Teachers want their students to transfer their learning, or
generalize it from the classroom to the world outside the classroom.

926 | Delivering Instruction
Of what value is learning how to speak or write grammatically
correct English, solve math problems, type with accuracy, read
poetry, plan a menu, or use logic if these skills are practiced only in
a classroom under the guidance of a teacher?

   Transfer of learning is a central concern whether you are engaged
in direct, indirect, or self-directed instruction--that is, whether you
want learners to acquire facts, rules, and action sequences;
concepts, patterns, and abstractions; or learn how to learn.
Regardless of which instructional method you choose or what the
goal or objective of instruction is, effective instruction should
culminate in the learner's demonstrating her learning in a new or
different context.

   The purpose of guided practice during coaching is to help
learners acquire new intellectual, social, and motor skills. The
purpose of independent practice during fading is to help learners
transfer those skills to real-world contexts. Achieving this goal
requires teachers to design independent practice with transfer in
mind. Independent practice that promotes transfer should:

   emphasize mastery by beginning after learners have mastered
      the original task that has been modeled for them

   have real-world similarity by being completed under the same
      time constraints and with the same distractions that exist in
      the real world

   provide variety by giving learners as many different examples
      and situations as possible on which to practice, using a variety
      of sources, such as fiction, editorials, poetry, and magazines

   offer flexibility by changing the conditions, locations, and
      peers under which practice occurs

   promote self-direction by asking learners to identify examples
      where they can use their skills, such as measurement,
      punctuation, money management, scientific inquiry, and
      classifying objects, and to monitor their own progress.

In the chapters ahead we will present several means by which you

                                                                   Delivering Instruction | 927
can determine the degree to which you have acquired the expert
practices of structuring, modeling, coaching, and fading.
CC licensed content, Original

   Delivering Instruction. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/
      chapter/delivering-instruction/%20. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Gary D. Borich and
      Martin L. Tombari. License: CC BY: Attribution

CC licensed content, Specific attribution

   Teach Like a Champion Technique 12--The Hook. Provided by:
      Kaizen Teaching. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/
      cArUHPZjilc. License: All Rights Reserved

   Teach Like a Champion Technique Supplement: I/We/You.
      Provided by: Kaizen Teaching. Retrieved from:
      https://youtu.be/Lhg4vYgE9TI. License: All Rights Reserved

928 | Delivering Instruction
Direct Instruction: Lecture

Lecture is "more or less continuous expositions by a speaker who
wants the audience to learn something" (Bligh, 2000. p. 4); most
likely a culmination of the lecturer's own interpretation and insights
on years of study, research, and experience (Sutherland, 1976).
Historically, before the wide availability of written information,
lecture was the primary means of transmitting knowledge from
expert to student. The popularity and persistence of lecture may be
due to the value of lecture that is not easily replicated using another
method (Webster, 2015).

   Lectures are an effective way to quickly present a large amount of
information that can be tailored to the needs of the student, even a
large audience, while maintaining control of the learning experience
and conveying information that may not otherwise be available to
the student. Lecturers can promote interest in a topic through their
enthusiasm during the lecture, which allows the lecturer to model
how professionals in their discipline think and solve problems.
Finally, lectures may also appeal to students that learn by listening
and keeps the environment low-risk for the student by not requiring
their participation (Cashin, 1985).

Is Lecture a Passive or Active Process?

Despite the prevalence of lectures, educators have long been in
search of a superior method of instruction due to the perceived
weaknesses of this method. One of the most common criticisms of
lecture has been that students are passive recipients of information,
empty vessels, waiting for the lecturer to give them the information
that they need to know (Vivekananthamoorthy et al., 2010); however,
Webster (2015) suggests that lecture is not a passive experience,
students are not empty vessels, and the lecturer's voice is not the

                                                            Direct Instruction: Lecture | 929
only voice present during a lecture. The student's previous
experiences and perspectives also contribute to the processing of
the information presented in the lecture.

   From the constructivist perspective, every student enters a
lecture with their own experiences and knowledge; context,
previous experience, and knowledge will inform students'
expectations, interpretations, and acceptance of any lecture
(Wandersee, Mintzes, & Novak, 1994). Vygotsky (1986) claims that
learners are constantly referring to their own framework for
understanding the world as they face new experiences and
information. These students are not passively soaking up
information, but are engaging in internal activity where students
are making meaning from words, fitting new information into their
current schema, making evaluations regarding the value of the
information, and determining whether to accept the information
presented (Webster, 2015). Dewey (2015) and Vygotsky (1986) both
argued that ideas or concepts cannot actually be transmitted from
one person to the next, and lecturers can only indirectly educate
students by transmitting facts or information; students must
construct concepts by thinking about and grappling with the
information. These are not passive processes but require significant
internal activity.

The Purpose of Lecture

What the lecturer anticipates the student to actually learn during
a lecture can vary. In general, there are four possible learning
objectives: acquiring information, promoting thought, changing
attitudes or beliefs, and performing behavioral skills. While lecture
is often used to meet these objectives, lecture has not been found
to be the most effective method in all cases. Bligh (2000) provided a
review of the research comparing lecture to several other methods,
including programmed learning, discussion, reading and

930 | Direct Instruction: Lecture
independent study, inquiry, and audio/TV/computer-assisted
learning, in meeting these objectives. No method emerged as clearly
superior.

Acquiring Information

Dubin and Taveggia's (1968) review of over ninety comparison
studies established that lecture may be as effective as any other
method in helping learners acquire information, but it is not more
effective. However, programmed learning did show some promise of
being more effective. This method involves arranging learning into
small steps with self-paced activity and student proctors providing
early feedback on performance via discussion. The method also
incorporates individual support for the learner with personal
contact, and progress to the next learning unit only occurs after
demonstrated mastery of the previous one (Bligh, 2000).

Promoting Thought

Lecture has been found to be less effective than other methods of
promoting thought. Instead, discussion tends to be superior for this
objective (Dubin & Taveggia, 1968). While lecture may be suitable
for transmitting knowledge of the principles necessary for thought,
this method alone is not teaching students how to practically solve
problems or apply principles (Corman, 1957). Lectures have also
been ineffective in promoting flexibility and creativity (Cabral-Pini,
1995), open-mindedness (Tillman, 1993), diversity of ideas (Gist,
1989), and promoting depth in questioning (Lam, 1984-1985). Bligh
(2000) suggests that lecture may be less effective for promoting
thought because the listener's role is passive. During a lecture, the
listener is putting effort into selecting important information from

                                                            Direct Instruction: Lecture | 931
the lecture, perhaps finding meaning from the material and writing
notes for later review. This does not leave much time for more
complex cognitive tasks during the lecture. Siegel, Siegel, Capretta,
Jones, and Bekowitz, (1963) found statistically significant differences
in the amount of time spent on active versus passive thought
between lecture and discussion students. During discussion,
students spent 8.3% of their time solving problems and synthesizing
information, while lecture students only did this 1% of the time.
Lecture students spent much more time in passive thought (36.8%)
and on irrelevant thoughts (31%) versus students participating in
discussion (20.3% and 14.5% respectively). Bligh (2000) claims that
if students are going to learn to think we must create experiences
in which they can practice thinking, such as asking questions,
providing students problems to solve, practice critical thinking, and
analyze situations. Traditional lecture might convey the information
needed for thought but it does not require students to think deeply
or apply what is being transmitted.

Changing Attitudes of Beliefs

Lecture also has not been shown to be effective in influencing
learners' attitudes; this outcome has been demonstrated by the
discussion method and has been well established for a long time
(i.e. Lewin, 1943). This method is especially effective when the
discussion leads to some consensus among the group members
(Pennington, Haravey, & Bass, 1958; Mitnick & McGinnies, 1958).
Bligh (2000) suggests the power of conformity within group
discussions as an influencing factor (e.g. Asch, 1951). Group identity
or opportunity for discussion is often lacking in a lecture setting
(Abercromie, 1978). Further, simulations (Dresner, 1989-1990) and
role-plays (Culbertson, 1957) have also been found to be more
effective than lecture at influencing attitudes. Each of these

932 | Direct Instruction: Lecture
methods involves studens' active participation, as opposed to
passive listening.

Teaching Behavioral Skills

Finally, lecture is ineffective for teaching behavioral skills (Bligh,
2000). While there is often an informational component to teaching
behavioral skills, eventually the students will need to practice the
skills to become proficient. Traditional lecture, even observations
and demonstrations, may provide important knowledge pertinent
to performing the skill, but these methods do not provide an
opportunity to practice the skills being taught; a fundamental
aspect of successful skill-building. In many cases, a combination of
lecture and practice was the most effective method for teaching
behavioral skills (Bligh, 2000).

   While lecture may be effective for transmitting information, it
has not been found to be effective for teaching students to think,
changing attitudes, or teaching behavioral skills. The transmission
of information is important but knowledge alone is not useful if
students cannot use and apply it. The transmission of information
rarely is or should be the sole objective of a course. As lecture has
not emerged as a superior method of instruction for meeting all
course objectives, is there another method that could prove to be
superior?
CC licensed content, Original

   Direct Instruction: Lecture. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/
      chapter/lecture/. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike

All rights reserved content

                                                            Direct Instruction: Lecture | 933
   A Controlled Study of Team-Based Learning in a Community
      College General Psychology . Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: University at Albany, State University of
      New York. License: All Rights Reserved

934 | Direct Instruction: Lecture
Active Learning

In their seminal work, Active Learning: Creating Excitement in the
Classroom, compiled in 1991 for the Association for the Study of
Higher Education and the ERIC Clearinghouse on Higher Education,
Bonwell and Eison (1991) defined strategies that promote active
learning as "instructional activities involving students in doing
things and thinking about what they are doing." Approaches that
promote active learning focus more on developing students' skills
than on transmitting information and require that students do
something--read, discuss, write--that requires higher-order
thinking. They also tend to place some emphasis on students'
explorations of their own attitudes and values.

   This definition is broad, and Bonwell and Eison explicitly
recognize that a range of activities can fall within it. They suggest a
spectrum of activities to promote active learning, ranging from very
simple (e.g., pausing lecture to allow students to clarify and organize
their ideas by discussing with neighbors) to more complex (e.g.,
using case studies as a focal point for decision-making). In their
book, Scientific Teaching, Handelsman, Miller, and Pfund (2007) also
note that the line between active learning and formative assessment
is blurry and hard to define; after all, teaching that promotes
students' active learning asks students to do or produce something,
which then can serve to help assess understanding.

                                                                            Active Learning | 935
                                                     The National Survey of
                                                  Student Engagement (NSSE)
                                                  and the Australasian Survey of
                                                  Student Engagement (AUSSE)
                                                  provides a very simple
                                                  definition: active learning
                                                  involves "students' efforts to
                                                  actively construct their
                                                  knowledge." This definition is
                                                  supplemented by the items that
                                                  the AUSSE uses to measure
active learning: working with other students on projects during
class; making a presentation; asking questions or contributing to
discussions; participating in a community-based project as part of a
course; working with other students outside of class on
assignments; discussing ideas from a course with others outside of
class; tutoring peers (reported in Carr et al., 2015).
   Freeman and colleagues collected written definitions of active
learning from >300 people attending seminars on active learning,
arriving at a consensus definition that emphasizes students' use
of higher-order thinking to complete activities or participate in
discussion in class (Freeman et al., 2014). Their definition also notes
the frequent link between active learning and working in groups.
   Thus active learning is commonly defined as activities that
students do to construct knowledge and understanding. The
activities vary but require students to do higher-order thinking.
Although not always explicitly noted, metacognition--students'
thinking about their own learning--is an important element,
providing the link between activity and learning.

The Theoretical Basis for Active Learning

Constructivist learning theory emphasizes that individuals learn

936 | Active Learning
through building their own knowledge, connecting new ideas and
experiences to existing knowledge and experiences to form new
or enhanced understanding (Bransford et al., 1999). The theory,
developed by Piaget and others, posits that learners can either
assimilate new information into an existing framework or can
modify that framework to accommodate new information that
contradicts prior understanding. Approaches that promote active
learning often explicitly ask students to make connections between
new information and their current mental models, extending their
understanding. In other cases, teachers may design learning
activities that allow students to confront misconceptions, helping
students reconstruct their mental models based on more accurate
understanding. In either case, approaches that promote active
learning promote the kind of cognitive work identified as necessary
for learning by constructivist learning theory.

   Active learning approaches also often embrace the use of
cooperative learning groups, a constructivist-based practice that
places particular emphasis on the contribution that social
interaction can make. Lev Vygotsky's work elucidated the
relationship between cognitive processes and social activities and
led to the sociocultural theory of development, which suggests that
learning takes place when students solve problems beyond their
current developmental level with the support of their instructor
or their peers (Vygotsky, 1978). Thus active learning approaches
that rely on group work rest on this sociocultural branch of
constructivist learning theory, leveraging peer-peer interaction to
promote students' development of extended and accurate mental
models.

Evidence for the Effectiveness of Active Learning

The evidence that active learning approaches help students learn
more effectively than transmissionist approaches in which

                                                                            Active Learning | 937
instructors rely on "teaching by telling" is robust and stretches back
more than thirty years (see, for example, Bonwell and Eison, 1991).
Here, we will focus on two reports that review and analyze multiple
active learning studies.

   Freeman and colleagues conducted a meta-analysis of 225 studies
comparing "constructivist versus exposition-centered course
designs" in STEM disciplines (Freeman et al., 2014). They included
studies that examined the design of class sessions (as opposed to
out-of-class work or laboratories) with at least some active learning
versus traditional lecturing, comparing failure rates and student
scores on examinations, concept inventories, or other assessments.
They found that students in traditional lectures were 1.5 times more
likely to fail than students in courses with active learning (odds ratio
of 1.95, Z = 10.4, P<<0.001). Further, they found that on average,
student performance on exams, concept inventories, or other
assessments increased by about half a standard deviation when
some active learning was included in the course design (weighted
standardized mean difference of 0.47, Z = 9.781, P<<0.001). These
results were consistent across disciplines: they observed no
significant difference in the effects of active learning in biology,
chemistry, computer science, engineering, geology, math, physics,
and psychology courses. They performed two analyses examining
the possibility that the results were due to a publication bias (i.e.,
a bias toward publishing studies with larger effects), finding that
there would have to be a large number of unpublished studies that
observed no difference between active learning and lecturing to
negate their findings: 114 reporting no difference on exam or
concept inventory performance and 438 reporting no difference in
failure rate. The authors conclude that the evidence for the benefits
of active learning are very strong, stating that, "If the experiments
analyzed here had been conducted as randomized controlled trials
of medical interventions, they may have been stopped for
benefit--meaning that enrolling patients in the control condition
might be discontinued because the treatment being tested was
clearly more beneficial" (Freeman et al., 2014).

938 | Active Learning
    Figure 8.9.1. Probability of failure, lecture versus active learning.
   These results support other, earlier reviews (e.g., Hake, 1998;
Prince, 2004; Springer et al., 1999). In one such review, Ruiz-Primo
and colleagues examined published studies examining the effects
of active learning approaches in undergraduate biology, chemistry,
engineering, and physics courses (Ruiz-Primo et al., 2011). They
identified 166 studies that reported an effect size when comparing
the effects of an innovation (i.e., active learning approaches) to
traditional instruction that did not include the innovation. Overall,
they found that inclusion of the active learning approaches
improved student outcomes (mean effect size = 0.47), although
there are important caveats to consider. First, the authors coded
the active learning activities as conceptually oriented tasks,
collaborative learning activities, technology-enabled activities,

                                                                            Active Learning | 939
inquiry-based projects, or some combination of those four
categories, and important differences existed within the categories
(for example, technology-assisted inquiry-based projects on
average did not produce positive effects). Second, more than 80%
of the studies included were quasi-experimental rather than
experimental, and the positive benefits (average effect size = 0.26)
were lower for the experimental studies in which students were
randomly assigned to a treatment group. Finally, many of the studies
did not control for pre-existing knowledge and abilities in the
treatment groups. Nonetheless, the review does provide qualified
support for the inclusion of active learning approaches in
instruction.

   While the two reviews reported focus on STEM disciplines and
no similar reviews exist for the humanities and social sciences, the
bulk of the evidence suggests that active learning approaches are
effective across disciplines (Ambrose et al, 2010; Bonwell and Eison,
1991; Chickering and Gamson, 1987).

Inclusiveness in Active Learning

In addition to the evidence that active learning approaches promote
learning for all students, there is some evidence that active learning
approaches are an effective tool in making classrooms more
inclusive. Haak and colleagues examined the effects of active
learning for students in the University of Washington's Educational
Opportunity Program (EOP) who were enrolled in an introductory
biology course (Haak et al., 2011). Students in the EOP are
educationally or economically disadvantaged, are typically the first
in their families to attend college, and include most
underrepresented minority students at the University of
Washington. Previous work had demonstrated that the researchers
could predict student grades in the introductory biology course
based on their college GPA and SAT verbal score; students in the

940 | Active Learning
EOP had a mean failure rate of ~22% compared to a mean failure
rate of ~10% for students not in the EOP. When multiple highly
structured approaches to promote active learning were
incorporated into the introductory biology course, all students in
the course benefited, but students in the EOP demonstrated a
disproportionate benefit, reducing the achievement gap to almost
half of the starting level. Given the pressing need to make U.S.
college classrooms more inviting and productive spaces for
students from all backgrounds, these results provide another
compelling reason to incorporate active learning approaches into
course design.

   Lorenzo, Crouch, and Mazur also investigated the impact of active
learning approaches on the difference in male and female
performance in introductory physics classes (2006). They found
that the inclusion of active engagement techniques benefited all
students, but had the greatest impact on female students'
performance. In fact, when they included a "high dose" of active
learning approaches, the gender gap was eliminated. This result
supports earlier work suggesting that women particularly benefit
from active learning approaches (Laws et al., 1999; Schneider, 2001).

Active Learning Techniques

Brief, Easy Supplements for Lectures

The pause procedure. Pause for two minutes every 12 to 18 minutes,
encouraging students to discuss and rework notes in pairs. This
approach encourages students to consider their understanding of
the lecture material, including its organization. It also provides an
opportunity for questioning and clarification and has been shown to
significantly increase learning when compared to lectures without

                                                                            Active Learning | 941
pauses (Bonwell and Eison, 1991; Rowe, 1980; 1986; Ruhl, Hughes, &
Schloss, 1980).

   Retrieval practice. Pause for two or three minutes every 15
minutes, having students write everything they can remember from
the preceding class segment. Encourage questions. This approach
prompts students to retrieve information from memory, which
improves long-term memory, ability to learn subsequent material,
and ability to translate information to new domains. (Brame and
Biel, 2015; see also the CFT's guide to test-enhanced learning)

   Demonstrations. Ask students to predict the result of a
demonstration, briefly discussing with a neighbor. After the
demonstration, ask them to discuss the observed result and how it
may have differed from their prediction; follow up with instructor
explanation. This approach asks students to test their
understanding of a system by predicting an outcome. If their
prediction is incorrect, it helps them see the misconception and
thus prompts them to restructure their mental model.

   Think-pair-share. Ask students a question that requires higher-
order thinking (e.g., application, analysis, or evaluation levels
within Bloom's taxonomy). Ask students to think or write about an
answer for one minute, then turn to a peer to discuss their
responses for two minutes. Ask groups to share responses and
follow up with instructor explanation. By asking students to explain
their answers to a neighbor and to critically consider their
neighbor's responses, this approach helps students articulate newly
formed mental connections.

   Peer instruction with ConcepTests. This modification of the
think-pair-share involves personal response devices (e.g., clickers).
Pose a conceptually based multiple-choice question. Ask students
to think about their answers and vote on a response before turning
to a neighbor to discuss. Encourage students to change their
answers after discussion, if appropriate, and share class results by
revealing a graph of student responses. Use the graph as a stimulus
for class discussion. This approach is particularly well-adapted for
large classes and can be facilitated with a variety of tools (e.g., Poll

942 | Active Learning
Everywhere, TopHat, TurningPoint). More information is available in
the CIRTL MOOC An Introduction to Evidence-Based College STEM
Teaching. (Fagen et al., 2002; Crouch and Mazur, 2001)

   Minute papers. Ask students
a question that requires them
to reflect on their learning or to
engage in critical thinking.
Have them write for one
minute. Ask students to share
responses to stimulate
discussion or collect all
responses to inform future class sessions. Like the think-pair-share
approach, this approach encourages students to articulate and
examine newly formed connections. (Angelo and Cross, 1993;
Handelsman et al., 2007)

Activities to Replace Some Lecture

Strip sequence. Give students the steps in a process on strips of
paper that are jumbled; ask them to work together to reconstruct
the proper sequence. This approach can strengthen students'
logical thinking processes and test their mental model of a process.
(Handelsman et al., 2007) An example from Aarhus University is
provided below.

                                                                            Active Learning | 943
                      Figure 8.9.2. Example strip sequence.
   Concept map. Concept maps are visual representations of the
relationships between concepts. Concepts are placed in nodes
(often, circles), and the relationships between indicated by labeled
arrows connecting the concepts. To have students create a concept
map, identify the key concepts to be mapped in small groups or as
a whole class. Ask students to determine the general relationship
between the concepts and to arrange them two at a time, drawing
arrows between related concepts and labeling with a short phrase
to describe the relationship. By asking students to build an external
representation of their mental model of a process, this approach
helps students examine and strengthen the organization within the
model. Further, it can emphasize the possibility of multiple "right"
answers. More information and a tool to do online concept mapping
can be found at the Institute for Human & Machine Cognition.
(Novak and Canas, 2008).

                        Figure 8.9.3. Example concept map.
   Mini-maps. Mini-maps are like concept maps, but students are
given a relatively short list of terms (usually 10 or fewer) to
944 | Active Learning
incorporate into their map. To use this approach, provide students
a list of major concepts or specific terms and ask them to work in
groups of two or three to arrange the terms in a logical structure,
showing relationships with arrows and words. Ask groups to
volunteer to share their mini-maps and clarify any confusing points.
Mini-maps have many of the same strengths as concept maps but
can be completed more quickly and thus can serve as part of a larger
class session with other learning activities. (Handelsman et al., 2007)

   Categorizing grids. Present students with a grid made up of
several important categories and a list of scrambled terms, images,
equations, or other items. Ask students to quickly sort the terms
into the correct categories in the grid. Ask volunteers to share
their grids and answer questions that arise. This approach allows
students to express and thus interrogate the distinctions they see
within a field of related items. It can be particularly effective at
helping instructors identify misconceptions. (Angelo and Cross,
1993)

   Student-generated test questions. Provide students with a copy
of your learning goals for a particular unit and a figure
summarizing Bloom's taxonomy (with representative verbs
associated with each category). Challenge groups of students to
create test questions corresponding to your learning goals and
different levels of the taxonomy. Consider having each group share
their favorite test question with the whole class or consider
distributing all student-generated questions to the class as a study
guide. This approach helps students consider what they know as
well as the implications of the instructor's stated learning goals.
(Angelo and Cross, 1993)

                                                                            Active Learning | 945
   Decision-making activities.
Ask students to imagine that
they are policy-makers who
must make and justify tough
decisions. Provide a short
description of a thorny
problem, ask them to work in
groups to arrive at a decision,
and then have groups share out
their decisions and explain their reasoning. This highly engaging
technique helps students critically consider a challenging problem
and encourages them to be creative in considering solutions. The
"real-world" nature of the problems can provide incentive for
students to dig deeply into the problems. (Handelsman et al., 2007)

   Content, form, and function outlines. Students in small groups
are asked to carefully analyze a particular artifact--such as a poem,
a story, an essay, a billboard, an image, or a graph--and identify
the "what" (the content), the "how" (the form), and the function
(the why). This technique can help students consider the various
ways that meaning is communicated in different genres. (Angelo and
Cross, 1993)

   Case-based learning. Much like decision-making activities, case-
based learning presents students with situations from the larger
world that require students to apply their knowledge to reach a
conclusion about an open-ended situation. Provide students with
a case, asking them to decide what they know that is relevant to
the case, what other information they may need, and what impact
their decisions may have, considering the broader implications of
their decisions. Give small groups (3-5) of students time to consider
responses, circulating to ask questions, and provide help as needed.
Provide opportunities for groups to share responses; the greatest
value from case-based learning comes from the complexity and
variety of answers that may be generated. More information and
collections of cases are available at the National Center for Case

946 | Active Learning
Study Teaching in Science, the Case Method Website of UC-Santa
Barbara, and World History Sources.

Discussion Techniques

Many faculty members dispense with lecture altogether, turning
to discussion to prompt the kinds of thinking needed to build
understanding. Elizabeth Barkley provides a large collection of
discussion techniques focused on different learning goals, ranging
from lower-level to higher-level thinking (Barkley, 2010). The CFT's
Joe Bandy has summarized some of the most useful of these
techniques.

Other Approaches

There are other active learning pedagogies, many of which are
highly structured and have dedicated websites and strong
communities. These include team-based learning (TBL), process-
oriented guided inquiry learning (POGIL), peer-led team learning,
and problem-based learning (PBL). Further, the flipped
classroom model is based on the idea that class time will be spent
with students engaged in active learning.
CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Active Learning. Provided by: Vanderbilt University. Retrieved
      from: https://cft.vanderbilt.edu/guides-sub-pages/active-
      learning/. License: CC BY-NC: Attribution-NonCommercial

                                                                            Active Learning | 947
Flipped Classroom

Flipped classroom has become something of a buzzword in the
last several years, driven in part by high profile publications in The
New York Times (Fitzpatrick, 2012); The Chronicle of Higher
Education (Berrett, 2012); and Science (Mazur, 2009); In essence,
"flipping the classroom" means that students gain first exposure to
new material outside of class, usually via reading or lecture videos,
and then use class time to do the harder work of assimilating that
knowledge, perhaps through problem-solving, discussion, or
debates.

   In terms of Bloom's revised taxonomy (2001), this means that
students are doing the lower levels of cognitive work (gaining
knowledge and comprehension) outside of class, and focusing on
the higher forms of cognitive work (application, analysis, synthesis,
and/or evaluation) in class, where they have the support of their
peers and instructor. This model contrasts with the traditional
model in which "first exposure" occurs via lecture in class, with
students assimilating knowledge through homework; thus the term
flipped classroom.

   To ensure that students do the preparation necessary for
productive class time, some proponents propose an assignment-
based model in which students produce work (writing, problems,
etc.) prior to class. The students receive productive feedback
through the processing activities that occur during class, reducing
the need for the instructor to provide extensive written feedback on
the students' work.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online

948 | Flipped Classroom
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=125#oembed-1

Video 8.10.1. The Flipped Classroom Model explains the process of
flipping the classroom.

Inverted Classroom

Maureen Lage, Glenn Platt, and Michael Treglia described a similar
approach as the inverted classroom, and reported its application in
an introductory economics course in 2000. Lage, Platt, and Treglia
initiated their experiment in response to the observation that the
traditional lecture format is incompatible with some learning
styles. To make their course more compatible with their students'
varied learning styles, they designed an inverted classroom in which
they provided students with a variety of tools to gain first exposure
to material outside of class: textbook readings, lecture videos,

                                                                       Flipped Classroom | 949
Powerpoint presentations with voice-over, and printable
Powerpoint slides.

   To help ensure student preparation for class, students were
expected to complete worksheets that were periodically but
randomly collected and graded. Class time was then spent on
activities that encouraged students to process and apply economics
principles, ranging from mini-lectures in response to student
questions to economic experiments to small group discussions of
application problems. Both student and instructor response to the
approach was positive, with instructors noting that students
appeared more motivated than when the course was taught in a
traditional format.

Peer Instruction

Eric Mazur and Catherine Crouch describe a modified form of the
flipped classroom that they term peer instruction (2001). Like the
approaches described by Walvoord and Anderson and Lage, Platt,
and Treglia, the peer instruction (PI) model requires that students
gain first exposure prior to class, and use assignments (in this case,
quizzes) to help ensure that students come to class prepared. Class
time is structured around alternating mini-lectures and conceptual
questions. Importantly, the conceptual questions are not posed
informally and answered by student volunteers as in traditional
lectures; instead, all students must answer the conceptual question,
often via "clickers", or handheld personal response systems, that
allow students to answer anonymously and that allow the instructor
to see (and display) the class data immediately. If a large fraction of
the class (usually between 30 and 65%) answers incorrectly, then
students reconsider the question in small groups while instructors
circulate to promote productive discussions. After discussion,
students answer the conceptual question again. The instructor
provides feedback, explaining the correct answer, and following up

950 | Flipped Classroom
with related questions if appropriate. The cycle is then repeated
with another topic, with each cycle typically taking 13-15 minutes.

   Mazur and colleagues have published results suggesting that the
PI method results in significant learning gains when compared to
traditional instruction (2001). In 1998, Richard Hake gathered data
on 2084 students in 14 introductory physics courses taught by
traditional methods (defined by the instructor as relying primarily
on passive student lectures and algorithmic problem exams),
allowing him to define an average gain for students in such courses
using pre/post-test data. Hake then compared these results to
those seen with interactive engagement methods, defined as
"heads-on (always) and hands-on (usually) activities which yield
immediate feedback through discussion with peers and/or
instructors" (Hake p. 65) for 4458 students in 48 courses. He found
that students taught with interactive engagement methods
exhibited learning gains almost two standard deviations higher than
those observed in the traditional courses (0.48 +/- 0.14 vs. 0.23 +/-
0.04). Assessment of classes taught by the PI method provides
evidence of even greater learning gains, with students in PI courses
exhibiting learning gains ranging from 0.49 to 0.74 over eight years
of assessment at Harvard University (Crouch and Mazur, 2001).
Interestingly, two introductory physics classes taught by traditional
methods during the assessment period at Harvard show much lower
learning gains (0.25 in a calculus-based course in 1990 and 0.40 in
an algebra-based course in 1999).

   Carl Wieman and colleagues
have also published evidence
that flipping the classroom can
produce significant learning
gains (Deslauriers et al., 2011).
Wieman and colleagues
compared two sections of a
large-enrollment physics class.
The classes were both taught
via interactive lecture methods

                                                                        Flipped Classroom | 951
for the majority of the semester and showed no significant
differences prior to the experiment. During the twelfth week of
the semester, one section was "flipped," with the first exposure to
new material occurring prior to class via reading assignments and
quizzes, and class time devoted to small group discussion of clicker
questions and questions that required written responses. Although
class discussion was supported by targeted instructor feedback, no
formal lecture was included in the experimental group. The control
section was encouraged to read the same assignments prior to class
and answered most of the same clicker questions for summative
assessment but was not intentionally engaged in active learning
exercises during class. During the experiment, student engagement
increased in the experimental section (from 45 +/- 5% to 85 +/-
5% as assessed by four trained observers) but did not change in
the control section. At the end of the experimental week, students
completed a multiple-choice test, resulting in an average score of
41 +/- 1% in the control classroom and 74 +/- 1% in the "flipped"
classroom, with an effect size of 2.5 standard deviations. Although
the authors did not address the retention of the gains over time,
this dramatic increase in student learning supports the use of the
flipped classroom model.

Theoretical Basis

How People Learn, the seminal work from John Bransford, Ann
Brown, and Rodney Cocking, reports three key findings of the
science of learning, two of which help explain the success of the
flipped classroom. Bransford and colleagues assert that

       To develop competence in an area of inquiry, students must:
       a) have a deep foundation of factual knowledge, b) understand
       facts and ideas in the context of a conceptual framework, and

952 | Flipped Classroom
       c) organize knowledge in ways that facilitate retrieval and
       application (Bransford et al., 2000, p. 16).

By providing an opportunity for students to use their new factual
knowledge while they have access to immediate feedback from
peers and the instructor, the flipped classroom helps students learn
to correct misconceptions and organize their new knowledge such
that it is more accessible for future use. Furthermore, the
immediate feedback that occurs in the flipped classroom also helps
students recognize and think about their own growing
understanding, thereby supporting Bransford and colleagues' third
major conclusion:

       A `metacognitive' approach to instruction can help students
       learn to take control of their own learning by defining
       learning goals and monitoring their progress in achieving
       them (Bransford et al., 2000, p. 18).

Although students' thinking about their own learning is not an
inherent part of the flipped classroom, the higher cognitive
functions associated with class activities, accompanied by the
ongoing peer/instructor interaction that typically accompanies
them, can readily lead to the metacognition associated with deep
learning.

Key Elements of the Flipped Classroom

1. Provide an opportunity for students to gain first
exposure prior to class.

The mechanism used for first exposure can vary, from simple
textbook readings to lecture videos to podcasts or screencasts.

                                                                        Flipped Classroom | 953
Content can be created by the instructor or found online on
YouTube, the Khan Academy, MIT's OpenCourseWare, Coursera, or
other similar sources. The pre-class exposure doesn't have to be
high-tech, however; in the Deslauriers, Schelew, and Wieman study
described above, students simply completed pre-class reading
assignments.

2. Provide an incentive for students to prepare for
class.

In all the examples cited above, students completed a task
associated with their preparation and that task was associated with
points. The assignment can vary; the examples above used tasks
that ranged from online quizzes to worksheets to short writing
assignments, but in each case, the task provided an incentive for
students to come to class prepared by speaking the common
language of undergraduates: points. In many cases, grading for
completion rather than effort can be sufficient, particularly if class
activities will provide students with the kind of feedback that
grading for accuracy usually provides.

3. Provide a mechanism to assess student
understanding.

The pre-class assignments that students complete as evidence of
their preparation can also help both the instructor and the student
assess understanding. Pre-class online quizzes can allow the
instructor to practice Just-in-Time Teaching (JiTT; Novak et al.,
1999), which basically means that the instructor tailors class
activities to focus on the elements with which students are
struggling. If automatically graded, the quizzes can also help

954 | Flipped Classroom
students pinpoint areas where they need help. Pre-class worksheets
can also help focus student attention on areas with which they're
struggling and can be a departure point for class activities, while
pre-class writing assignments help students clarify their thinking
about a subject, thereby producing richer in-class discussions.
Importantly, much of the feedback students need is provided in
class, reducing the need for instructors to provide extensive
commentary outside of class (Walvoord and Anderson, 1998). In
addition, many of the activities used during class time (e.g., clicker
questions or debates) can serve as informal checks of student
understanding.

4. Provide in-class activities that focus on
higher-level cognitive activities.

If the students gained basic knowledge outside of class, then they
need to spend class time to promote deeper learning. Again, the
activity will depend on the learning goals of the class and the culture
of the discipline. For example, Lage, Platt, and Treglia described
experiments students did in class to illustrate economic principles
(2000), while Mazur and colleagues focused on student discussion
of conceptual "clicker" questions and quantitative problems focused
on physical principles (2001). In other contexts, students may spend
time in class engaged in debates, data analysis, or synthesis
activities. The key is that students are using class time to deepen
their understanding and increase their skills at using their new
knowledge.
CC licensed content, Original

   Flipped Classroom. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van Hoose.
      Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College. License: CC
      BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

                                                                        Flipped Classroom | 955
CC licensed content, Shared previously
   Flipping the Classroom. Authored by: Cynthia J. Brame.
      Provided by: Vanderbilt University . Retrieved from:
      https://cft.vanderbilt.edu/guides-sub-pages/flipping-the-
      classroom/. License: CC BY-NC: Attribution-NonCommercial

CC licensed content, Specific attribution
   The Flipped Classroom Model. Provided by: Sprout. Retrieved
      from: https://youtu.be/qdKzSq_t8k8. License: All Rights
      Reserved

956 | Flipped Classroom
Just-In-Time Teaching (JiTT)

                                              Just-in-Time Teaching (JiTT) is a
                                              teaching and learning strategy
                                              designed to promote the use of
                                              class time for more active
                                              learning. Developed by Gregor
                                              Novak and colleagues, JiTT relies
                                              on a feedback loop between web-
                                              based learning materials and the
                                              classroom (Novak et al., 1999).
                                              Students prepare for class by
reading from the textbook or using other resources posted to the
web and by completing assignments (called WarmUps and Puzzles)
online. These assignments often have complex answers; students'
work outside class serves as preparation for more complete work in
class. The students' answers are delivered to the instructor a few
hours before class starts, allowing the instructor to adapt the lesson
as needed. Importantly, JiTT allows the instructor to create an
interactive classroom environment that emphasizes active learning
and cooperative problem-solving.

Types of JiTT Activities

WarmUps are short, web-based assignments designed for students
to complete before receiving instruction on a topic. They prompt
students to think about the upcoming lesson and to answer a few
simple questions before class to prepare them to develop more
complex answers in cooperative groups in class. Class time can
focus on the points for which students need more help, and it can be
structured around specific student responses, allowing an element
of personalization. An example from Biology is shown here.

                                                          Just-In-Time Teaching (JiTT) | 957
   Puzzles are short, web-based assignments that are designed to
help structure a wrap-up session on a topic that has already been
covered in a class. They provide closure and often integrate
concepts. An example from Mathematics is shown here.

   GoodFors are enrichment essays that help students connect the
class to the real world, help keep material fresh, and are starters for
classroom discussion. An example from Physics is shown here.

   The goal of the JiTT assignments is for students to come to class
prepared, engaged, and motivated.

The Theoretical Basis for JiTT

Kathleen Marrs and Gregor Novak suggest that Just-in-Time
Teaching incorporates three major elements that are important for
helping students learn (2004).

   1) Just-in-Time Teaching incorporates active learning
approaches. By moving the "content-transfer" element of the
course to pre-class preparation and focusing class time on
cooperative problem solving, JiTT encourages the active learning
approaches that have been found to promote learning (National
Research Council (NRC), 2000; Hake (1998); Paulson 1999, Udovic et
al., 2002).

   2) Just-in-Time Teaching provides structured opportunities for
students to actively construct new knowledge from prior
knowledge.

   This theory of learning, termed "constructivism," was developed
by Piaget and others, and posits that learners build new
understandings on existing attitudes, experiences, and knowledge
(Kujawa and Huske, 1995). Pre-existing misconceptions can serve as
barriers to the development of new, more accurate mental models.
Effective learning requires that students uncover and address
preexisting knowledge and misconceptions. Just-in-Time Teaching
incorporates this element regularly through the use of the

958 | Just-In-Time Teaching (JiTT)
WarmUps, which can help reveal misconceptions and prior
knowledge and help focus class activities on the elements that need
the most thought.

   3) Just-in-Time Teaching provides prompt feedback. How People
Learn notes that the best learning environments are assessment-
centered, and emphasizes that formative assessment is particularly
valuable for learners because it provides opportunities for learners
to adjust or clarify their thinking prior to a summative assessment
(such as a graded exam). This is a key element of JiTT, occurring
during essentially every class meeting through instructor responses
to the WarmUps that students submit in preparation for the class.
CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Just-in-Time Teaching (JiTT). Authored by: Cynthia Brame.
      Provided by: Vanderbilt University. Retrieved from:
      https://cft.vanderbilt.edu/guides-sub-pages/just-in-time-
      teaching-jitt/. License: CC BY-NC: Attribution-NonCommercial

                                                         Just-In-Time Teaching (JiTT) | 959
Team-Based Learning (TBL)

Team-based learning (TBL) is a model of classroom instruction
similar to that of a `flipped classroom' in that the students' first
introduction to the fundamental material is done outside of the
classroom (Demetry, 2010). For example, students are expected to
grasp the essential concepts from the assigned readings or videos
prior to coming to class. The class time is spent clarifying and
applying the information that they learned outside of class.
However, TBL differs from other flipped-classroom models in that
the application exercises are done through team interactions,
guided by the instructor, around specific problems. Another
difference is that each unit of study must begin with an assessment
of students' understanding of the prepared content, and is followed
by an ordered method for structuring class time.

   TBL is a model for course instruction, not just a teaching strategy
that can be employed on occasion (Fink, 2004). TBL creator, Larry
Michaelsen (2004), suggests that this model requires a paradigm
shift in how an instructor approaches teaching, as embracing TBL
often results in significant changes to instructional objectives, views
on how learning occurs, and expectations for the instructor and
student roles. Instructors move away from emphasizing content
coverage toward the application of course concepts. They are no
longer the masters of content, responsible for the distribution of
knowledge, but instead act as designers and managers of student
learning experiences. Their instructional planning focuses on
designing application exercises that require students to solve
problems, make decisions, and engage in team discussions.
Consequently, students need to be engaged and accountable for
their own learning inside and outside of the classroom, rather than
focusing on memorizing content disbursed by the instructor.

960 | Team-Based Learning (TBL)
                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=127#oembed-1

Video 8.12.1. Team-Based Learning explains the process of
implementing this model.

Principles of Team-Based Learning

Michaelsen (2004) believes that this shift in emphasis will occur
under the four essential principles of TBL. These principles include
the following: proper team formation and management; student
accountability, both individual and team; use of team activities to
promote learning and team development; and frequent and
immediate feedback on student learning.

Team Formation and Management

Teams should be permanent and large enough to bring diversity
to the team decision-making process; Michaelsen's (2004)
recommendation is five to seven members per team. Team
formation is managed by the instructor in class so that it is
transparent to the students and done in a way that will break up any
previously established subgroups, as perceived favoritism of other
teams or previously established relationships may interfere with the
development of team cohesiveness. To make teams more evenly
matched and better prepared to solve problems together, student

                                                           Team-Based Learning (TBL) | 961
talents and resources, as well as liabilities, should be distributed
among the teams (Michaelsen, 2004).

Student Accountability

Student accountability is established by constructing systems for
monitoring the quality of individual and team contributions and
building in mechanisms for consequences that are dependent upon
that quality of work. This includes graded individual readiness
assurance tests (iRATs) and team readiness assurance tests (tRATs),
team performance on application activities and summative
assessments, and assessment of a team member's contributions and
performance by the teammates (Birmingham & McCord, 2004).

Use of Team Activities

Team activities are not only meant to assist students in exploring
and learning course concepts but also encourage group cohesion
and the development of communication and teamwork among
members. Well-designed activities will promote discussion and
shared decision-making for more complex and well-developed
answers (Michaelsen & Knight, 2004). Michaelsen (2004)
recommends that all team activities adhere to the `4S' framework;
activities should be significant problems, the same problem, require
a specific choice, and choices should be reported spontaneously.
Significant problems are meaningful to students and complex
enough to promote team discussion. All teams should work on the
same problem at the same time to elicit greater team investment
in class-wide discussions and debriefings, as well as, gain a deeper
understanding through comparison and critique of the other teams'
choices. Problems should have specific choices with a clearly-

962 | Team-Based Learning (TBL)
defined answer. Finally, teams should present their choices to the
class simultaneously, encouraging team accountability for their
choices and preventing teams from changing their choice after
hearing from other teams. Simultaneous reporting may also create
an atmosphere of engagement through anticipation, excitement,
and competition.

Frequent and Immediate Feedback

Frequent and immediate feedback is essential for team-based
learning for two reasons. First, feedback is important for learning
and retaining content. Second, feedback is important for group
development. From the beginning, teams will need feedback to
gauge how effectively they work together, which team strategies
work and which do not, and their understanding of the concepts
that they are discussing (Michaelsen, 2004).

Team-Based Learning Process

TBL requires students to work together in teams on a three-part
sequenced set of learning activities: a preparation phase,
application phase, and assessment phase. In the preparation phase,
students are engaging with materials outside of class to introduce
the concept, followed by the completion of the individual readiness
assurance test (iRAT) and the team readiness assurance test (tRAT),
and finally, brief instruction on challenging concepts needing
clarification. During the application phase, students are asked to
apply concepts to make predictions, solve problems and create
explanations for complex problems. Finally, during the assessment
phase, a final problem is presented to the students to assess their
mastery of the concepts (Fink, 2004).

                                                           Team-Based Learning (TBL) | 963
1. Preparation Phase

The preparation phase or readiness assurance process (RAP) begins
prior to the start of each module or unit of study and is meant
to confirm that the students are prepared with the fundamental
knowledge necessary for the application phase. Students are
assigned specific materials to prepare them with the essential
concepts for that module. The assigned materials may be readings,
videos, or audio recordings, which are to be completed outside of
class time and prior to the first class for which the content was
applied. On the first day of class for that module, students complete
a two-part readiness assurance test (RAT); a brief multiple-choice
assessment of students' comprehension of the assigned content.
The first part of the RAT is the individual readiness assurance test
(iRAT), done independently. The second part of the RAT is the team
readiness assurance test (tRAT), a team test that is comprised of the
same set of questions as the iRAT. The two scores are then averaged
together for a single RAT score (the weights of the scores may vary
by course) (Michaelsen, 2004).

   Immediate feedback is an important aspect of the TBL model, thus
the tRAT utilizes a method for immediate feedback. One popular
tool for immediate team feedback is the immediate feedback
assessment technique (IF-AT). The IF-AT (see Figure1) is a card with
squares that can be scratched off by the students. Each row of
squares corresponds to a test item number and the multiple-choice
options, A-B-C-D. The team discusses the question, agrees upon an
answer and then a team member scratches their selection to find
out whether their choice was correct or not. If the team's choice
was incorrect then they may choose a second, third, or even fourth
answer for partial credit. This encourages students to continue to
discuss the material that they did not understand to find the correct
answer, rather than getting the item wrong and just moving on
without any further clarification.

964 | Team-Based Learning (TBL)
    Figure 8.12.1. Immediate feedback assessment technique (IF-AT)
     scratch card for tRAT. From IF-AT Demonstration: Step 1, by

                    Epstein Educational Enterprises, 2009,
   http://www.epsteineducation.com/home/demo/demo1.htm.

                            Reprinted with permission.
   Once the RAT process is complete, the team may decide to appeal
any questions they missed that they believe should be correct. The
appeal process requires the team to justify the reason for the appeal,
as well as find and cite the correct answer in a written appeal to the
instructor. This encourages further review of the material. Appeals
are reviewed by the instructor after class, and RAT scores may be
adjusted if the appeal is approved.
   As the teams turn in their IF-AT cards, the instructor will examine
the tRAT answers to look for continued difficulties with
understanding concepts. The issues are reviewed in a brief
corrective instruction that follows the completion of the RAT. Once

                                                           Team-Based Learning (TBL) | 965
assured that students have an understanding of the material for the
module, the team application activities may begin.

2. Application Phase

Where the readiness assurance process is estimated to take fifty
to seventy minutes, the application activities should be significantly
longer, typically three to five hours. The design of the application
activities should follow the `4S' framework highlighted by
Michaelsen (2004). The teams should be given a significant problem,
the same problem, with a specific choice, and they should be
simultaneously reporting their answers. Activities start out simple
and become more complex as students build upon previous
experiences. Again, an important aspect of the application process
includes constant and specific feedback to the teams regarding
their responses. Sometimes this feedback comes from the
instructor, but often the feedback comes from teammates or other
teams. When students have the opportunity to share, compare,
and defend their answers they get feedback as to whether their
answer is correct and justified. Students also get to witness how
others solve problems and consider alternative ways to approach a
problem.

3. Assessment Phase

The last phase of the module is assessment. These assessments
may be administered to the team or individual students and might
include graded problems to solve, traditional exams, peer
evaluations, or other forms of assessment. Once the three phases
are complete, the entire process can begin again with a new module.

966 | Team-Based Learning (TBL)
Michaelsen (2004) suggests dividing a course into five to seven
modules.

Effects of TBL on Learning Outcomes

A number of studies have examined the effectiveness of TBL in
meeting course objectives and learning outcomes. Several studies
have found improvements in pretest-posttest outcomes, student
learning through team interaction, and higher test scores for TBL
students when compared to other instructional methods. However,
not all studies have corroborated that TBL is a superior instructional
method, but have confirmed that TBL is at least as effective as other
methods.

   There are documented differences in the level and types of
engagement of students in TBL classes. Instructors have observed
that students appear more engaged with each other than with a
comparison lecture-only course (Hunt et al., 2003). It is not to say
that there is no engagement in lecture classes. Kelly et al. (2005)
found that students in lecture had significantly more interactions
with their teachers than students in TBL classes, while students in
TBL courses had significantly more learner-to-learner interactions.
Compared to Problem-Based Learning (PBL), students in TBL
courses had significantly more interactions with their instructors
than students in PBL courses. The students in the TBL group also
perceived their level of engagement to be higher, rating their
individual and team members' engagement as high (Bick et al.,
2009). Similar differences have been found in student-rated
engagement in class between TBL and lectures courses, with TBL
students rating engagement as significantly higher (Clark et al.,
2008).

   Participation in TBL has also been found to positively influence
students' attitudes toward teamwork. The exception to this trend
was among students who were the top academic performers.

                                                           Team-Based Learning (TBL) | 967
Students who have been highly successful in traditional academic
settings were found to have more negative attitudes about TBL
(Epsey, 2010).

Effects of TBL on Course Evaluation

Course satisfaction is a broad category and can be qualified in many
different ways. Most often, studies have collected student-reported
levels of satisfaction on course evaluation items. Overall, student
attitudes about TBL have been positive (Haberyan, 2007). Many
students have responded to TBL with high satisfaction (Abdelkhalek,
Hussein, Gibbs, & Hamdy, 2010), even rating the TBL methodology as
excellent (Touchet & Coon, 2005). Beatty et al. (2009) reported that
91% of students felt that TBL helped improve their understanding
of course content and 93% of students encouraged continued use
of TBL. Students reported that TBL helped them improve critical
and independent thinking skills (McInerney & Fink, 2003). When
comparing students in TBL classes to students in lecture classes,
TBL students rated classroom engagement, perceptions of
effectiveness, and enjoyment significantly higher (Levine et al.,
2004). Feingold et al. (2008) found that students felt that TBL helped
them learn how to apply concepts in clinical situations, how to
become more accountable students, and how to learn through
discussion. Participants in Kuhne-Eversmann & Fischer's (2013)
study rated the interactivity and team-based discussions as reasons
for their learning and also anticipated that the course would
influence their behavior. In fact, participants did show an increase
in specific course-taught behaviors, while the control group showed
a decline in the same behaviors.

   Not all course evaluation reports have been positive about TBL.
Lancaster and Strand (2001) compared student perceptions of the
course and the instructor and found no difference between the
TBL and lecture students. Letassy et al. (2008) found higher course

968 | Team-Based Learning (TBL)
evaluations for the lecture group over the TBL group. Focus group
interviews indicated that students felt that their team members
were not enthusiastic about TBL (Hunt et al., 2003). Student
interviews also found that students were uncomfortable with the
RAT testing process and were concerned about the impact of team
grading on their scores (Feingold et al., 2008).
CC licensed content, Original

   Team-Based Learning (TBL). Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/
      chapter/team-based-learning/. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

All rights reserved content
   A Controlled Study of Team-Based Learning in a Community
      College General Psychology . Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: University at Albany, State University of
      New York. License: All Rights Reserved

                                                           Team-Based Learning (TBL) | 969
Experiential and Applied
Learning

Experiential learning is the active engagement of students in
learning through doing, and reflecting on those activities. This
experience and reflection enable them to apply theoretical and
abstract concepts to practical contexts. Experiential learning
takes various shapes and takes place in various settings.

                    Figure 8.13.1. Experiential design models.
   Learning that is considered "experiential" contains all the
following elements: reflection, critical analysis, and synthesis, and
opportunities for students to take initiative, make decisions, and be
accountable for the results. It provides opportunities for students to
engage intellectually, creatively, emotionally, socially, or physically.
970 | Experiential and Applied
Learning
There are several benefits to employing experiential learning:

 Increases student motivation to learn. When students are
   engaged in learning experiences that they see the relevance of,
   and the product has more significance than a grade, they have
   increased motivation to learn and produce a more thoughtful
   product. Experiential learning stimulates academic inquiry to
   enrich and apply the content students are learning, as well as
   encountering authentic opportunities for applying their
   learning to motivate students.

 Produces more autonomous learners. To solve problems and
   complete tasks in unfamiliar situations in a real-world context,
   students need to figure out what they know, what they do not
   know, and how to learn it.

 Reflection deepens learning. Students transfer their previous
   learning to new contexts, master new concepts, principles, and
   skills, as well as articulate how they developed this mastery.

 Most transferable and marketable skills are forged in "real
   world" settings. Real-world competencies such as civic
   engagement, teamwork, and leadership that most employers
   look for in candidates, are best practiced in the "real world" not
   sitting in a classroom. These skills need to be practiced in
   many different settings. They are not "remembered" but
   instilled by using and honing them through practice.

Experiential Learning Design Principals

Experiential learning focuses on learners reflecting on their

experience of doing something, so as to gain conceptual insight

as well as practical expertise. Kolb's experiential learning model

suggests  four  stages  in  this  process: active

                        Experiential and Applied Learning | 971
experimentation, concrete experience, reflective  observation,
and abstract conceptualization.

 Activity. Do something-anything, in fact. Run a
  meeting, give a presentation, and have a
  difficult conversation. (One of the most
  valuable aspects of this model is the way in
  which it allows us to turn every experience
  into a learning opportunity.

 Reflect. Look back on your experience and assess the results.
   Determine what happened, what went well, and what didn't.

 Conceptualize. Make sense of your experience. Seek to
   understand why things turned out as they did. Draw some
   conclusions and make some hypotheses.

 Apply. Put those hypotheses to the test. Don't simply re-
   act. Instead, have a conscious plan to do things differently to
   be more effective. And begin the cycle again.

There are parallels between the experiential learning cycle as we
typically define it (based on Kolb's work), and Roger Greenaway's
Active Reviewing Cycle, and Chris Argyris and David Schon's work
on Theories of Action. These models aren't identical, but they're
similar enough that they can be overlaid on a 4-stage cycle.

972 | Experiential and Applied Learning
 Figure 8.13.2. An integrated model of experiential learning cycles.

Experiential Learning Design Models

There are many options for including experiential and applied
learning in the classroom and out. We will review a few design
models.

Community Engagement

Community engagement pedagogies, often called "service learning,"
are ones that combine learning goals and community service in

                                                  Experiential and Applied Learning | 973
ways that can enhance both student growth and the common good.
In the words of the National Service Learning Clearinghouse, it
is "a teaching and learning strategy that integrates meaningful
community service with instruction and reflection to enrich the
learning experience, teach civic responsibility, and strengthen
communities." Or, to quote Vanderbilt University's Janet S. Eyler
(winner of the 2003 Thomas Ehrlich Faculty Award for Service
Learning) and Dwight E. Giles, Jr., it is

       a form of experiential education where learning occurs
       through a cycle of action and reflection as students. . . seek
       to achieve real objectives for the community and deeper
       understanding and skills for themselves. In the process,
       students link personal and social development with academic
       and cognitive development. . . experience enhances
       understanding; understanding leads to more effective action.

Typically, community engagement is incorporated by way of a
project that has both learning and community action goals. This
project is designed via collaboration between faculty and
community partners, such as non-governmental organizations or
government agencies. The project asks students to apply course
content to community-based activities. This gives students
experiential opportunities to learn in real-world contexts and
develop skills of community engagement while affording
community partners opportunities to address significant needs.
Vanderbilt University's Sharon Shields has argued that service-
learning is "one of the most significant teaching methodologies
gaining momentum on many campuses."Indeed, when done well,
teaching through community engagement benefits students,
faculty, communities, and institutions of higher education. Below
are some of the benefits that education researchers and
practitioners have associated with community-engaged teaching.

974 | Experiential and Applied Learning
Student Benefits of Community Engagement

   Learning Outcomes. Students experience a positive impact on
      academic learning, improved ability to apply what they have
      learned in "the real world," gains in the complexity of
      understanding, problem analysis, problem-solving, critical
      thinking, and cognitive development, as well as improved
      ability to understand complexity and ambiguity.

   Personal Outcomes. Students gain a greater sense of personal
      efficacy, personal identity, spiritual growth, and moral
      development, as well as greater interpersonal development,
      particularly the ability to work well with others and build
      leadership and communication skills.

   Social Outcomes. These experiences reduce stereotypes and
      increase greater inter-cultural understanding, improve social
      responsibility and citizenship skills, as well as increase the
      likelihood of involvement in community service after
      graduation

   Career Development. Students make connections with
      professionals and community members for learning and career
      opportunities and greater academic learning, leadership skills,
      and personal efficacy can lead to greater opportunity.

   Relationship with the Institution. Students have stronger
      relationships with faculty, greater satisfaction with college, and
      improved graduation rates.

As you might suspect, though, making service learning successful
is not automatic. For one thing, service-learning lends itself well
only to certain curriculum areas (for example, community studies
or social studies). For another, some students may initially resist
service-learning, wondering whether it benefits them personally
as students (Jones, Gilbride-Brown, & Gasiorski, 2005). Also, some
service projects may inadvertently be invented only to benefit
students, without adequate consultation or advice from community
members. Bringing food hampers to low-income families may seem

                                                  Experiential and Applied Learning | 975
like a good idea to middle-class students or instructors, but some
families may perceive this action less as a benefit than as an act of
charity which they therefore resent. But none of these problems are
insurmountable. Evaluations generally find that service-learning,
when done well, increases students' sense of moral empowerment
as well as their knowledge of social issues (Buchanan, Baldwin, &
Rudisill, 2002). Like many other educational practices, insuring
success with service learning requires doing it well.

Problem-Based Learning

The earliest form of systematized problem-based learning (PBL)
was developed in 1969 by Howard Barrows and colleagues in the
School of Medicine at McMaster University in Canada, from where
it has spread to many other universities, colleges, and schools. This
approach is increasingly used in subject domains where the
knowledge base is rapidly expanding and where it is impossible
for students to master all the knowledge in the domain within a
limited period of study. Working in groups, students identify what
they already know, what they need to know, and how and where
to access new information that may lead to the resolution of the
problem. The role of the instructor (usually called a tutor in classic
PBL) is critical in facilitating and guiding the learning process.

   Usually, PBL follows a strongly systematized approach to solving
problems, although the detailed steps and sequence tend to vary to
some extent, depending on the subject domain. The following is a
typical example:

976 | Experiential and Applied Learning
      Figure 8.13.2. Problem-based learning method (derived from
                                   Gijeselaers, 1995).

   Traditionally, the first five steps would be done in a small face-to-
face class tutorial of 20-25 students, with the sixth step requiring
either individual or small group (four or five students) private study,
with the seventh step being accomplished in a full group meeting
with the tutor. However, this approach also lends itself to blended
learning in particular, where the research solution is done mainly
online, although some instructors have managed the whole process
online, using a combination of synchronous web conferencing and
asynchronous online discussion.

   Developing a complete problem-based learning curriculum is
challenging, as problems must be carefully chosen, increasing in
complexity and difficulty over the course of study, and problems
must be chosen so as to cover all the required components of
the curriculum. Students often find the problem-based learning
approach challenging, particularly in the early stages, where their
foundational knowledge base may not be sufficient to solve some
of the problems. (The term `cognitive overload' has been used to

                                                   Experiential and Applied Learning | 977
describe this situation.) Others argue that lectures provide a quicker
and more condensed way to cover the same topics. Assessment also
has to be carefully designed, especially if a final exam carries heavy
weight in grading, to ensure that problem-solving skills, as well as
content coverage, are measured.

   However, research (see, for instance, Strobel and van Barneveld,
2009) has found that problem-based learning is better for long-
term retention of material and developing `replicable' skills, as well
as for improving students' attitudes towards learning. There are
now many variations on the `pure' PBL approach, with problems
being set after initial content has been covered in more traditional
ways, such as lectures or prior reading, for instance.

Apprenticeships

Apprenticeship is a particular way of enabling students to learn
by doing. Learning by doing is particularly common in teaching
motor skills, such as learning to ride a bike or play a sport, but
examples can also be found in education, such as vocational
training, practicums, internships, and laboratory study. It is often
associated with vocational training where a more experienced
tradesman or journeyman models behavior, the apprentice attempts
to follow the model, and the journeyman provides feedback.
Besides learning motor or behavioral skills, students may also learn
how to think like an expert through cognitive apprenticeship. Like
motor-skill or behavior apprenticeships, cognitive apprenticeships
also involve an experienced person modeling cognitive and
metacognitive skills, the student practicing those skills, and the
expert providing feedback.

978 | Experiential and Applied Learning
Key Features of Apprenticeship

Schn (1983) argues that apprenticeship operates in `situations of
practice that...are frequently ill-defined and problematic, and
characterized by vagueness, uncertainty and disorder`. Learning in
apprenticeship is not just about learning to do (active learning), but
also requires an understanding of the contexts in which the learning
will be applied. In addition, there is a social and cultural element
to learning, understanding, and embedding the accepted practices,
customs, and values of experts in the field.

   Pratt and Johnson (1998) identify the characteristics of a master
practitioner, whom they define as `a person who has acquired a
thorough knowledge of and/or is especially skilled in a particular area
of practice`. Master practitioners:

 1. possess great amounts of knowledge in their area of expertise,
      and are able to apply that knowledge in difficult practice
      settings;

2. have well-organized, readily accessible schemas (cognitive maps)
      which facilitate the acquisition of new information;

3. have well-developed repertoires of strategies for acquiring new
      knowledge, integrating and organizing their schemas, and
      applying their knowledge and skills in a variety of contexts....;

4. ...are motivated to learn as part of the process of developing their
      identities in their communities of practice. They are not
      motivated to learn simply to reach some external performance
      goal or reward;

5. frequently display tacit knowledge in the form of:

         spontaneous action and judgments;
         being unaware of having learned to do these things;
         being unable or having difficulty in describing the knowing

            which their actions reveal.

                                                  Experiential and Applied Learning | 979
Cognitive Apprenticeship

An intellectual or cognitive apprenticeship model is somewhat
different because this form of learning is less easily observable than
learning motor or manual skills. Pratt and Johnson argue that in this
context, master and learner must say what they are thinking during
applications of knowledge and skills, and must make explicit the
context in which the knowledge is being developed because context
is so critical to the way knowledge is developed and applied.

   Pratt and Johnson suggest five stages for cognitive and
intellectual modeling (p. 99):

 1. modeling by the master and development of a mental model/
      schema by the learner;

2. learner approximates replication of the model with master
      providing support and feedback (scaffolding/ coaching);

3. learner widens the range of application of the model, with less
      support from master;

4. self-directed learning within the specified limits acceptable to
      the profession;

5. generalizing: learner and master discuss how well the model
      might work or would have to be adapted in a range of other
      possible contexts.

CC licensed content, Original

   Experiential and Applied Learning. Authored by: Nicole
      Arduini-Van Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community
      College. Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      edpsy/chapter/experiential-and-applied-learning/%20u200e.
      License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Experiential Learning. Provided by: University of Texas at

980 | Experiential and Applied Learning
   Austin, Faculty Innovation Center. Retrieved from:
   https://facultyinnovate.utexas.edu/experiential-learning.
   License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
 Teaching in a Digital Age. Authored by: Anthony William (Tony)
   Bates. Provided by: BC Campus Open Education. Retrieved
   from: https://opentextbc.ca/teachinginadigitalage/chapter/
   4-4-models-for-teaching-by-doing/. License: CC BY-NC:
   Attribution-NonCommercial
 Experiential Learning Cycles. Authored by: Ed Batista.
   Retrieved from: https://www.edbatista.com/2007/10/
   experiential.html. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
 What is Service Learning or Community Engagement?.
   Provided by: Vanderbilt University. Retrieved from:
   https://cft.vanderbilt.edu/guides-sub-pages/teaching-
   through-community-engagement/. License: CC BY-NC:
   Attribution-NonCommercial

                                                Experiential and Applied Learning | 981
Blended and Online Learning

Whether instructional goals originate from curriculum documents,
students' expressed interests, or a mixture of both, students are
more likely to achieve the goals if teachers draw on a wide variety
of resources. As a practical matter, this means looking for materials
and experiences that supplement--or occasionally even
replace--the most traditional forms of information, such as
textbooks. Precisely what resources to use depend on factors
unique to each class, school, or community, but they might include
one or more of the following.

The Internet as a Learning Tool

The Internet has become a fixture of modern society, and it offers
a huge variety of information on virtually any topic, including any
school subject and any possible grade level from kindergarten
through university. However, the vastness of the Internet is not
entirely a blessing. A major problem is the sheer volume of
information available, which can sometimes make searching for a
specific topic, article, or document overwhelming and inefficient.
The newer search engines (such as Google) can help with this
problem, though they do not solve it completely. When searching
the term photosynthesis, for example, Google and other similar
search engines return over fourteen million web pages that discuss
or refer to this topic in some way! If a teacher is planning a unit
about photosynthesis, or if a student is writing an essay about it,
which of these web pages will prove most helpful? Choosing among
web pages is a new, somewhat specialized form of computer literacy,
one that can be learned partially by trial-and-error online, but that
also benefits from assistance from a teacher or by more
experienced peers (Ragains, 2006).

982 | Blended and Online Learning
   Another problem with the Internet is the inequity of access. Even
though virtually all schools now have access of some sort, the access
is distributed quite unevenly across communities and income
groups (Skinner, Biscope, & Poland, 2003; Parsad & Jones, 2005).
Schools vary widely in how much Internet service they can provide.
In general, well-to-do schools and those in cities provide more
access than those located in less well-off areas or in rural
areas--though there are many exceptions. A richly endowed school
might have an Internet connection in every classroom as well as
multiple connections in a school library or in specialized computer
rooms. Students, as well as faculty, would be able to use these
facilities, and one or more teachers might have special training
in Internet research to help when problems arise. On the other
extreme, a school might have only a few Internet connections for
the entire school, or even just one, located in a central place like the
library or the school office. Usage by students would consequently
be limited, and teachers would essentially teach themselves how
to search the Internet and how to troubleshoot technical problems
when they occur.

   In spite of these problems, the Internet has considerable potential
for enhancing students' learning, precisely because of its flexibility
and near universality. Some of the best recent successes involve
the creation of a learning commons (sometimes also called
an information commons or teaching commons), a combination of a
website and an actual, physical place in a school or library that
brings together information, students, and teachers so that both
(though perhaps especially students) can learn (Haas & Robertson,
2004; Beagle, 2006). A learning commons includes an online library
catalog and online Internet service, but it also offers other services:
online information and advice about study skills, for example, as
well as access to peer tutors and support groups, either online or
in-person, that can help with difficulties about writing or doing
assignments. As you might suspect, using a learning commons
effectively sometimes requires reorganizing certain features of

                                                         Blended and Online Learning | 983
teaching and learning, chiefly toward greater explicit collaboration
among students and teachers.

Blended and Online Learning

Online courses are those in which at least 80 percent of course
content is delivered online. Blended (sometimes called hybrid)
instruction has between 30 and 80 percent of the course content
delivered online with some face-to-face interaction. Blended and
online courses not only change how content is delivered, but they
also redefine traditional educational roles and provide different
opportunities for learning. As described by Palloff and Pratt (2013):

       The online classroom is a potentially powerful teaching and
       learning arena in which new practices and new relationships
       can make significant contributions to learning. In order to
       harness the power this creates in education, instructors must
       be trained not only to use technology but also to shift the ways
       in which they organize and deliver material. Making this shift
       can increase the potential for learners to take charge of their
       own learning process and facilitate the development of a sense
       of community among them (p.30).

Research on Blended and Online Learning

In 2010, the U.S. Department of Education released a meta-analysis
and review of empirical studies focused on online learning in K-12
schools and higher education from 1996 to 2008. Their findings
revealed that "students in online conditions performed modestly
better, on average, than those learning the same material through
traditional face-to-face instruction" (p. xvi). In addition, they

984 | Blended and Online Learning
reported that blended instruction combining online and face-to-
face elements had a larger advantage than purely online instruction
(Means, Toyama, Murphy, Bakia & Jones, 2010).

   Although these results suggest that blended learning
environments can provide a learning advantage when compared
to purely face-to-face instruction, the researchers emphasized the
findings "do not demonstrate that online learning is superior as
a medium...It was the combination of elements in the treatment
conditions (which was likely to have included additional learning
time and materials as well as additional opportunities for
collaboration) that produced the observed learning advantages" (p.
xviii, original emphasis). In other words, it's important for the
instructor to create an interactive, supportive, and collaborative
learning environment for students to reap the potential benefits
afforded by online learning.

Elements of Successful Online and Blended
Learning

As noted above, the research suggests that when facilitated
effectively, online education can not only match but also surpass
traditional face-to-face learning (Means et al., 2010). Here are some
of the potential benefits of online education:

   Learner-Centered Education: Palloff and Pratt (2013) explain
      that an effective online instructor is someone "who is open to
      giving up control of the learning process" by making students
      active participants in their learning process (p. 24). A learner-
      centered approach acknowledges what students bring to the
      online classroom--their background, needs, and interests--and
      what they take away as relevant and meaningful outcomes.
      With the instructor serving as a facilitator, students are given
      more control and responsibility around how they learn,

                                                         Blended and Online Learning | 985
      including the opportunity to teach one another through
      collaboration and personal interactions (Palloff & Pratt, 2013).

   Collaborative & Interactive Learning: Research has found that
      online instruction is more effective when students collaborate
      rather than work independently (Means et al., 2010; Schutte,
      1996). There are a variety of ways for students to collaborate
      online, including synchronous and asynchronous discussions
      and small group assignments. In addition, the relative
      anonymity of online discussions helps to create a "level playing
      field" for quieter students or those from typically marginalized
      groups. When posed questions in advance, students have the
      opportunity to compose thoughtful responses and have their
      voices heard, as well as respond to one another in a manner
      not usually afforded by face-to-face instruction (Kassop, 2003).

   Metacognitive Awareness: Since online learners have more
      autonomy and responsibility for carrying out the learning
      process, it's important that students understand which
      behaviors help them learn and apply those strategies
      proactively. This awareness and knowledge of one's personal
      learning process involve increased metacognition--a key
      practice for student success (Bransford, Brown & Cocking,
      2000).

   Increased Flexibility: Online learning offers more flexibility
      because students can control when and where they learn. By
      self-monitoring their time and pacing, students are able to
      spend more time on unfamiliar or difficult content (Aslanian &
      Clinefelter, 2012).

   Immediate Feedback: Online learners generally have greater
      access to instructors via email and are able to have questions
      answered by their peers in a timely fashion on discussion
      boards. In addition, online tests and quizzes can be

986 | Blended and Online Learning
      constructed with automatic grading capability that provides
      timely feedback (Kassop, 2003). Immediate and continual
      feedback throughout the learning process is beneficial for
      gaining an understanding of difficult concepts, as well as
      triggering retrieval mechanisms and correcting
      misconceptions (Thalheimer, 2008).

   Multimodal Content: The Internet provides an abundance of
      interactive and multimodal materials that can be used to
      increase engagement and appeal to diverse learners.

Good Practices for Blended and Online Learning

Designing Your Online Course

   Know Your Learner: A recent survey of 1,500 individuals
      nationwide, who were recently enrolled, currently enrolled, or
      planning to enroll in an online course found that a wide variety
      of students were drawn to online learning (Aslanian &
      Clinefelter, 2012). However, they also identified the following
      key themes in online students' responses:
         Most online students have several responsibilities in life,
            so they seek convenience and flexibility when furthering
            their education. Millions of post-secondary students have
            turned to online education because it enables them to fit
            education around their work and family responsibilities
            and to study anytime and anywhere (p. 16).
         Online students unquestionably value independence, self-
            direction, and control online education offers them.
            Among several factors that drive them to online programs,
            students most often point to "the ability to study when
            and where I want" and "the ability to study at my own

                                                         Blended and Online Learning | 987
            pace" (p. 17).

As you design your course, it's important to develop as
comprehensive a picture as possible of the specific students who
will be enrolling in the class (Angelino, Williams & Natvig, 2007).
Gaining a sense of their prior knowledge and technology
competency will help you to know what support they will need and
tailor your instruction accordingly. A few ways to gain these insights
include asking students to complete an online survey, concept
inventory, or pre-assessment. In addition, students can reflect on
their prior knowledge and experiences through an online discussion
or blog post.

   Develop Learning Goals: As with face-to-face instruction, it's
      imperative, to begin with the end in mind by developing
      learning goals first (Froyd, 2008). Ask yourself, what are the key
      concepts and/or skills students need to master by the end of
      the course? The answer to this question will help in developing
      course content, activities, and assessments that align with
      your learning goals, as well as choosing the appropriate
      technology (Caulfield, 2011).

   Have Clear Expectations: Present clear guidelines for
      participation in the class, as well as specific information for
      students about course expectations and procedures. In
      addition, use rubrics to clearly communicate learning
      objectives and grading criteria for each learning activity in the
      course (e.g., quality online discussions) and incorporate them
      into student assessments (Palloff & Pratt, 2013).

Organizing Course Content

   Provide an obvious path through the material, and make sure
      guideposts are clear to the student. Savery (2005) explains

988 | Blended and Online Learning
   that organization is essential since online learners need to fit
   the course into their crowded schedules. He emphasizes the
   importance of posting course assignments and due dates early
   and having clear directions. Shea and colleagues (Shea,
   Fredericksen, Pickett & Pelz, 2003; Shea, Pickett & Pelz, 2003)
   also explained the importance of clearly labeling and
   organizing course-level and section-level materials in order to
   create a path that students can follow.

 Organize the content in logical units, or modules, in which
   each module is organized around a major topic and contains
   relevant objectives, material, and associated activities. In the
   introduction to the module, including information about how
   long the student should expect to spend working on the
   module. This helps to keep students moving along at a similar
   pace (Shea, Fredericksen, Pickett & Pelz, 2003; Shea, Pickett &
   Pelz, 2003). The course demo from Boston University here
   illustrates this modular organization.

 Within each module, present content in chunks that are easily
   digestible (Smith, 2008).
       When presenting text, format the content for the Web by
         breaking it into short paragraphs and using headings,
         bullets, graphics, and other formatting devices that make
         webpages easier to read and comprehend. The "7+/-2"
         instructional design rule of thumb, based on the work of
         psychologist George Miller, suggests the inclusion of 5 to 9
         pieces of information in a segment. This self-paced
         asynchronous course from UC-Irvine demonstrates
         several of these principles.
       When presenting audio or video, include a brief
         description and information about the length. Keep the
         segments short, from 2-15 minutes, to help maximize
         listeners' retention (Smith, 2008). Strategically chunking
         content helps students to absorb the information, avoiding

                                                      Blended and Online Learning | 989
            information overload and exhaustion (Garrison, Anderson
            & Archer, 2001).
         Help your students digest the chunks of material by
            providing short recall or application questions after each
            one. Research has demonstrated the critical role of
            retrieval practices in conceptual learning (Karpicke &
            Blunt, 2011; Karpicke & Roediger, 2008).

Facilitating Online Learning

   Promote metacognitive awareness. Since online learners have
      more autonomy and responsibility, it is crucial that are
      supported in planning, monitoring, and assessing their
      understanding and performance (Bransford, Brown, & Cocking,
      2000). As mentioned earlier, providing clear expectations and a
      clear path through the material can help students monitor
      their pace. In Promoting Student Metacognition, Tanner (2012)
      offers a handful of adaptable specific activities for promoting
      metacognition, including pre and post-assessments, reflective
      journals, and questions for students to ask themselves as they
      plan, monitor, and evaluate their thinking.

   Maintain a Social Presence: Stay present and be responsive to
      student needs and concerns (Savery, 2005). The instructor
      should engage in a balanced level of participation and
      communication--both publicly and privately--so students
      know he or she is engaged and available. This includes
      modeling good participation by frequently contributing to
      discussions by responding to students' posts and asking
      further questions. The instructor is instrumental in creating a
      warm and inviting atmosphere that promotes an online sense
      of community (Garrison & Vaughan, 2008; Jiang & Ting, 2000).

   Promote Collaboration: As described by Palloff and Pratt

990 | Blended and Online Learning
   (2013), "collaborative learning processes help students achieve
   deeper levels of knowledge generation through the creation of
   shared goals, shared exploration, and a shared process of
   meaning-making. In addition, collaborative activity can help to
   reduce the feeling s of isolation that can occur when students
   are working at a distance" (p. 39). Collaborative learning can be
   promoted through a variety of activities, including small group
   assignments, case studies, simulations, and group discussions.

 Promote Active Learning: Chickering and Ehrmann (1996)
   explain that "learning is not a spectator sport...[Students] must
   talk about what they are learning, write reflectively about it,
   relate it to past experiences, and apply it to their daily lives.
   They must make what they learn part of themselves" (p. 5).
   Keeping in mind the characteristics of online learners, it's also
   important to make tasks authentic for students. That is,
   complex tasks related to real-life experiences that can also be
   applied to future activities (Woo, Herrington, Agostinho &
   Reeves, 2007).

 Incorporate Multiple Media: A key mistake instructors make is
   simply converting print materials to an online environment.
   Instead, leverage the possibilities of the Internet by
   considering various content sources and media formats to
   motivate learning and appeal to different learning styles
   (Mayer, 2001). CIRTL suggests that when selecting media for a
   course, think about how it accomplishes learning goals and
   how the medium will affect the learner (e.g., technology needs,
   download time, disabilities). In addition, Kapus (2010)
   recommends that when incorporating streaming media in a
   course to also post complete transcripts and encourage
   students to both watch the content and read the transcript.

 Provide Adequate Technical Support: It should not be
   assumed that all students have experience with online learning
   or using the necessary technology. Provide ample technical

                                                       Blended and Online Learning | 991
      support for learners by including links to resources, making
      yourself available to students, and promoting collaborative
      peer problem solving on the discussion board.
   Respect Copyright Rules: The rules of fair use
      described here may apply to copyrighted material that you
      wish to excerpt.
CC licensed content, Original
   Blended and Online Learning. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/
      chapter/blended-and-online-learning/. License: CC BY-NC-
      SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
CC licensed content, Shared previously
   Blended and Online Learning. Authored by: Blaine Smith and
      Cynthia Brame. Provided by: Vanderbilt University . Retrieved
      from: https://cft.vanderbilt.edu/guides-sub-pages/blended-
      and-online-learning/. License: CC BY-NC: Attribution-
      NonCommercial

992 | Blended and Online Learning
Chapter Summary:

Instruction

This chapter started with one premise but ended with another.
It started with the idea that teachers need to locate curriculum
goals, usually from a state department of education or a publisher
of a curriculum document. In much of the chapter we described
what these authorities provide for individual classroom teachers,
and how their documents can be clarified and rendered specific
enough for classroom use. In the middle of the chapter, however,
the premise shifted. We began noting that instruction cannot be
planned simply for students; teachers also need to consider
involving students themselves in influencing or even choosing their
own goals and ways of reaching the goals. Instructional planning, in
other words, should not be just for students, but also by students, at
least to some extent. In the final parts of the chapter, we described
a number of ways of achieving a reasonable balance between
teachers' and students' influence on their learning. We suggested
considering relatively strong measures, such as an emergent or an
anti-bias curriculum, but we also considered more moderate ones,
like the use of the Internet, local experts and field trips, service-
learning, and of guided and independent practice. All things
considered, then, teachers' planning is not just about organizing
teaching; it is also about facilitating learning. Its dual purpose is
evident in many features of public education, including the one we
discuss in the next two chapters, the assessment of learning.

   In the United States, broad educational goals for most subject
areas are published by many national professional associations and
by all state departments of education. Usually, the state
departments of education also publish curriculum frameworks or
curriculum guides that offer somewhat more specific explanations
of educational goals, and how they might be taught.

                                                      Chapter Summary: Instruction | 993
   Transforming the goals into specific learning objectives, however,
remains a responsibility of the teacher. The formulation can focus
on curriculum topics that can be analyzed into specific activities,
or it can focus on specific behaviors expected of students and
assemble them into general types of outcomes. Taxonomies of
educational objectives, such as the ones originated by Benjamin
Bloom, are a useful tool with either approach to instructional
planning.

   Since students normally are diverse, teaching requires
differentiated instruction, or adjustments to students' learning
needs, backgrounds, and capacities. A widely used framework for
doing this is called response to intervention and involves continual
short-term assessment of students' response to teaching, coupled
with a system of more intense instruction for the relatively small
number of students who need it.

   In addition to planning instruction on students' behalf, many
teachers organize instruction so that students themselves can
influence the choice of goals. One way to do so is through emergent
curriculum; another way is through multicultural and anti-bias
curriculum.

   Whatever planning strategies are used, learning is enhanced by
using a wide variety of resources, including the Internet, local
experts, field trips, and service-learning, among others. It is also
enhanced if the teacher can build bridges between curriculum goals
and students' experiences through judicious use of modeling,
activation of prior knowledge, the anticipation of students'
preconceptions, and an appropriate blend of guided and
independent practice.
CC licensed content, Original

   Chapter Summary: Instruction. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-
      Van Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/
      chapter/summary-8/. License: Public Domain: No Known
      Copyright

994 | Chapter Summary: Instruction
CC licensed content, Shared previously
   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

                                                       Chapter Summary: Instruction | 995
Glossary

996 | Glossary
References

Allan, S. & Goddard, Y. (2010). Differentiated instruction and RTI: A
natural fit. Interventions that work, 68(2).

   Allen, E. & Seaman, J. (2013). Changing Course: Ten Years of
Tracking Online Education in the United States. Wellesley, MA:
Babson College.

   Ambrose, S. A., Bridges, M. W., DiPietro, M., Lovett, M. C., Norman,
M. K., & Mayer, R. E. (2010). How learning works: seven research-
based principles for smart teaching. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

   Anderson, L. W. & Krathwohl, D. (2001). A taxonomy for learning,
teaching, and assessing: a revision of Bloom's taxonomy of educational
objectives. New York: Longman.

   Angelino, L. M., Williams, F. K., & Natvig, D. (2007). Strategies to
engage online students and reduce attrition rates. The Journal of
Educators Online, 4(2), 1-14.

   Angelo, T. A. & Cross, K. P. (1993). Classroom assessment
techniques: a handbook for college teachers. San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass.

   Aslanian, C. B. & Clinefelter, D. L. (2012). Online college students
2012: Comprehensive data on demands and preferences. Louisville,
KY: The Learning House, Inc.

   Banchi, H. & Bell, R. (2008). The many levels of inquiry. Science and
Children, 46(2).

   Bandura, A. (2002). Social cognitive theory in cultural
context. Journal of Applied Psychology: An International Review, 51,
269-290.
Banks, C. & Banks, J. (1995). Equity pedagogy: An essential

   component of multicultural education. Theory into Practice, 34(3),
   152-158.
Banks, J. & Banks, C. (2005). Multicultural education: Issues and
   perspectives, 5th edition. New York: Wiley.

                                                                                  References | 997
   Barkley, E. (2010). Student engagement techniques: a handbook for
college faculty. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

   Beagle, D. Bailey, R., & Tierney, B. (2004). The information
commons handbook. New York: Neal-Shuman Publishers.

   Berrett D (2012). How `flipping' the classroom can improve the
traditional lecture. The Chronicle of Higher Education, Feb. 19, 2012.
Bloom, B. (1956). Taxonomy of educational objectives. New York:

   David McKay Publishers.
   Bonwell, C. C. & Eison, J.A. (1991). Active learning: creating
excitement in the classroom. ASH#-ERIC Higher Education Report
No. 1, Washington, D.C.: The George Washington University, School
of Education and Human Development.
   Brame, C.J. and Biel, R. (2015). Test-enhanced learning: the
potential for testing to promote greater learning in undergraduate
science courses. CBE Life Sciences Education, 14, 1-12.
   Bransford, J. D., Brown, A., & Cocking, R. (Eds.). (1999). How people
learn: Brain, mind, experience, and school. Washington, D.C.:
National Academy Press.
   Brame, C.J. and Biel, R. (2015). Test-enhanced learning: the
potential for testing to promote greater learning in undergraduate
science courses. CBE Life Sciences Education, 14, 1-12.
Brumfiel, G. (2005). Intelligent design: who has designs on your
   students' minds? Nature, 434, 1062-1065.
Bryan, T. & Burstein, K. (2004). Improving homework completion
   and academic performance: Lessons from special
   education. Theory into Practice, 43(3), 213-219.
Buchanan, A., Baldwin, S., & Rudisill, M. (2002). Service learning
   as scholarship in teacher education. Educational Researcher 32(8),
   28-34.
   Campbell, P., Wang, A., & Algozzine, B. (2010). 55 tactics for
implementing RTI in inclusive settings. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin.
   Carr, R., Palmer, S., and Hagel, P. (2015). Active learning: the
importance of developing a comprehensive measure. Active
Learning in Higher Education 16, 173-186.

998 | References
   Caulfield, J. (2011). How to design and teach a hybrid course.
Sterling, VA: Stylus Publishing.

   Chickering, A. W. & Ehrmann, S. C. (1996). Implementing the
seven principles: technology as lever. AAHE Bulletin, 49(1-10), 3-6.

   Chickering, A. W. & Gamson, Z. F. (1987). Seven principles for
good practice in undergraduate education. AAHE Bulletin March
1987, 3-7
Chiu, M. & Lin, J. (2005). Promoting 4th-graders' conceptual change

   of their understanding of electrical current via multiple
   analogies. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 42(4), 429-464.
Clark, D. (2006). Longitudinal conceptual change in students'
   understanding of thermal equilibrium: An examination of the
   process of conceptual restructuring. Cognition and Instruction,
   24(4), 467-563.
Clark, K. (2006). Computer Based Virtual Field Trips in the K-12
   Classroom. In C. Crawford et al. (Eds.), Proceedings of Society for
   Information Technology and Teacher Education International
   Conference 2006, pp. 3974-3980. Chesapeake, VA: AACE.
Cooper, H. & Valentine, J. (2001). Using research to answer practical
   questions about homework. Educational Psychology, 36(3),
   143-153.
Corno, L. & Xu, J. (2004). Homework as the job of childhood. Theory
   into Practice, 43(3), 227-233.
   Crouch, C.H. and Mazur, E. (2001). Peer instruction: ten years of
experience and results. Am. Journal of Physics 69, 970-977.
Crow, C. (2005). Multicultural education: Equity pedagogy on
   perspectives and practices of secondary teachers. Unpublished
   doctoral dissertation. Waco, TX: Baylor University.
Curriculum Development and Supplemental materials Commission.
   (1999). Reading/Language Arts Framework for California Public
   Schools. Sacramento, CA: California Department of Education.
   DesLauriers L, Schelew E, and Wieman C (2011). Improved learning
in a large-enrollment physics class. Science 332: 862-864.
   Dewey, J. (1938). Experience & Education. New York, NY: Kappa
Delta Pi

                                                                                  References | 999
Dicklitch, S. (2005). Human rights--human wrongs: Making political
   science real through service-learning. In D. Butin (Ed.), Service-
   learning in higher education: Critical issues and directions. New
   York: Palgrave Macmillan.

Egan, K. (2005). An imaginative approach to teaching. San Francisco:
   Jossey-Bass.
   Fagen, A.P., Crouch, C.H., and Mazur, E. (2002). Peer instruction:

results from a range of classrooms. Physics Teacher 40, 206-209.
   Fitzpatrick, M. (2012). Classroom lectures go digital. The New York

Times, June 24, 2012.
   Freeman, S., Eddy, S.L., McDonough, M., Smith, M.K., Okoroafor,

N., Jordt, H., and Wenderoth, M.P. (2014). Active learning increases
student performance in science, engineering, and
mathematics. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA
111, 8410-8415.

   Froyd, J. (2008, June). White paper on promising practices in
undergraduate STEM education.

   Fuchs, D. & Deshler, D. (2007). What we need to know about
responsiveness to intervention (and shouldn't be afraid to
ask). Learning disabilities research and practice, 22(2), 129-136.

   Garrison, D. R., & Vaughan, N. D. (2008) Blended learning in
higher education: Framework, principles, and guidelines. San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

   Garrison, R., Anderson, T., & Archer, W. (2001). Critical thinking,
cognitive presence, and computer conferencing in distance
education. American Journal of Distance Education, 15(1), 87-105.

   Gibson, S. (2004). Social learning (cognitive) theory and
implications for human resources development. Advances in
Developing Human Resources, 6(2), 192-210.

   Gijselaers, W., (1995) `Perspectives on problem-based learning' in
Gijselaers, W, Tempelaar, D, Keizer, P, Blommaert, J, Bernard, E &
Kapser, H (eds) Educational Innovation in Economics and Business
Administration: The Case of Problem-Based Learning. Dordrecht,
Kluwer.

   Gill, B. & Schlossman, S. (2004). Villain or savior? The American

1000 | References
discourse on homework, 1850-2003. Theory into Practice, 43(3),
174-181.

   Goddard, Y. , Goddard, R., & Tschannen-Moran, M. (2007), A
theoretical and empirical investigation of teacher collaboration for
school improvement and student achievement in public elementary
schools. Teachers' College Record, 109, 877-896.
Gronlund, N. (2004). Writing instructional objectives for teaching

   and assessment, 6th edition. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.
Gurlitt, J., Renkl, A., Motes, M., & Hauser, S. (2006). How can we use

   concept maps for prior knowledge activation? Proceedings of the
   7th International Conference on Learning Sciences, 217-220.
Haas, L. & Robertson, J. (Eds). (2004). The information commons.
   Washington, D.C.: Association of Research Libraries.
   Haak, D. C., HilleRisLambers, J., Pitre, E., & Freeman, S. (2011).
Increased structure and active learning reduce the achievement gap
in introductory biology. Science 332, 1213-1216.
   Hake, R. (1998). Interactive-engagement versus traditional
methods: A six-thousand-student survey of mechanics test data for
introductory physics courses. American Journal of Physics 66, 64-74.
   Hall, T., Vue, G., Strangman, N., & Meyer, A. (2004). Differentiated
Instruction and Implications for UDL Implementation. Wakefield,
MA: National Center on Accessing the General Curriculum. (Links
updated 2014). Retrieved [7.16.19] from http://aem.cast.org/about/
publications/2003/ncac-differentiated-instruction-udl.html This
work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
4.0 International license.
   Handelsman, J., Miller, S., & Pfund, C. (2007). Scientific teaching.
New York: W.H. Freeman.
   Harrow, A. (1972). A taxonomy of the psychomotor domain. New
York: David McKay.
Hawkins, J. (2006). Accessing multicultural issues through critical
   thinking, critical inquiry, and the student research process. Urban
   Education, 41(2), 169-141.
   Herreid, C. F. (2007). Start with a story: The case study method of
teaching college science. Arlington VA: NSTA Press.

                                                                                 References | 1001
Hyde, J. & Lynn, M. (2006). Gender similarities in mathematics and
   science. Science, 314(5799), 599-600.
   Hyman, R. T. (1980). Improving discussion leadership. New York:

Columbia University Teachers College Press.
   Irby, D. (1994) Three exemplary models of case-based

teaching Academic Medicine, 69(12).
   Jacobson, T. (2003). Confronting out discomfort: Clearing the way

for anti-bias in early childhood. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
   Jiang, M. & Ting, E. (2000). A study of factors influencing students'

perceived learning in a web-based course environment.
International Journal of Educational Telecommunications 6(4),
317-338.
Johnson, B. & O'Grady, C. (Eds.). (2006). The spirit of service:

   Exploring faith, service, and social justice in higher education.
   Bolton, MA: Anker Publishers.
Jones, S., Gilbride-Brown, J., & Gasiorski, A. (2005). Getting inside
   the "underside" of service-learning: Student resistance and
   possibilities. In D. Butin (Ed.), Service-learning in higher
   education: Critical issues and directions. New York: Palgrave
   Macmillan.
   Kapus, J. (2010, June 25). Five quick tips for using streaming
media in your blended or online courses.
   Karpicke, J. D. & Blunt, J. R. (2011). Retrieval practice produces
more learning than elaborative studying with concept mapping.
Science, 331(6018), 772-775.
   Karpicke, J. D. & Roediger, H. L. (2008). The critical importance of
retrieval for learning. Science, 319(5865), 966-968.
   Kassop, M. (2003). Ten ways online education matches, or
surpasses, face-to-face Learning.
   Kirshner, P., Sweller, J. amd Clark, R. (2006) Why minimal guidance
during instruction does not work: an analysis of the failure of
constructivist, discovery, problem-based, experiential, and inquiry-
based teaching. Educational Psychologist, 41(2).
Kohn, A. (1999). The schools our children deserve. Boston: Houghton
   Mifflin.

1002 | References
Kohn, A. (2004). Challenging students, and how to have more of
   them. Phi Delta Kappan,86(3), 184-194.
   Kolb. D. (1984) Experiential Learning: Experience as the source of

learning and development. Englewood Cliffs NJ: Prentice Hall.
   Lage, M. J., Platt, G. J., & Treglia, M. (2000). Inverting the

classroom: a gateway to creating an inclusive learning
environment. The Journal of Economic Education 31, 30-43.

   Larmer, J. & Mergendoller, J. (2010) Seven essentials for project-
based learning. Educational Leadership, 68(1).

   Laws, P., Rosborough P, & Poodry, F. (1999).Women's responses to
an activity-based introductory physics program. American Journal
of Physics, 67, S32-S37.

   Lester, P. & Ross, S. (2003). Images that injure: pictorial stereotypes
in the media. Westport, CT: Praeger.

   Lorenzo, M., Crouch, C. H., & Mazur, E. (2006). Reducing the
gender gap in the physics classroom. American Journal of Physics 74,
118-122.

   Lumpkin, A., Achen, R., & Dodd, R. (2015). Student perceptions of
active learning. College Student Journal 49, 121-133.

   Mager, R. (2005). Preparing instructional objectives, 3rd edition.
Atlanta, GA: Center for Effective Performance.

   Marcus, G., Taylor, R., & Ellis, R. (2004) Implications for the design
of online case-based learning activities based on the student blended
learning experience: Perth, Australia: Proceedings of the ACSCILITE
conference, 2004.

   Marrs, K. A. & Novak, G. (2004). Just-in-time teaching in biology:
creating an active learner classroom using the internet. Cell Biology
Education 3, 49-61.
Marzano, R. (2006). Designing a new taxonomy of educational

   objectives. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Books.
   Mayer R. E. (2001). Multimedia Learning. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
   Mazur E (2009). Farewell, Lecture? Science 323: 50-51.
   Means, B., Toyama, Y., Murphy, R., Bakia, M., & Jones, K. (2010).
Evaluation of evidence-based practices in online learning: a meta-

                                                                                 References | 1003
analysis and review of online learning studies. US Department of

Education. Office of Planning, Evaluation, and Policy Development.

Policy and Program Studies Service. ED-04-CO-0040.

Mellard, D. & Johnson, E. (2008). RTI: A practitioner's guide to

implementing response to intervention. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin.

Moon, J. A. (2004). A handbook of reflective and experiential

learning: theory and practice. New York: Routledge

Myths   and          Misconceptions.         (n.d.)     Retrieved

from http://www.alludl.ca/myths-misconceptions. (CC BY NC SA).

National Research Council. (2000). How people learn: brain, mind,

experience and school. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.

Notar, C., Wilson, J., Yunker, B., & Zuelke, D. (2004). The table of

specifications: insuring accountability in teacher-made tests.

Journal of Instructional Psychology, 31(3).

Novak, G., Patterson, E. T., Gavrin, A. D., & Christian, W. (1999).

Just-in-time teaching: blending active learning with web technology.

Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Novak, J. D. & Canas, A. J. (2008). The theory underlying concept

maps and how to construct and use them. Technical Report IHMC

CmapTools 2006-01 Rev 2008-01 (retrieved from

http://cmap.ihmc.us/docs/theory-of-concept-maps).

Ohio Department of Education. (2003). Academic Content

Standards. Columbus, Ohio: Author.

Owens, C. (2003). Nonsense, sense and science: misconceptions

and illustrated trade books. Journal of Children's Literature, 29(1),

55-62.

   Palloff, R. M. & Pratt, K. (2013). Lessons from the Virtual Classroom
(2nd Ed). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

Parsad, B. & Jones, J. (2005). Internet access in U.S. public schools

and classrooms: 1994-2003. Washington, D.C.: United States

Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics.

Pashler, H., McDaniel, M., Rohrer, D., & Bjork, R. (2008). Learning

styles: concepts and evidence. Psychological Science in the Public

Interest 9,103-119.

1004 | References
   Paulson, D. R. (1999). Active learning and cooperative learning in
the organic chemistry lecture class. J. Chem. Educ. 76, 1136-1140.
Peterson, E. (2002). A practical guide to early childhood curriculum:

   Linking thematic, emergent, and skill-based planning to children's
   outcomes, 2nd edition. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
   Popham, J. (2002). What every teacher should know about
educational assessment. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.
   Pratt, D. & Johnson, J. (1998). The apprenticeship perspective:
modeling ways of being. In Pratt, D. (ed.) Five Perspectives on
Teaching in Adult and Higher Education Malabar FL: Krieger
Publishing Company
   Prince, M. (2004). Does active learning work? A review of the
research. Journal of Engineering Education 93, 223-231.
   Ragains, P. (2006). Information literacy instruction that works.
New York: Neal-Schuman Publishers.
   Rebellon, C. (2006). Do adolescents engage in delinquency to
attract the social attention of peers? An extension and longitudinal
test of the social reinforcement hypothesis. Journal of Research in
Crime and Delinquency, 43(4), 387-411.
   Riley, R. (2002). Education reform through standards and
partnerships, 1993-2000. Phi Delta Kappan, 83(9), 700-707.
   Rogoff, B. (2003). Cultural nature of human development. In
Thinking with the tools and institutions of culture, pp. 236-281.
   Rowe, M. B. (1980). Pausing principles and their effects on
reasoning in science. In F. B. Brawer (Ed.). Teaching the sciences. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
   Ruhl, K., Hughes, C. A., & Schloss, P. J. (1987). Using the pause
procedure to enhance lecture recall. Teacher Education and Special
Education 10, 14-18.
   Ruiz-Primo, M. A., Briggs, D., Iverson, H., Talbot, R., & Shepard,
L.A. (2011). Impact of undergraduate science course innovations on
learning. Science 331, 1269-1270.
Sample, M. (2011). Teaching for Enduring Understanding. Retrieved
   from http://www.chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/teaching-
   for-enduring-understanding/35243.

                                                                                 References | 1005
Savery, J. R. (2005). BE VOCAL: Characteristics of Successful Online
   Instructors. Journal of Interactive Online Learning, 4(2).
   Schneider, M. (2001). Encouragement of women physics majors at

Grinnell College: A case study. Phys. Teach. 39, 280-282.
   Schn, D. (1983) The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals

Think in Action New York: Basic Books.
   Schutte, J. (1996). Virtual teaching in higher education. Retrieved

from http://media.sabda.org/alkitab-1/Pdfs/Schutte-
VirtualTeachinginHigherEd.pdf

   Seitz, H. (2006). The plan: building on children's interests. Young
Children, 61(2), 36-41.

   Shea, P. J., Fredericksen, E. E., Pickett, A. M. & Pelz, W. E. (2003). A
preliminary investigation of "teaching presence" in the SUNY
Learning Network. In J. Bourne & J. C. Moore (Eds.) Elements of
Quality Online Education: Practice and Direction. Needham, MA:
Sloan Center for Online Education, 279-312.

   Shea, P. J., Pickett, A. M. & Pelz, W. E. (2003). A follow-up
investigation of "teaching presence" in the SUNY Learning
Network. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, 7(2), 61-80.
Skinner, H., Biscope, S., & Poland, B. (2003). Quality of Internet

   access: Barriers behind Internet use statistics, 57(5), 875-880.
Slotta, J. & Chi, M. (2006). Helping students understand challenging

   topics in science through ontology training. Cognition and
   Instruction, 24(2), 261-289.
   Smith, R. (2008). Conquering the content: A step-by-step guide to
online course design. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
   Springer, L., Stanne, M.E., Donovan, S.S. (1999). Effects of small-
group learning on undergraduates in science, mathematics,
engineering, and technology. Rev. Educ. Res. 69, 21-51.
   Strobel, J. , & van Barneveld, A. (2009). When is PBL More
Effective? A Meta-synthesis of Meta-analyses Comparing PBL to
Conventional Classrooms. Interdisciplinary Journal of Problem-
based Learning, 3(1).
   Tanner, K. D. (2012). Promoting student metacognition. CBE--Life
Sciences Education, 11, 113-120.

1006 | References
   Tanner, K. & Allen, D. (2005). Approaches to biology teaching
and learning--understanding the wrong answers: Teaching toward
conceptual change. Cell Biology Education, 4, 112-117.

   Thalheimer, W. (2008). Providing learners with feedback, part 1:
research-based recommendations for training, education, and e-
learning.
Thomsen, K. (2006). Service-learning in grades K-8: Experiential

   learning that builds character and motivation. Thousand Oaks, CA:
   Corwin.
Tomlinson, C. & McTighe, J. (2006). Integrating differentiated
   instruction and understanding by design. Alexandria, VA:
   Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development.
   Udovic, D., Morris, D., Dickman, A., Postlethwait, J., and
Wetherwax, P. (2002). Workshop Biology: demonstrating the
effectiveness of active learning in an introductory biology course.
BioScience 52, 272-281.
Vartuli, S. & Rohs, J. (2006). Conceptual organizers of early
   childhood curriculum content. Early Childhood Education
   Journal, 33(4), 231-237.
Vavrus, M. (2002). Transforming the multicultural education of
   teachers. New York: Teachers' College Press.
   Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
   Walvoord, B. E. & Anderson, V. J. (1998). Effective grading: A tool
for learning and assessment. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
   Wiggins, G. & McTighe, Jay. (1998). Backward Design. In
Understanding by Design (pp. 13-34). ASCD.
   Woo, Y., Herrington, J., Agopstinho, S., & Reeves, T.C. (2007).
Implementing authentic tasks in web-based learning
environments. Educause Quarterly 3, 36-43.
   Woodward, J. (2004). Mathematics education in the United
States: Past to present. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 37, pp.
16-31.
Wurm, J. (2005). Working in the Reggio way. St. Paul, MN: Redleaf
   Press.

                                                                                 References | 1007
CLASSROOM
MANAGEMENT

     Theme: Classroom Management

        Overview of Content:
          Student Behavior Management
        Learning Objectives:
          Define misbehavior and various causes
          Discuss proactive ways to address behavior

             management
          Summarize considerations for responding to

             behavior

                                                              Classroom Management | 1009
Classroom Management and
Why It Matters

Managing the learning environment is both a major responsibility
and an ongoing concern for all teachers, even those with years
of experience (Good & Brophy, 2002). for many educators and
educational psychologists, classroom management is synonymous
with classroom control (Bowers & Flinders, 1990; Doyle, 1986).
However, as we will see in this chapter, management should include
warmth and care as well as control. Your decisions about classroom
arrangement, rules, and routines should reflect a concern for a
secure, safe, orderly environment, but not at the expense of
communication and trust among your learners. As a new teacher,
you will quickly come to realize that warmth and control are not
mutually exclusive concerns. Effective teachers who care about
their learners inevitably combine the quality of warmth with their
efforts to control.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=134#oembed-1

Video 9.1.1. Teaching like a Champion-Control describes the balance
of control that teachers exert in their classroom.

                                                        Classroom Management and Why It
                                                                                      Matters | 1011
Teaching Styles and Classroom Management

For many years, the concepts of warmth and control were
considered to be at opposite ends of the same continuum. If a
teacher chose to be warm, he or she could not be in control,
and vice versa. However, Soar and Soar (1983) have suggested that
different degrees of warmth and control may occur simultaneously,
and behavior in one dimension does not necessarily preclude
behavior in the other. Although many combinations of warmth and
control are possible, four major profiles emerge from this
conception of classroom climate, as shown in the figure below.

                             Figure 9.1.1. Teaching styles
   For the dimension of control, student spontaneity, risk-taking
behavior, and student-initiated responses characterize low-control
climates. Teacher
talk, task orientation, and teacher authority characterize high-
control climates. For the dimension of warmth, the use of praise
and rewards, use of student ideas, and responsiveness to student
requests are associated with high warmth. Frequent reference to

1012 | Classroom Management and Why It Matters
formal rules and procedures, use of punishment, criticism, scolding,
and reprimanding are associated with low warmth.

Authoritarian

The first is teaching style, authoritarian, is characterized as cold
and controlling. Such a teacher may humiliate and criticize
students in an effort to control all aspects of their behavior. Lesser
extremes represent a teacher who provides little praise or reward.
This style generally results in a classroom climate that is
businesslike and task-oriented, with few interchanges with
students that are not initiated by the teacher. It also is a classroom
in which motivation to do high-level work may be inspired more by
a fear of punishment, embarrassment, or, in extreme cases,
humiliation than by the expectation of praise, reward, or
reinforcement.

Authoritative

The second type of classroom climate is a result of an authoritative
teaching style, in which the teacher is warm but in control. Here,
classroom rules are mutually determined and a consistently applied
system of praise and rewards is used to motivate good behavior,
warmth and control may exist simultaneously.

   One danger of excessive use of rewards, however, is the creation
of an almost suffocating climate in which students have little if
any room to pursue a behavior or activity independently. In such
a classroom, only those behaviors that the teacher has
previously identified are eligible for a reward--all others are deemed
less worthy. As Soar and Soar (1983) have noted, this may create
a classroom climate in which students have little room to pursue

                                   Classroom Management and Why It Matters | 1013
independent behavior because of the tightly managed praise and
reward system established by the teacher.

   This style differs primarily from the first in that motivation for
good behavior here comes from a well-defined and consistently
applied system of praise and rewards. With authoritarian teachers,
good behavior results from a well-defined and consistently
applied system of rules and/or punishment.

Permissive

A third classroom climate is characterized by a permissive teaching
style, in which the teacher is warm and permissive. A teacher who
falls at the lower right corner of this quadrant is one who praises
and rewards students frequently while allowing them almost
complete freedom in choosing the limits of their own behavior,
sometimes resulting in confusion.

   A lesser extreme of this quadrant may represent a classroom in
which praise and rewards are used freely but student spontaneity
(for example, calling out) and risk-taking behavior are limited to
certain times (for example, group discussion, problem-solving
activities) or certain types of content (for example, social studies
but not math). During these times the teacher acts as a moderator
or co-discussant, guiding and directing but not controlling
classroom behavior. In such a classroom, students have
considerable freedom in how and when to speak, and the teacher's
warm and nurturing attitude is conveyed mostly nonverbally,
through a set of classroom rules that encourage individual initiative.

Neglectful

The fourth style, neglectful, represents a classroom that is cold

1014 | Classroom Management and Why It Matters
yet permissive. A teacher who falls at the lower-left corner of this
quadrant is one who spends most of the time scolding and
criticizing students but has few classroom rules to control or limit
the behavior being criticized. Such an extreme climate sometimes
prevails in a classroom where a substitute teacher takes over
without warning. In such a classroom, students may use the
teacher's unfamiliarity with the rules as an opportunity to act out,
thereby initiating scolding or criticizing behavior. Since the
substitute teacher is unfamiliar with the classroom rules, he cannot
fall back on the established system to prevent misbehavior. And
because the substitute's role is to keep order, not to create or
discover the rules, much of his behavior is an attempt to "hold the
line" by criticizing, reprimanding, and punishing, if need be, in order
to keep the class under control.

   In a less extreme form, a classroom with lead by this teacher may
be characterized by some coverage of content, interspersed with
delays for classroom management of misbehavior. In general, this
quadrant shows both a lack of task orientation and teacher control
over the subject matter
content and a high frequency of scolding, criticizing, and
reprimanding.

   An effective classroom management plan blends warmth and
control in ways that preclude overly rigid, dictatorial, or
authoritarian forms of control, using instead a mutually agreed-
upon set of rules and a well-defined and consistently applied system
of praise and rewards. In other words, an effective plan combines
strikes a balance of warmth with control. In this chapter, we will
show you how to create this balance to build an effective classroom
management plan.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online

                                   Classroom Management and Why It Matters | 1015
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=134#oembed-2

Video 9.1.2. Teaching like a Champion-Warm/Strict describes the
balance of warmth and strictness that teachers exert in their
classroom.

Why Classroom Management Matters

Managing the learning environment is both a major responsibility
and an ongoing concern for all teachers, even those with years of
experience (Good & Brophy, 2002). There are several reasons. In the
first place, a lot goes on in classrooms simultaneously, even when
students seem to be doing only one task in common. Twenty-five
students may all seem to be working on a sheet of math problems.
But look more closely: several may be stuck on a particular problem,
each for different reasons. A few others have worked only the first
problem or two and are now chatting quietly with each other
instead of continuing. Still, others have finished and are wondering
what to do next. At any one moment, each student needs something
different--different information, different hints, different kinds of
encouragement. Such diversity increases even more if the teacher
deliberately assigns multiple activities to different groups or
individuals (for example, if some students do a reading assignment
while others do the math problems).

   A major reason that managing the environment is challenging is
because a teacher can not predict everything that will happen in
a class. A well-planned lesson may fall flat on its face, or take less
time than expected, and you find yourself improvising to fill class

1016 | Classroom Management and Why It Matters
time. On the other hand, an unplanned moment may become a
wonderful, sustained exchange among students, and prompt you to
drop previous plans and follow the flow of discussion. Interruptions
happen continually: a fire drill, a drop-in visit from another teacher
or the principal, a call on the intercom from the office. An activity
may indeed turn out well, but also rather differently than you
intended; you, therefore, have to decide how, if at all, to adjust the
next day's lesson to allow for this surprise.

   A third reason for the importance of management is that students
form opinions and perceptions about your teaching that are
inconsistent with your own. What you intend as encouragement
for a shy student may seem to the student herself like "forced
participation." An eager, outgoing classmate watching your effort
to encourage the shy student, moreover, may not see you
as either encouraging or coercing, but as overlooking or
ignoring other students who already want to participate. The variety
of perceptions can lead to surprises in students' responses--most
often small ones, but occasionally major.

   At the broadest, society-wide level, classroom management
challenges teachers because public schooling is not voluntary, and
students' presence in a classroom is therefore not a sign, in and
of itself, that they wish to learn. Instead, students' presence is just
a sign that an opportunity exists for teachers to motivate students
to learn. Some students, of course, do enjoy learning and being
in school, almost regardless of what teachers do! Others do enjoy
school, but only because teachers have worked hard to make
classroom life pleasant and interesting. Those students become
motivated because you have successfully created a positive learning
environment and have sustained it through skillful management.

   Fortunately, it is possible to earn this sort of commitment from
many students, and this chapter describes ways of doing so. We
begin with ways of preventing management problems from
happening by increasing students' focus on learning. The methods
include ideas about arranging classroom space, establishing
procedures, routines, and rules, and communicating the importance

                                   Classroom Management and Why It Matters | 1017
of learning to students and parents. After these prevention-oriented
discussions, we look at ways of refocusing students when and if
their minds or actions stray from the tasks at hand. As you probably
know from being a student, bringing students back on task can
happen in many ways, and the ways vary widely in the energy and
persistence required of the teacher. We try to indicate some of
these variations, but because of space limitations and because of the
richness of classroom life, we cannot describe them all.
CC licensed content, Original

   Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van Hoose. Provided by: Hudson
      Valley Community College. Retrieved from:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/chapter/
      classroom-manageu2026d-why-it-matters/. License: CC BY-
      NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Gary D. Borich and
      Martin L. Tombari. License: CC BY: Attribution

CC licensed content, Specific attribution

   Teach Like a Champion Technique 45 - Warm/Strict. Provided
      by: Kaizen Teaching. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/
      wi_zQJik-SA. License: All Rights Reserved

1018 | Classroom Management and Why It Matters
Systems of Classroom

Management

Anyone who reads the newspaper, listens to candidates running
for public office, attends school board meetings, or overhears
conversations in the teachers' lounge, quickly realizes that
classroom order and discipline are frequently discussed topics. A
teacher's inability to control a class is one of the most commonly
cited reasons for dismissal, and beginning teachers consistently
rate classroom discipline among their most urgent concerns (Rogan,
Borich, & Taylor, 1992).

   Problems in maintaining classroom order and discipline can be
exaggerated, however. Major disciplinary problems (for example,
vandalism, violent fighting, and physical abuse toward teachers)
are rare in most schools. Unfortunately, these incidents attract
attention. Often the media report them to the exclusion of the
many positive events that also occur. Below, we will address some
major discipline problems, but the primary focus will be on the
many less dramatic problems that, without an effective classroom
management plan, can divert your attention from the instructional
process.

   Some teachers spend nearly 50 percent of their class time dealing
with misbehavior that might be described as "amiable goofing off"
(Jones, 1987), although these problems are minor. Thus, although
you may worry about how to handle rare incidents of fighting, open
defiance, property destruction, or swearing and cursing, you will
actually spend most of your management time coping with students
who pass notes, whisper, stare out the window, ignore your simple
requests, squirm in their seats, sleep, do work unrelated to your
class, or do no work at all.

   Let's return for a moment to Mrs. Gates's class, where some of
these misbehaviors were occurring. Imagine that on a Wednesday

                                                                            Systems of Classroom
                                                                              Management | 1019
afternoon you get a call from the principal of Mrs. Gates's school
inquiring whether you would accept a teaching job there. It turns
out that Mrs. Gates has resigned and they need a replacement for
Monday morning. You accept the challenge and have four days to
prepare for the class. What will you do?

   Approaches to managing classrooms like Mrs. Gates's can be
grouped into three traditions. The humanistic tradition emphasizes
the critical role of communication and problem solving between
teachers and students. This tradition is represented by the writings
of Ginott (1972) and Glasser (1986, 1990). The applied behavior
analysis tradition is best represented by the writings of O'Leary
and O'Leary (1977), Alberto and Troutman (1986), Jones (1987), and
Canter (1989), who apply behavioristic principles to the classroom.
The third approach, which is the newest, emphasizes the teaching
skills involved in organizing and managing instructional activities
and in presenting content. The major proponents of this classroom
management tradition are Kounin (1970), Brophy and Good (1986),
Emmer, Evertson, Clements, and Worsham (1994), and Doyle (1986).
This approach, more so than the humanistic and applied behavior
analysis traditions, underscores the critical role of prevention in
managing classroom behavior.

   We will briefly summarize the main features of each of these
traditions, point out how they can be used to manage the classroom,
and evaluate each approach. First, let's identify six criteria an
effective classroom management plan should contain. A
comprehensive approach to classroom management should
incorporate classroom strategies that accomplish the following:

   Establish positive relationships between all classroom
      participants. A positive, supportive classroom environment
      that meets student needs for belonging and acceptance is a
      necessary foundation for managing an orderly classroom.

   Prevent attention-seeking and work-avoidance behaviors.
      Time devoted to managing the classroom should be directed to
      engaging students in the learning process and preventing

1020 | Systems of Classroom Management
      behaviors that interfere with it. Engagement and prevention
      include both arrangements of physical space and teaching
      rules and routines for working in this
      space.
   Redirect misbehavior quickly and unobtrusively once it occurs.
      Most classroom problems take the form of minor off-task and
      attention-seeking events. Techniques for coping with these
      events should not cause more disruption than the behavior
      itself.
   Stop persistent and chronic misbehavior with strategies that
      are simple enough to be used consistently. Management
      systems that require responses to every act of positive or
      negative behavior may not be practical in today's busy
      classrooms.
   Teach self-control. Students should be allowed the
      opportunity to exercise internal control before external
      control is imposed. When external controls are imposed, they
      should be implemented with plans for fading them out.
   Respect cultural differences. Verbal and nonverbal techniques
      for redirecting disruptive behavior do not mean the same thing
      to all cultural groups. Likewise, systematic strategies involving
      social rewards, tangible rewards, and consequences can violate
      important cultural norms.

Now let's learn something about each of the three approaches and
analyze how well each meets these criteria.

The Humanist Tradition in Classroom
Management

The principles underlying the humanist tradition come from the
practice of clinical and counseling psychology. It is called humanist
because its primary focus is the inner thoughts, feelings,

                                               Systems of Classroom Management | 1021
psychological needs, and emotions of the individual learner.
Humanist approaches emphasize allowing the student time to
develop control over his or her behavior rather than insisting on
immediate behavioral change or compliance. They use interventions
that stress the use of communication skills, an understanding of
student motives, private conferences, individual and group problem
solving, and the exercise of referent and expert power.

   Ginott's (1972) cooperation through congruent communication
(also called the communication skills approach) and Glasser's (1990)
cooperation through individual and group problem solving (also
called reality therapy) are examples of the humanistic tradition.

   While each emphasizes a different area or set of skills that the
effective classroom manager should possess, these approaches
essentially represent two sides of the same coin.

Cooperation Through Congruent
Communication

The cardinal principle underlying Ginott's communication skills
approach is that learners can control their own behavior if teachers
allow them to do so. Teachers foster this self-control by allowing
learners to choose how they wish to change their own behavior
and how the class will be run. In addition, they help their students
express their inner thoughts and feelings through the use of
effective communication skills.

   Communication skills are the primary vehicle for influencing
learners' self-esteem, which in turn is the primary force underlying
acceptable behavior. Therefore, this tradition tries to influence
student behavior above all by enhancing student self-esteem.
According to the proponents of this approach, congruent
communication is the vehicle for promoting self-esteem. Teachers
have many opportunities during the school day to engage their
students in congruent communication. Such communication

1022 | Systems of Classroom Management
usually occurs during private conferences with students who
misbehave. However, it can also go on during problem-solving with
the whole class. At such times, teachers communicate congruently
when they do any of the following.

   Express "Sane" Messages. Sane messages communicate to
students that their behavior is unacceptable but do not blame,
scold, preach, accuse, demand, threaten, or humiliate. Sane
messages describe what should be done rather than scold what was
done. Example: "Rosalyn, we are all supposed to be in our seats
before the bell rings," not "Rosalyn, you're always gossiping at the
doorway and coming late to class."

   Accept Rather than Deny Feelings. Teachers should accept
students' feelings about their individual circumstances rather than
argue about them. If a student complains, "I have no friends," the
teacher should accept the student's feelings of isolation, identify
with the student, and say, for example, "So, you're feeling that you
don't belong to any group" rather than try to convince the student
that he or she has misperceived the social situation.

   Avoid Using Labels. When talking to students about what they do
well or poorly, teachers should avoid terms such as "lazy," "sloppy,"
or "bad attitude," as well as "dedicated," "intelligent," or
"perfectionist." Instead, teachers should describe what they like or
don't like about students in terms of what they do. For example,
"You have a lot of erasures and whiteouts on your homework," not
"Your homework is sloppy"; "You form your letters correctly," not
"You are a good writer."

   Use Praise Cautiously. Ginott believes that many teachers use
praise excessively and manipulatively to control student behavior
rather than to acknowledge exceptional performance. They use
praise judgmentally ("Horace, you are a good student"), confuse
correctness with goodness (referring to a student who completes
work with a minimum of mistakes as a "good child"), and praise
students who display minimally acceptable behavior as a way of
influencing other students ("I like the way Joan is sitting in her
seat"), and praise so often that the statements lose all significance.

                                              Systems of Classroom Management | 1023
Ginott urges teachers to use praise only to acknowledge exceptional
performance and in terms that separate the deed from the doer. For
example, "That essay showed a great deal of original thought and
research."

   Elicit Cooperation. Once a teacher and student have identified
behavioral concerns, Ginott encourages teachers to offer
alternatives to solving the problem rather than tell students what
to do. "Cooperate, don't legislate" is a convenient maxim to help
teachers remember this point.

   Communicate Anger. Teachers are people, too. They get
frustrated and angry just like anyone else. Ginott believes that
teachers should express their feelings through the use of "I
messages" rather than "You messages." The former focus on your
feelings about the behavior or situation that angered you ("You
talked when the guest speaker was lecturing, and I feel very
unhappy and embarrassed by that"). The latter put the focus on the
students and typically accuse and blame them ("You were rude to
the guest speaker"). "I messages" should be used when you own the
problem--that is, when you are the one who is angry or upset.

   If you were to consult Ginott about what to do Monday morning
in Mrs. Gates's class, he would recommend that you have an open
discussion with the students to draw their attention to the problem.
Then, you would invite your students' cooperation in developing
mutually agreed-upon rules and consequences. Finally, as problems
arise you would have individual conferences with your students,
during which you would engage them in congruent communication.

Cooperative Learning

Glasser points out that effective classroom managers create a
learning environment where students want to be, develop mutually
agreed-upon standards of behavior that must be followed if they

1024 | Systems of Classroom Management
want to remain in this environment, and conduct problem-solving
conferences with those who violate the standards.

   Glasser advocates an instructional approach called cooperative
learning as a way to make the classroom a place learners want to
be. According to Glasser, classrooms that emphasize cooperative
learning motivate all children to engage in learning activities.
Whole-group instruction, in which students compete with one
another for limited rewards, inevitably causes 50 percent of the
students to be bored, frustrated, inattentive, or disruptive.

   In the face of such behavior, Glasser asserts, teachers resort to
"boss management." That is, they use reward and coercive power
to manipulate and control their learners. Boss management (as
opposed to lead management) jeopardizes the development of self-
control, persuades students to value external rewards over the
satisfaction that comes from doing good work, and, when such
rewards fail to come, causes students to become disruptive,
frustrated, and inattentive. Glasser (1990) summarizes the
difference between bosses and leaders in the following way:

   A boss drives. A leader leads.
   A boss relies on authority. A leader relies on cooperation.
   A boss says "I." A leader says "We."
   A boss creates fear. A leader creates confidence.
   A boss knows how. A leader shows how.
   A boss creates resentment. A leader breeds enthusiasm.
   A boss fixes blame. A leader fixes mistakes.
   A boss makes work drudgery. A leader makes work interesting.

For Glasser, dealing with disruptive students is straightforward in
a classroom where students experience belonging, power, and
freedom--in other words, a classroom the learner would regret
leaving. Faced with a student who persists in violating classroom
rules the group believes are essential, the teacher should hold a
brief private conference with the student during which the teacher
reviews the rules, describes the disruptive behavior, asserts the

                                              Systems of Classroom Management | 1025
need for following the rules, and makes clear the consequences for
not obeying the rules (for example, removal from the room until
the learner chooses to follow the rules). Glasser cautions teachers
not to accept excuses from students why they can't control their
own behavior. He disagrees with teachers who use socioeconomic
or sociocultural conditions as excuses for learners not making the
"right" choices. For Glasser, there can be no excuse for disrupting an
environment designed to meet learners' needs. Furthermore, when
students are faced with removal from such an environment, Glasser
believes they will choose, not need to be forced, to behave:

       ...students will soon discover that you have given them every
       chance. If they want to stay in class, they have no choice but
       to follow the rules, at least until you talk things over. And if
       your students are satisfied most of the time, they'll want to
       stay (Glasser, 1990, p. 142).

Glasser would have a clear directive for you on Monday morning
as you take over Mrs. Gates's class: Begin building a more friendly
workplace based on principles of cooperative learning. Some of his
more specific recommendations would be the following:

   With your students, develop rules for the workplace.
   Get support from school administrators for setting aside an

      area to which disruptive students can be removed.
   Hold private conferences with disruptive students; stress the

      importance of correct choices and accept no excuses for
      wrong ones.
   Follow through when students must be removed, but always
      allow them the opportunity to return when they choose to
      obey class rules.

1026 | Systems of Classroom Management
Applied Behavior Analysis in Classroom
Management

Applied behavior analysis is closely linked with B. F. Skinner's (1953)
theory of learning, called behaviorism or operant conditioning,
which we introduced in the earlier section on Behaviorism. The
techniques underlying the practice of behavior modification derive
from behaviorism. The use of behavior modification techniques to
change the behavior of animals has been called the experimental
analysis of behavior. The use of these same techniques to change
the socially important behaviors of learners, workers, or the public
at large (for example, to encourage conservation and protection of
the environment) is called applied behavior analysis (Lovitt, 1994).

   So what is applied behavior analysis all about? Simply, we have to
first undergo an analysis of the behavior in question to understand
a few key pieces of information. We call these the ABCs of behavior
and they include:

   Antecedents. These are the environmental events or stimuli that
trigger a behavior. If your significant other does something nice for
you and you say, `Thank you,' the kind act is the antecedent.

   Behaviors. Again, this is what the person does, says, thinks/feels.
In the previous example, you say, `Thank you,' is the behavior or
what you said. The behavior may be something we want to increase,
and so is classified as a behavioral deficit, or something we need
to decrease, and is a behavioral excess. As we will discuss later,
we will have desirable and undesirable behaviors we engage in. The
undesirable behaviors serve as temptations and distract us from our
end goal.

   Consequence. You might say a consequence is the outcome of a
behavior that either encourages it to be made again in the future
or discourages its future occurrence. If we always engage in a
particular behavior when a specific stimulus is present, then there
must be some favorable outcome that follows the behavior, thereby
reinforcing its occurrence and making it highly likely that the

                                               Systems of Classroom Management | 1027
behavior will occur the next time the antecedent is present. Hence
why we
say that the antecedent is a trigger for the behavior.

      Figure 9.2.1. The ABC model summarizes the most important
                  components of applied behavior analysis.

   Let's say that whenever Steve's friend, John, is present he
misbehaves in class by talking out of turn, getting out of his seat,
and failing to complete his work. John laughs along with him and
tells stories about how fun Steve is to the other kids in the 6th
grade class. John is the Antecedent for the unruly Behavior, and
the approval from Steve's peers is the Consequence. Now consider
for a minute that Steve is likely getting in trouble at both school
and home, also a consequence, but continues making this behavior.
We might say that the positive reinforcers delivered by John and
his peers are stronger or more motivational for Steve than the
punishment delivered by parents and teachers.

   In this case, the school and parents will want to change Steve's
behavior in class as it is directly impacting his grades but also the
orderliness of the classroom for the teacher. In making this plan, all
parties involved will want to keep a few basic principles in mind:

   The behavior will need to be measured both before and after
      any treatment is implemented.

1028 | Systems of Classroom Management
   Whatever treatment is decided upon by the applied behavior
      analysist, everyday people in the child's life will have to
      implement it. Why? The therapist cannot be present 24/7 but
      parents and other caregivers, teachers, administrators,
      babysitters, etc. will be. In fact, none of these people are
      present 24/7 and so it will take a coordinated effort of several
      stakeholders to bring about behavior change. It really does
      take a village to raise a child, or in this case to help change/
      establish a behavior.

   The behavior to be changed must be defined precisely.
   Controlling variables, or the events in Steve's environment that

      are related to the behavior in a functional way, need to be
      considered. If these four principles are addressed, then a
      sound treatment plan can be developed and implemented to
      bring about positive change in Steve's behavior.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=135#oembed-1

Video 9.2.1. Antecedent Behavior Consequence: ABC Charts &
Model explains the process used in behavioral analysis.

Changing Behavior

The applied behavior analysis approach, as it is used in schools,
focuses on changing behaviors that are important for cognitive and
social development. These behaviors are actions that can be seen,
heard, or counted. Attitudes, values, beliefs, feelings, emotions, or

                                              Systems of Classroom Management | 1029
self-images, all important aspects of a learner's school life, are not
behaviors. Consequently, they are not the focus of applied behavior
analysis.

   If ever you are unsure whether something is a "behavior," put it
to the "Hey, Dad! Watch me..." test. For example, "Hey, Dad! Watch
me ride a bike" (or "do a handstand," or "solve this problem") would
pass the test, since Dad can see you do it with his own eyes. But,
substitute "Hey, Dad! Watch me feel good about myself" (or "have a
positive attitude toward
school," or "be motivated," or "have an interest in science"). These
expressions fail the test since they do not describe behaviors that
Dad can observe directly.

Antecedents

Antecedents are events (or stimuli) that, when present, increase
the likelihood that a particular behavior will occur. For example,
seeing the teacher seated at her desk talking to a student may
be an antecedent for a student in the back of the room to fool
around with the person sitting next to her. Similarly, an antecedent
to misbehavior in a class might be the teacher turning his back to
write on the chalkboard. To give a positive example, turning on the
overhead projector may be an antecedent for some students to take
out their notebooks and start copying without the teacher needing
to ask them. Posting rules for all to see and reminding learners of
these rules before a lesson can be an antecedent for some students
to engage in learning-related behaviors.

   Antecedents are an important aspect of classroom conduct
management because their presence or absence often makes the
difference in whether students engage in appropriate learning and
social behaviors. Antecedents acquire this ability to control behavior
by their repeated association with the rewards or consequences
that typically follow behavior. For example, seeing the teacher with

1030 | Systems of Classroom Management
her back to the class is an antecedent for certain types of disruptive
behavior because, in the past, whenever the teacher turned her
back and students misbehaved they were rewarded with attention
from peers (positive reinforcement) or by avoiding work (negative
reinforcement).

   Similarly, teachers often want students to raise their hands and
wait to be called on (behavior) following a question (antecedent). To
develop this association between question-asking and hand raising,
teachers explain and model the behaviors they expect, praise
students who respond appropriately, and call on students who raise
their hands. They ignore students who call out answers without
first raising their hands. If teachers use this important procedure
consistently, children learn that following a question, they must
raise a hand if they are to get recognized by the teacher.

   Here are some antecedents to appropriate and inappropriate
behavior often observed in classrooms:

   Seating arrangement. Whenever Mike sits near Jamal he is
      likely to talk and not complete work; sitting near the window
      or door is an antecedent to not paying attention, but sitting
      near the teacher is an antecedent to getting work done.

   Teacher proximity. The farther a teacher is from students, the
      more likely they are to engage in off-task behaviors; students
      are more likely to listen and participate in the lesson when the
      teacher faces them; during independent seatwork activities,
      students work best when the teacher walks around the room
      and monitors their work.

   Style of asking questions. Students are more likely to pay
      attention when the teacher asks a question, pauses, looks at
      the entire class, and then calls on someone.

   Activity transitions. Students are more likely to engage in
      disruptive behavior during transitions from one activity to
      another.

   Nature of the activity. Students pay attention during whole
      group activities and discussions but disrupt during individual

                                               Systems of Classroom Management | 1031
      seatwork (or vice versa).
   Person leading the lesson. Students pay attention when the

      teacher leads the lesson but misbehave for substitute teachers
      and student teachers.
   Teacher's manner to students. Students typically talk back to
      the teacher after she has harshly criticized a response, made
      fun of a student, or unjustly accused a student of misbehavior.

These and other antecedents to good and bad behavior are
important to you as a teacher because they suggest low-profile,
non-intrusive ways of preventing the behavior. For example, rather
than interrupt your lesson to stop the misbehavior of two students
who are sitting near each other, you can change their seats
beforehand. Similarly, walking around the room to prevent
misbehavior is preferable to constantly calling out the names of
students who misbehave while you are seated at your desk doing
paperwork.

Consequences

When your goal is to teach a new behavior, or make an existing
behavior occur more frequently (for example, spell more words
correctly, come to class on time more often), the behavior must be
followed by some type of reinforcement during the initial stages of
learning.

   Recall that reinforcement can be either positive or negative.
Positive reinforcement occurs when a teacher provides pleasant
or satisfying consequences after the desired behavior and these
consequences increase the likelihood that this behavior will occur
again. Negative reinforcement occurs when a teacher ends or
terminates some condition that a child perceives as threatening,
fearful, or uncomfortable, after the child has engaged in some

1032 | Systems of Classroom Management
positive behavior. This increases the likelihood that the positive
behavior will occur again.

   Negative Reinforcement. Thorndike gave us one of the earliest
demonstrations of the power of negative reinforcement when he
used it to teach a cat how to escape a puzzle box. He placed the cat
in an enclosed box, a situation that most cats find uncomfortable.
To get out of the box, the cat had to pull a cord hanging from the
top of the box. As soon as the cat pulled the cord, a door opened and
the cat escaped. The next time Thorndike placed the cat in the same
box, the animal pulled the cord more quickly. It had learned a useful
behavior that helped it escape an unpleasant situation--an example
of negative reinforcement.

   While teachers plan ways to use positive reinforcement to teach
children useful behaviors, they rarely arrange situations to use
negative reinforcement for this purpose. This is because the use
of negative reinforcement first requires that the child be put in an
unpleasant situation and then taught how to get out of it. Such an
approach is contrary to recommendations made by both applied
behavior analysts and school personnel that teachers give
preference to positive (nonaversive) techniques for improving the
conduct of their learners (Donnellan & LaVigna, 1990).

   However, teachers must be aware of the principle of negative
reinforcement in their classrooms because many of them are
inadvertently using it to reinforce inappropriate behaviors. For
example, consider the common situation in which a learner
experiences something in the classroom that he wants to escape
or avoid: difficult work, dull workbook exercises, or a teacher he
perceives as punitive and unfair. Such a learner may complain,
refuse to do work, change his seat without permission, fall asleep,
or disrupt the class to delay or escape the unpleasant event. If the
teacher changes the learner's assignment when he complains, or
puts him in the hallway when he is disruptive, that is negatively
reinforcing the learner's behavior and thus increasing the likelihood
that it will recur.

   As this example illustrates, teachers can easily fall into the

                                              Systems of Classroom Management | 1033
"negative reinforcement trap" that some learners unconsciously set.
In fact, applied behavior analysts like Brian Iwata (1987) speculate
that more inappropriate behavior is learned through negative than
through positive reinforcement. In other words, students are more
likely to avoid or escape something undesirable than to be rewarded
with attention for doing something appropriate.

   Intermittent Reinforcement. When you are satisfied with a
particular behavior and its frequency, intermittent reinforcement
can be applied to maintain the behavior at its present level. For
example, suppose that at the start of the school year, a student
consistently came late and unprepared. You started a program to
reinforce this student for coming to class prepared and on time. The
student now has met the goal. You can maintain this behavior by
reinforcing the student's behavior on an intermittent schedule (for
example, every fourth day), as we discussed in the earlier section on
Behaviorism.

Using Applied Behavior Analysis to Improve
Classroom Behavior

Applied behavior analysts recommend the following strategies for
improving the classroom behavior of your learners:

   1. Identify precisely both the inappropriate behavior you wish to
change and the appropriate behavior you want to take its place. As
we emphasized above, applied behavior analysis requires observable
definitions of classroom problems and goals. Be sure to state
positively the alternative behavior in which you want the student
or students to engage. For example, if students are looking out
the window or talking with one another during seatwork, the
appropriate statement would be "Complete your assignments," not
"No talking or whispering or staring out the window." This last
statement violates the so-called Dead Person's Rule: If the behavior
can be performed better by a dead person, it is not an appropriately

1034 | Systems of Classroom Management
stated goal. Negatively stated goals ("No talking," "No getting out
of your seat," "No calling out") should be restated positively: "Take
notes while the teacher is speaking," "Complete seatwork," "Raise
your hand and wait to be called on," and "Look at me when I am
talking to you."

   2. Identify the antecedents to both inappropriate and appropriate
behavior and make the necessary changes. The following are
examples of changes in classroom antecedents that can accomplish
the goals above: changing seating arrangements to bring you closer
to the students, eliminating certain distractions (what's going on
outside the classroom), or to separate students who misbehave;
using an overhead projector so that your back is never turned to the
class; walking around the room and monitoring students whenever
you assign seatwork; reviewing rules at the start of class to remind
students of expected behavior; preparing students for activity
transitions so that they go smoothly; giving students warm-up
activities to eliminate dead time at the start of a class; commenting
on student responses in an encouraging manner.

   3. Identify the goal of the inappropriate behavior and discontinue
actions on your part (or those of peers) that reinforce it. Students
typically misbehave with two goals in mind: (1) to gain positive
reinforcement from you or their peers or (2) to escape or delay
classroom situations that they find unpleasant, undesirable, or
boring. One strategy for dealing with misbehavior is to ensure that
the student is not positively reinforced for misbehavior. This
typically involves such teacher actions as ignoring misbehavior
whose purpose is to gain attention (a response sometimes called
extinction), seeing to it that peers don't attend to misbehavior, and
not giving students preferred activities when they misbehave to get
them. When the goal of misbehavior is to escape or avoid classroom
activities and responsibilities, the general strategy is for you to be
careful not to let this happen. Be sure students are held accountable
for work they don't complete; follow through on assignments rather
than forgetting about them in the face of noncompliance; do not
shorten assignments in response to student complaints.

                                              Systems of Classroom Management | 1035
   4. Set up procedures to reinforce the behavior you want to replace
the inappropriate behavior. In addition to changing antecedents
and avoiding reinforcing inappropriate behavior, applied behavior
analysts recommend that you set up procedures to systematically
reinforce the appropriate behavior you want students to
demonstrate. When choosing reinforcement procedures to teach
appropriate classroom behavior, use reinforcers that are natural
to the school setting, such as extra time to do homework, lunch
with the principal or favorite teacher, extra recess, playing an
educational game, time to use the library for pleasure reading, or
access to computers. Such reinforcers, called natural reinforcers,
are readily available in schools at almost no cost. Consequently,
you will use them more consistently than reinforcers that must be
purchased and brought into the school setting. The accompanying
box, Using Natural Reinforcers, provides additional suggestions.

   5. Use punishment as a last resort. Most behavior problems can
be dealt with without punishment (Donnellan & LaVigna, 1990). For
some learners, however, more restrictive strategies may be
required. Thus, if you have tried the strategies above and still not
been able to change learner behavior for the better, you might,
under appropriate guidance and supervision from a school
psychologist or counselor, consider the following strategies for
reducing inappropriate behavior, together with the positive
strategies described above:

   Removal from the classroom setting: Remove the student to a
      setting where he or she cannot gain access to positive
      reinforcement (a "time out"). Time-outs should be used only
      when the goal of the misbehavior is positive reinforcement
      (e.g., attention), not when the goal of the behavior is to escape
      the lesson or class. It should be used for a brief period of time
      (10 to 30 minutes). Following the end of the time-out period,
      the student should be returned to the classroom and expected
      to engage in the classroom activities that are going on at that
      time. If a particular student's misbehavior is motivated to

1036 | Systems of Classroom Management
      escape the classroom and becomes so disruptive that he must
      be removed, make sure he completes work missed during the
      time-out period.
   Loss of privileges: Denying a student a desired activity because
      he has misbehaved can be effective in reducing misbehavior;
      for example, missing part of recess, coming in early from
      lunch, staying a few extra minutes after school, and so forth.
   Restitution: This strategy involves the student performing such
      activities as repairing things that were broken, cleaning objects
      that were soiled or disfigured, paying for things that were
      stolen, or apologizing to others for behaving inappropriately
      toward them.
   Positive practice: Have students write essays in which they
      explain their misbehavior, why it was not a good choice of
      actions, what they should do instead, and why this would be
      useful to them; or have students practice the appropriate
      behavior they should have performed.

If you were to invite an applied behavior analyst to help you with
Mrs. Gates's classroom, she would first take a "wait-and-see
approach," assuming that much of the misbehavior was elicited by
actions on Mrs. Gates's part that serve as antecedents. Since the
students will meet a new teacher on Monday, some of their behavior
may change. The behavior analyst would wait to see which
disruptive behaviors emerge, analyze the antecedents for these
behaviors, decide what is reinforcing them, and then develop an
intervention that uses punishment only as a last resort.

                                               Systems of Classroom Management | 1037
     PRINCIPLES OF BEHAVIOR ANALYSIS
   AND MODIFICATION

             For a more detailed review of behavior analysis and
                            modification, the OER book

        Principles of Behavior Analysis and Modification provides
                                  more information.

The Classroom Management Tradition

Throughout much of the latter half of this century, classroom
discipline was focused on the question of how best to respond to
student misbehavior. The humanistic and applied behavior analysis
approaches to classroom management shared the spotlight during
this period.

   As we have seen from the previous sections, both of these
traditions are primarily reactive rather than preventative systems of
classroom management. That is, they tend to emphasize solutions
to misbehavior after it occurs, rather than before. The 1970s and
1980s, however, provided another approach to classroom
management that framed the question of classroom control and
warmth not in terms of reaction but in terms of prevention. This
approach was based on classroom research that examined what
effective teachers do to prevent misconduct and what less effective
teachers do to create it.

   The research basis for this tradition began with projects carried
out by Kounin (1970), by the Research and Development Center for
Teacher Education at the University of Texas at Austin (Emmer et
al., 1994), and by the Institute for Research on Teaching at Michigan

1038 | Systems of Classroom Management
State University (Brophy, 1986, 1988). Some of this research involved
the observation and analysis of both experienced and inexperienced
teachers while they taught. The major conclusion was that the
distinction between more and less effective classroom managers
can be made more by what they do to prevent misbehavior than
by how they respond to it. In this section, we will explain how
the researchers came to this conclusion and the characteristics of
effective classroom managers they found. First, let's look at one
study of classroom management and how it was conducted.

   In a study by Emmer, Evertson, and Anderson (1980), 27 third-
grade teachers in eight elementary schools were recruited for a
year-long observation. Based on their average rates of student
engagement and student off-task behavior (measured after the first
three weeks of school), the teachers were classified into two groups:
more effective managers and less effective managers. The teachers
who were categorized as effective classroom managers had
significantly higher student engagement rates (more students
actively engaged in the goals of the lesson) and significantly lower
student off-task behaviors (fewer reprimands and warnings)
throughout the school year. Finally, observation data pertaining to
the classroom management procedures of these teachers during
the first three weeks of school were used to compare the two
groups. These included data on room arrangement, classroom rules,
consequences of misbehavior, responses to inappropriate behavior,
consistency of teacher responses, monitoring, and reward systems.
In addition, observers counted the number of students who were
on-task or off-task at 15-minute intervals to determine the extent
to which students were attending to the teacher.

   The more effective managers established themselves as
instructional leaders early in the school year. They worked on rules
and procedures until students had fully learned them. Instructional
content was important for these teachers, but they also emphasized
group cohesiveness and socialization into a common set of
classroom norms. By the end of the first three weeks, their classes
were ready for the rest of the year.

                                              Systems of Classroom Management | 1039
   In contrast to the more effective managers, the less effective
managers did not have well-worked-out procedures in advance.
This was most evident among the first-year teachers who were
being observed. For example, the researchers described one new
teacher who had no procedures for using the bathroom, pencil
sharpener, or water fountain. As a result, the children came and
went at will, complicating the teacher's instructional tasks.

   Like the better managers, most of the poorer managers had rules,
but they presented the rules and followed up on them differently. In
some cases, the rules were vague: "Be in the right place at the right
time." In other cases, they were introduced casually and without
discussion, leaving it unclear to most children when and where a
rule applied.

   The less effective managers were also ineffective monitors of
their classes. This was caused in part by the lack of efficient routines
for activities. In other cases, this was the result of teachers
removing themselves from the active surveillance of the whole class
to work at length with a single child. A major result of the
combination of vague and untaught rules and poor procedures for
monitoring and establishing routines was that students were
frequently left without sufficient guidance to direct their own
activities.

   One further characteristic of the less effective managers was that
the consequences of good behavior and inappropriate behavior
were either not in evidence in those classrooms or not delivered in
a timely manner. For example, teachers sometimes issued general
criticisms that failed to identify a specific offender or a particular
event. Some of these teachers frequently threatened or warned
children but did not follow through, even after several warnings.
This allowed children to push the teacher to the limits, causing
more problems. Other teachers issued vague disciplinary messages
("You're being too noisy") that were not sufficiently focused to
capture the attention of the children for whom they were intended.

   It was easy to see how deficiencies in the areas of rules, the
establishment of routines, monitoring, and a praise-and-reward

1040 | Systems of Classroom Management
structure negatively affected the overall management and
organization of the classroom. Most of the time these deficiencies
became "windows of opportunity" that prompted a wider range
of pupil misconduct, off-task behavior, and disengagement from
the goals of the classroom. After only a few weeks had elapsed,
undesirable patterns of behavior and low teacher credibility had
become established in the less effective managers' classrooms.

   From this and related studies of classroom management
(Evertson, Emmer, Clements, & Worsham, 1994; Evertson & Emmer,
1982), we learn that effective classroom managers possess three
broad classes of effective teaching behaviors:

    They devote extensive time before and during the first few
      weeks of school to planning and organizing their classrooms to
      minimize disruption and enhance work engagement.

    They approach the teaching of rules and routines as
      methodically as they approach teaching their subject areas.
      They provide students with clear instructions about acceptable
      behavior, and they monitor student compliance with these
      instructions carefully during the first few weeks of school.

    They inform students about the consequences of breaking
      rules and enforce these consequences consistently.

How would this tradition analyze Mrs. Gates's class? Recall that this
tradition has a lot to say about ways to prevent behavior problems
but offers few immediate, short-term solutions after a problem
has occurred. In other words, it offers no quick fixes, since it
emphasizes planning in anticipation of such problems, not their
resolution afterward. A comprehensive plan incorporating elements
of all three traditions is needed to make Mrs. Gates's classroom
a positive environment for learning. We will present such a
perspective in the next section.

An Integrated Approach to Classroom

                                               Systems of Classroom Management | 1041
Management

As we have seen, all three approaches have both advantages and
limitations. Each approach has made significant contributions,
effective classroom managers blend together the best parts of
different approaches (Doyle, 1986; Emmer et al., 1980; Evertson &
Emmer, 1982). We now turn to an integration of all three traditions
of classroom management.

Setting Up the Classroom Workplace

During the first week of school, do you want your students to do
more listening or more talking? Do you want them to be calm and
quiet or excited and talkative? Do you want them to focus on your
questions or listen to your answers? Do you want to promote talking
or listening, independent or cooperative work, self-study or group
problem solving? The way you arrange your classroom--align
furniture, place partitions, decorate walls and bulletin boards, and
"soften" the environment--will have as much to do with achieving
these goals as the rules and routines you create to establish a
classroom management plan.

   Psychologists use the term behavioral setting to refer to the way
in which particular environments elicit specific behaviors. You will
have numerous choices to make about how to arrange your
classroom--your behavioral setting. Each choice will encourage
certain student behaviors and discourage others. The first step in
designing your behavioral setting is to identify what you want your
students to do when they are in it. Your behavioral and instructional
goals for students will vary from day to day and from month to
month as you identify learner needs and provide the necessary
learning experiences to meet them. As your goals vary, so must the
behavioral setting you arrange to bring about these goals.

1042 | Systems of Classroom Management
                Figure 9.2.2. Classroom seating arrangements.
   As a rule, you will want to match your behavioral goals with
your behavioral setting. Thus, the room arrangement you choose is
important in communicating to your students the kind of behaviors
you are trying to elicit. We will discuss this more in Preventing
Management Problems.
   The arrangement of space also tends to dictate patterns of
student involvement. For example, a more traditional arrangement
encourages speaking in sequential order, one-on-one involvement
with the teacher, and individual seatwork (Phillips, 1983). Some
arrangements may also limit the teacher's interaction with

                                              Systems of Classroom Management | 1043
individual students, who then must respond in front of the entire
group (Erickson & Mohatt, 1982).

   If the internal features of your classroom turn from a traditionally
formal arrangement to this less formal one, so too will the social
climate of the classroom. Grouping arrangements suggest that
interpersonal communication and sharing are permitted, then they
undoubtedly will occur. And, sometimes more than one classroom
arrangement can exist simultaneously, as when both the acquisition
of knowledge and cooperation and sharing may be your goals.

   Classroom arrangements should be responsive to both
instructional goals and classroom culture expectations. However,
keep in mind that whichever arrangement that you select,
differences in ability, personality, or culture, some students may be
less responsive to some classroom arrangements than to others.

Rules for Running the Workplace

Just as no one behavioral setting is best for all students and every
teacher, there is no one best set of rules to direct your students'
behavior. When you develop rules you are making a personal
statement about the type of atmosphere you want to promote in
your behavioral setting.

   If you want to establish an orderly, businesslike, task-oriented
climate, rules such as "Speak and leave your seat only when
recognized" are appropriate. But such rules are inappropriate if you
want a classroom where students are expected to discuss, obtain
resources in different parts of the room, problem solve, and
cooperate with one another.

   Here are several general suggestions for developing classroom
rules:

   Make your rules consistent with the classroom climate you

1044 | Systems of Classroom Management
      seek to promote. The beginning of your teaching career is the
      time to recognize your own values and preferences for
      managing your classroom. Articulate your personal philosophy
      of classroom management and have your classroom rules
      reflect it.
   Don't establish rules that can't be enforced. A rule that says
      "No talking or getting out of your seat" may be difficult to
      enforce when your personal philosophy encourages
      independent thinking, problem-solving, and group work.
      Unfairness and inconsistency may result in your applying rules
      you do not fully believe in.
   Set only necessary rules. There are four reasons to have rules,
      and each should reflect at least one of these purposes:
      Enhance work engagement and minimize disruption Promote
      safety and security Prevent disturbance to other students or
      other classroom activities Promote acceptable standards of
      courtesy and interpersonal relations.
   Make your rules general enough to include a range of specific
      behaviors. The rule "Respect other people's property and
      person" covers a variety of problems, such as stealing,
      borrowing without permission, and throwing things. Similarly,
      the rule "Follow the teacher's requests immediately" allows you
      to put an end to a variety of off-task, disruptive behaviors that
      no list of rules could anticipate or cover. Similarly, be careful
      not to state a rule so generally that the specific problems to
      which it pertains remain unclear to your learners. For example,
      a rule that states simply "Show respect" or "Obey the teacher"
      may be sufficiently vague as to be ignored by most of your
      learners and to thus be unenforceable by you.

Engaging Students in the Learning Process

Classrooms are busy places. Materials have to be checked in and

                                              Systems of Classroom Management | 1045
out, activities begun and ended, learners moved through their
lessons, and assignments given, completed, and evaluated. Groups
are formed, arranged, and rearranged. In the midst of these
activities, students need things, forget things, borrow things. They
get thirsty, hungry, tired, and sick. They have to use the bathroom.

   This complexity requires systematic routines. A routine is a set of
rules organized around a particular time (for example, beginning of
the day), context (for example, group work), or place (for example,
library, learning center, or playground) that helps guide your
learners through the day. The key to keeping your learners engaged
and you in control of this complexity is effective teaching of the
routines that keep your classroom productive and efficient.

   The amount of time learners spend thinking about, acting on,
or working on a learning task is referred to as engaged learning
time (Savage, 1991). Engaged learning time is different from the
amount of time you may have planned for teaching a particular
lesson or activity. For example, you may have allocated 35 minutes
for a particular activity, but your students may spend only 15
minutes of that time actively engaged in the learning task. What
happened to the other 20 minutes? Most likely they were used up
passing out materials, making announcements, giving directions,
dealing with student requests to leave the room or to borrow
materials, cleaning up, and handling discipline problems. In the
studies of effective classroom managers we cited earlier, the
teachers who were most successful at maximizing engaged learning
time were those who taught routines to their students during the
first few weeks of school (Emmer et al., 1994). There is also a
significant relationship between engaged learning time and
achievement, providing perhaps the most persuasive argument for
using well-established routines.

   With each routine comes a set of procedures or informal rules
pertaining to specific areas of concern. For example, your
"beginning class routine" may include what your students should
be doing while you are taking attendance (sit still without talking,
check over homework or last assignment, read silently from text, for

1046 | Systems of Classroom Management
instance). It can also include how a student should enter the room
after the bell has rung (for example, come to you, go directly to
his or her seat, or go see the counselor) and how handouts, tests,
and assignments are to be dispensed (for example, first in each
row passes them to those behind, student helpers come to your
desk, each helps himself or herself from stacks conveniently placed
in the front and back of the room). The procedures you establish
under each routine will depend on your own circumstances and
instructional style.

There are five elements to effectively teaching classroom routines
(EIS, 2022):

   1. Define the behavioral expectations for each routine. The
expectations should be developmentally appropriate, culturally
responsive, positively stated, specific, and observable.
2. Explicitly teach the routine to students and review it often.
3. Practice the routines.
4. Provide positive reinforcement to students when they effectively
demonstrate the routines using praise or rewards.
5. Provide visual prompts of the classroom routines, keeping each
routine to the fewest steps possible.

Teaching a routine takes time and energy, but routines established
in advance of your first day of teaching will also save you time later
and give your students a sense of organization and order. Routines
allow you more time to teach and more time for your learners to
become engaged in the learning process, since the routines will
enhance the speed and efficiency with which things get done.
Routines are especially effective with time-consuming
noninstructional activities, which can sometimes take up to 50
percent of the time you initially allocate to a particular topic or
lesson (Jones & Jones, 1990). Think for a moment about the time that
might have been saved in Mrs. Gates's class, had she had a routine
for the beginning of class. Routines should be taught with as much
planning and thoroughness as your learning objectives, and then

                                               Systems of Classroom Management | 1047
followed up by monitoring their effectiveness (Jones & Jones, 1990;
Pasch, SparksLanger, Gardner, Starko, & Moody, 1991).

Maintaining Work Engagement

A concern for trusting relationships and a behavioral setting suited
to the goals of your instruction, together with a carefully crafted set
of rules and routines, will get you off on the right foot during the
first weeks of school. Some students, however, may choose not to
follow your rules and routines. They may be disinterested in school,
lack the skills to profit from the lesson, or simply want to escape
from the classroom. Some of these disruptions will be minor, last
for only a short time, and resolve themselves. But others will persist.
If they do, it is important that you respond in ways that promote a
positive learning climate.

Low-Profile Classroom Management

Rinne (1984) has used the expression low-profile classroom control
to refer to coping strategies used by effective teachers to stop
misbehavior without disrupting the flow of a lesson. These
techniques are effective for surface behaviors (Levin & Nolan, 1991),
minor disruptions that represent the majority of disruptive
classroom actions. Examples of surface behaviors are laughing,
talking out of turn, passing notes, daydreaming, not following
directions, combing hair, doodling, humming, and tapping. These
are the normal developmental behaviors that children do when
confined to a small space with large numbers of other children.
They are not indicative of underlying emotional disorders or
personality problems. However, they can disrupt the flow of a lesson
and the work engagement of others if left unchecked.

1048 | Systems of Classroom Management
   Low-profile classroom control consists of a set of techniques that
requires anticipation by the teacher to prevent problems before
they occur; deflection to redirect disruptive behavior that is about
to occur; and reaction to stop disruptions immediately after they
occur. Let's look at each. We also list some of the most time-
honored of these techniques in the accompanying box, Employing
Low-Profile Classroom Control.

   Anticipation. Alert teachers have their antennae up to sense
changes in student motivation, attentiveness, arousal levels, or
excitability as these changes happen or even as they are about to
happen. They are aware that at certain times of the year (before and
after holidays), week (just before a major social event), or day (right
after an assembly or physical education class), the class will be less
ready for work than usual. Skilled classroom managers are alert not
only to changes in the group's motivational or attention level but
also to changes in specific individuals that may be noticed as soon
as they enter class.

   At these times anticipation involves visually scanning back and
forth to quickly size up the seriousness of a potential problem and
head it off before it emerges or becomes a bigger problem. For
example, you may decide to pick up the pace of the class to counter
a perceived lethargy after a three-day weekend, or remove
magazines or other objects that may distract attention before a long
holiday. Anticipation involves not only knowing what to look for but
where and when to look for it. It also involves having a technique
ready, no matter how small, for changing the environment quickly
and without notice to your students to prevent the problem from
occurring or escalating.

   Deflection. As noted, good classroom managers sense when
disruption is about to occur. They are attuned to verbal and
nonverbal cues that in the past have preceded disruptive behavior.
For instance, a student may glance at a friend, close his textbook
abruptly, sit idly, squirm, ask to be excused, sigh with frustration,
or grimace. Although not disruptive by themselves, these behaviors
may signal that other, more disruptive behavior is about to follow.

                                              Systems of Classroom Management | 1049
Some teachers can deflect these behaviors by simply moving nearer
to the student who may be about to misbehave, thus preventing a
more disruptive episode from occurring. Other teachers make eye
contact with the learner and use certain facial expressions such
as raised eyebrows or a slight tilt of the head to communicate a
warning. Both these techniques effectively use nonverbal signals to
deflect a potential problem. Verbal signals, such as prompting or
name dropping, can also be effective (see the box). As the potential
for the problem to escalate increases, the effective manager shifts
from nonverbal to verbal techniques to keep pace with the
seriousness of the misbehavior about to occur.

   Table 9.2.1. Types of Control: Eyes

   *Note: adopted from Rinne, C. H. (1982). Low-profile classroom
controls. The Phi Delta Kappan, 64(1), 53. Retrieved from
https://www.jstor.org/stable/20386554.

   Reaction. Anticipation and deflection can efficiently and
unobtrusively prevent actions that disrupt the flow of a lesson.
They allow students the opportunity to correct themselves, thus
fostering the development of self-control. However, the classroom
is a busy place, and the many demands on your attention may make
a behavior difficult to anticipate or deflect.

   When disruptive behavior that cannot be anticipated or
unobtrusively redirected occurs, your primary goal is to end the
disruptive episode as quickly as possible. Effective classroom
managers, therefore, must at times react to a behavior by providing

1050 | Systems of Classroom Management
a warning and a consequence. Glasser (1990) points out that an
effective consequence for breaking a rule is temporary removal
from the classroom--provided that your classroom is a place where
that student wants to be. Other possible consequences are loss
of privileges, school detention, loss of recess, or loss of another
activity that the learner would miss. When disruptive behavior
occurs, your reaction sequence might proceed as follows:

   1. As soon as a student is disruptive, acknowledge a nearby
classmate who is performing the expected behavior: "Carlos, I
appreciate how hard you are working on the spelling words." Then
wait 15 seconds for the disruptive student to change his or her
behavior.

   2. If the disruption continues, say, "Michael, this is a warning.
Complete the spelling assignment and leave Carrie alone." Wait 15
seconds.

   3. If the student doesn't follow the request after this warning, say,
"Michael, you were given a warning. You must now leave the room
[or you must stay inside during lunch or cannot go to the resource
center today]. I'll talk to you about this during my free period."

Dealing with Chronic Disruptive Behavior

The low-profile techniques of anticipation, deflection, and reaction
should promote lesson flow when used skillfully. When these
techniques do not work for a particular student or group of
students, it may be a signal that the needs of the student (for
example, for belonging, as discussed in the chapter on Motivation)
are not being met. When disruptive behavior persists and you are
sure you have taken all reasonable steps to deal with it (for example,
following the anticipation deflection-reaction approach), you
should consult a school counselor or school psychologist. Many
school districts have professionals either on staff or under
consultant contracts who can handle such matters.

                                               Systems of Classroom Management | 1051
Culturally Responsive Classroom Management

One of the most interesting and encouraging advances in the
understanding of classroom management is the emerging field of
cultural compatibility and behavior management. The writings and
research of Tharp (1989), Dillon (1989), and Bowers and Flinders
(1990) present convincing arguments that members of different
cultures react differently to the nonverbal and verbal behavior
management techniques discussed in this chapter, including
proximity control, eye contact, warnings, and classroom
arrangement. Furthermore, they cite numerous examples of varying
ways in which teachers from one culture interpret disruptive
behaviors of children from another culture.

   In the section on Cultural Differences in the Classroom, we deal
with the issues of culturally responsive teaching in more detail. For
now, it is important for you to know simply that many behavioral
management techniques are culturally sensitive and that the
effective classroom manager matches the technique not only with
the situation but also with the cultural history of the learner.
CC licensed content, Original

   Systems of Classroom Management. Authored by: Nicole
      Arduini-Van Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community
      College. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-
      ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Gary D. Borich and
      Martin L. Tombari. License: CC BY: Attribution

   Principles of Behavior Analysis and Modification. Authored by:
      Lee W. Daffin Jr.. Retrieved from: . License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

   Classroom Seating Arrangements. Provided by: Yale. Retrieved
      from: https://poorvucenter.yale.edu/

1052 | Systems of Classroom Management
      ClassroomSeatingArrangements. License: CC BY-NC-ND:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives
All rights reserved content
   Antecedent Behavior Consequence: ABC Charts & Model.
      Authored by: Teachings in Education. Retrieved from:
      https://youtu.be/UVKb_BXEp5U. License: All Rights Reserved

                                              Systems of Classroom Management | 1053
Preventing Management
Problems

The easiest management problems to solve are ones that do not
happen in the first place! Even before the school year begins, you
can minimize behavior problems by arranging classroom furniture
and materials in ways that encourage a focus on learning as much
as possible. Later, once school begins, you can establish procedures
and rules that support a focus on learning even more.

Arranging Classroom Space

Viewed broadly, classrooms may seem to be arranged in similar
ways, but there are actually important alternative arrangements to
consider. Variations exist because of grade level, the subjects taught,
the teacher's philosophy of education, and of course the size of the
room and the furniture available. Whatever the arrangement that
you choose, it should help students to focus on learning tasks as
much as possible and minimize the chances of distractions. Beyond
these basic principles, however, the "best" arrangement depends on
what your students need and on the kind of teaching that you prefer
and feel able to provide (Boyner, 2003; Nations & Boyett, 2002). The
next sections describe some of the options.

Displays and Wall space

All classrooms have walls, of course, and how you fill them can
affect the mood or feeling of a classroom. Ample displays make a
room interesting and can be used to reinforce curriculum goals
1054 | Preventing Management
Problems
and display (and hence publicly recognize) students' work. But too
many displays can also make a room seem "busy" or distracting as
well as physically smaller. They can also be more work to maintain.
If you are starting a new school year, then, a good strategy is to
decorate some of the walls or bulletin board space, but not to fill
it all immediately. Leaving some space open leaves flexibility to
respond to ideas and curriculum needs that emerge after the year
is underway. The same advice applies especially for displays that are
high maintenance, such as aquariums, pets, and plants. These can
serve wonderfully as learning aids, but do not have to be in place
on the first day of school. Not only the students but also you may
already have enough to cope with at that time.

Computers in the Classroom

If you are like the majority of teachers, you will have only one
computer in your room, or at most, just a few, and their placement
may be pre-determined by the location of power and cable outlets.
If so, you need to think about computer placement early in the
process of setting up a room. Once the location of computers is set,
locations for desks, high-usage shelves, and other moveable items
can be chosen more sensibly--in general, as already mentioned, so
as to minimize distractions to students and to avoid unnecessary
traffic congestion.

Visibility of and Interactions with Students

Learning is facilitated if the furniture and space allow you to see
all students and interact with them from a comfortable distance.
Usually, this means that the main, central part of the room--where
desks and tables are usually located--needs to be as open and as

                                                Preventing Management Problems | 1055
spacious as possible. While this idea may seem obvious, enacting it
can be challenging in practice if the room itself is small or shaped
unusually. In classrooms with young students (kindergarten),
furthermore, open spaces tend to allow, if not invite, physical
movement of children--a feature that you may consider either
constructive or annoying, depending on your educational goals and
the actual level of activity that occurs.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=136#oembed-1

Video 9.3.1. Teach Like a Champion Technique-Circulate explains
the benefits of the teacher circulating the classroom for classroom
management.

Spatial Arrangements

The physical setup of chairs, tables, and presentations in a
classroom can significantly influence learning. Instructional
communication theory suggests that seating arrangements can
impact how the instructor communicates with students and how
the students interact with one another, impacting engagement,
motivation, and focus (McCorskey and McVetta, 1978). More recent
research also suggests that students tend to prefer more flexible
seating arrangements (Harvey and Kenyon, 2013). In particular,
students have been shown to be more partial towards classrooms
with mobile vs. fixed chairs, and trapezoidal tables with chairs on
casters as opposed to rectangular tables with immobile chairs.

1056 | Preventing Management Problems
   The best room arrangement sometimes depends on the grade
level or subject area of the class. If you teach in elementary school,
for example, you may need to think especially about where students
can keep their daily belongings, such as coats and lunches. In some
schools, these can be kept outside the classroom--but not
necessarily. Some subjects and grade levels, furthermore, lend
themselves especially well to small group interaction, in which case
you might prefer not to seat students in rows, but instead around
small-group tables or work areas. The latter arrangement is
sometimes preferred by elementary teachers, but is also useful in
high schools wherever students need lots of counter space, as in
some shops or art courses, or where they need to interact, as in
English as Second Language courses (McCafferty, Jacobs, & Iddings,
2006). The key issue in deciding between tables and rows, however,
is not grade level or subject as such, but the amount of small group
interaction you want to encourage, compared to the amount of
whole-group instruction. As a rule, tables make working with peers
easier, rows make listening to the teacher more likely, and group-
work slightly more awkward physically.

In general, spaces designed in a student-centered manner, focusing
on learner construction of knowledge, can support student learning
(Rands and Gansemer-Topf, 2017). In reality, however, many
classrooms are built using more conventional models for traditional
seating arrangements. Teachers can consider ways to modify
seating arrangements and match arrangements with the demands
of classroom activities in order to help maximize student learning.

                                                Preventing Management Problems | 1057
Seating Arrangement Options

        Figure 9.3.1. Varieties of classroom seating arrangements.
   Traditional. The traditional classroom setup typically consists

      of rows of fixed seating. Students face the teacher with their
      backs to one another. This seating arrangement is historically
      common in classrooms, minimizing student-student
      communication and largely supporting a "sage on the stage"
      learning environment. The highest communication
      interactions between teacher and students typically occur
      with students in the first row or along the middle of the
      classroom. Students in back rows are more likely to be less
      engaged.
   Roundtable. Many seminar-course room arrangements may
      consist of teachers and students sitting around a single large
1058 | Preventing Management Problems
   table. This seating arrangement can also be formed using
   individual desks. Students and teachers all face one another in
   this setup, which can support whole-class as well as pair-wise
   dialogue.
 Horseshoe or Semicircle. The horseshoe or semi-circle offers
   a modified roundtable setup, where all participants face each
   other while the teacher can move about the room. The
   horseshoe encourages discussion between students and with
   the teacher, although this setup tends to encourage more
   engagement between the teacher and students directly
   opposite, with slightly lesser amounts for students
   immediately adjacent to the instructor. A horseshoe setup can
   be particularly effective when the instructor wishes to project
   and discuss course-related material in the front of the class.
 Double Horseshoe. This seating arrangement involves an inner
   and outer horseshoe, and similar to the conventional
   horseshoe, invites greater discussion than the traditional
   format. It is more limited by the backs of students within the
   inner circle facing students in the outer circle. However,
   students may also more easily interact with those nearest to
   them or turn around and face students behind them for group
   work.
 Pods (Groups, Pairs). The pod or pair arrangement can be
   designed with rectangular, circular or trapezoidal tables, or
   individual desks. With regards to stations, teachers can place
   several tables together to form student groups (e.g. 3 - 4
   students), or pairs. This arrangement can be especially
   advantageous when students will work in groups or pairs with
   their classmates for a large portion of class time. More
   generally, this arrangement communicates a learning
   community where students are expected to work with one
   another.

                                             Preventing Management Problems | 1059
Recommendations

   Align Arrangement with Activity. Teachers can consider
      matching the classroom seating arrangement to the goals of
      instruction. For instance, classes involving group work might
      utilize group pods, while whole-class discussion might benefit
      from a horseshoe. Teachers can also strategically change
      arrangements during class to suit shifting learning goals.

   Bolster Arrangement With Engagement. When dynamic
      change to seating arrangements proves difficult, teachers can
      bolster the physical space through intentional engagement.
      For example, in a typical horseshoe arrangement where
      students along the sides may experience less attention, a
      teacher may be more deliberate in their interactions with
      those particular learners. In a traditional classroom setup
      where the teacher cannot change the seating arrangements,
      they can maximize student engagement by implementing
      Think-Pair-Share or other active learning activities conducive
      to students working with a neighbor. They can also encourage
      student groups to work in other spaces of the classroom as
      needed (e.g. on the floor, front of the room, etc.).

   Set Up Early. To the extent possible, a teacher can designate
      time for setting up the classroom and/or can ask students to
      help. If there is no class immediately before, this can be done
      prior to class, or alternatively during the first few minutes.
      Similar consideration should be given to resetting the room
      after the session ends.

Ironically, some teachers also experience
challenges with room arrangement because they
do not actually have a classroom of their own,
because they must move each day among other
teachers' rooms. "Floating" is especially likely for
specialized teachers (e.g. music teachers in

1060 | Preventing Management Problems
elementary schools, who move from class to class)
and in schools have an overall shortage of
classrooms. Floating can sometimes be annoying
to the teacher, though it actually also has
advantages, such as not having to take
responsibility for how other teachers' rooms are
arranged. If you find yourself floating, it helps to
consider a few key strategies, such as:

   consider using a permanent cart to move crucial supplies from
      room to room

   make sure that every one of your rooms has an overhead
      projector (do not count on using chalkboards or computers in
      other teachers' rooms)

   talk to the other teachers about having at least one shelf or
      corner in each room designated for your exclusive use

     Class Set-up Tool

        When considering classroom arrangement options (and
     before moving too much furniture around your room!), you
     might want to try experimenting with spatial arrangements
     "virtually" by using one of the computer programs available
     on the Internet, like the Scholastic Class Set-Up Tool.

Establishing Daily Procedures and Routines

Procedures or routines are specific ways of doing common,
repeated classroom tasks or activities. Examples include checking

                                                Preventing Management Problems | 1061
daily attendance, dealing with students who arrive late, or granting
permission to leave the classroom for an errand. Academically
related procedures include ways of turning in daily homework (e.g.
putting it on a designated shelf at a particular time), of gaining the
teacher's attention during quiet seat work (e.g. raising your hand
and waiting), and of starting a "free choice" activity after completing
a classroom assignment.

   Procedures serve the largely practical purpose of making
activities and tasks flow smoothly--a valuable and necessary
purpose in classrooms, where the actions of many people have to be
coordinated within limited time and space. As such, procedures are
more like social conventions than moral expectations. They are only
indirectly about what is ethically right or ethically desirable to do
(Turiel, 2006). Most procedures or routines can be accomplished in
more than one way, with only minor differences in outcomes. There
is more than one way, for example, for the procedure of taking
attendance: the teacher could call the role, delegate a student to
call the role or note students' presence on a seating chart. Each
variation accomplishes essentially the same task, and the choice
may be less important than the fact that the class coordinates its
actions somehow, by committing to some sort of choice.

   For teachers, of course, an initial management task is to establish
procedures and routines as promptly as possible. Because of the
conventional quality of procedures, some teachers find that it works
well simply to announce and explain key procedures without
inviting much discussion from students ("Here is how we will
choose partners for the group work"). Other teachers prefer to
invite input from students when creating procedures (asking the
class, "What do you feel is the best way for students to get my
attention during quiet reading time?"). Both approaches have
advantages as well as disadvantages. Simply announcing key
procedures saves time and ensures consistency in case you teach
more than one class (as you would in high school). But it puts
more responsibility on the teacher to choose procedures that are
truly reasonable and practical. Inviting students' input, on the other

1062 | Preventing Management Problems
hand, can help students to become aware of and committed to
procedures, but at the cost of requiring more time to settle on them.
It also risks creating confusion if you teach multiple classes, each of
which adopts different procedures. Whatever approach you choose,
of course, they have to take into account any procedures or rules
imposed by the school or school district as a whole. A school may
have a uniform policy about how to record daily attendance, for
example, and that policy may determine, either partly or completely,
how you take attendance with your particular students.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=136#oembed-2

Video 9.3.2. Seat Signals provides examples of procedures that
teachers can implement that will allow students to make requests,
like using the restroom, without interrupting instruction or
disturbing others.

Establishing Classroom Rules

Unlike procedures or routines, rules express standards of behavior
for which individual students need to take responsibility. Although
they are like procedures in that they sometimes help in ensuring
the efficiency of classroom tasks, they are really about encouraging
students to be responsible for learning and showing respect for
each other. Example 1 lists a typical set of classroom rules.

                                                Preventing Management Problems | 1063
     SAMPLE SET OF CLASSROOM RULES

          Treat others with courtesy and politeness.
          Make sure to bring required materials to class and

             to activities.
          Be on time for class and other activities.
          Listen to the teacher and to others when they are

             speaking.
          Follow all school rules.

Note three things about the examples in Example 1. One is that the
rules are not numerous; the table lists only five. Most educational
experts recommend keeping the number of rules to a minimum in
order to make them easier to remember (Thorson, 2003; Brophy,
2004). A second feature is that they are stated in positive terms ("Do
X...") rather than negative terms ("Do not do Y..."), a strategy that
emphasizes and clarifies what students should do rather than what
they should avoid. A third feature is that each rule actually covers
a collection of more specific behaviors. The rule "Bring all materials
to class," for example, covers bringing pencils, paper, textbooks,
homework papers, and permission slips--depending on the
situation. As a result of their generality, rules often have a degree of
ambiguity that sometimes requires interpretation. Infractions may
occur that are marginal or "in a grey area," rather than clear cut. A
student may bring a pen, for example, but the pen may not work
properly. You may therefore wonder whether this incident is really
a failure to follow the rule or just an unfortunate (and in this case
minor) fault of the pen manufacturer.

   As with classroom procedures, rules can be planned either by
the teacher alone or by the teacher with advice from students.
The arguments for each approach are similar to the arguments for

1064 | Preventing Management Problems
procedures: rules "laid on" by the teacher may be more efficient
and consistent, and in this sense fairer, but rules influenced by the
students may be supported more fully by the students. Because
rules focus strongly on personal responsibility, however, there is a
stronger case for involving students in making them than in making
classroom procedures (Brookfield, 2006; Kohn, 2006). In any case,
the question of who plans classroom rules is not necessarily an
either/or choice. It is possible in principle to impose certain rules
on students (for example, "Always be polite to each other") but let
the students determine the consequences for violations of certain
rules (for example, "If a student is discourteous to a classmate, he/
she must apologize to the student in writing"). Some mixture of
influences is probably inevitable, in fact, if only because the class
needs to take into account your own moral commitments as the
teacher as well as any imposed by the school (like "No smoking in
the school" or "Always walk in the hallways").

Pacing and Structuring Lessons and Activities

One of the best ways to prevent management problems is by pacing
and structuring lessons or activities as smoothly and continuously
as possible. This goal depends on three major strategies:

   selecting tasks or activities at an appropriate level of difficulty
      for your students

   providing a moderate level of structure or clarity to students
      about what they are supposed to do, especially during
      transitions between activities

   keeping alert to the flow and interplay of behaviors for the
      class as a whole and for individuals within it.

Each strategy presents special challenges to teachers, but also
opportunities for helping students to learn.

                                                Preventing Management Problems | 1065
Choosing Tasks at an Appropriate Level of
Difficulty

As experienced teachers know and as research has confirmed,
students are most likely to engage with learning when tasks are
of moderate difficulty, neither too easy nor too hard and therefore
neither boring nor frustrating (Britt, 2005). Finding the right level of
difficulty, however, can be a challenge if you have little experience
teaching a particular grade level or curriculum, or even if students
are simply new to you and their abilities unknown. Whether familiar
or not, members of any class are likely to have diverse skills and
readiness-a fact that makes it challenging to determine what level
of difficulty is appropriate. A common strategy for dealing with
these challenges is to begin units, lessons, or projects with tasks
that are relatively easy and familiar. Then, introduce more difficult
material or tasks gradually until students seem challenged, but not
overwhelmed. Following this strategy gives the teacher a chance
to observe and diagnose students' learning needs before adjusting
content, and it gives students a chance to orient themselves to
the teacher's expectations, teaching style, and the topic of study
without becoming frustrated prematurely. Later in a unit, lesson, or
project, students seem better able to deal with more difficult tasks
or content (Van Merrionboer, 2003). The principle seems to help as
well with "authentic" learning tasks--ones that resemble real-world
activities, such as learning to drive an automobile or to cook a meal,
and that present a variety of complex tasks simultaneously. Even in
those cases, it helps to isolate and focus on the simplest subtasks
first (such as "put the key in the ignition") and move to harder tasks
only later (such as parallel parking).

   Sequencing instruction is only a partial solution to finding the
best "level" of difficulty, however, because it does not deal with
enduring individual differences among students. The fundamental
challenge to teachers is to individualize or differentiate instruction
fully: to tailor it not only to the class as a group but to the lasting

1066 | Preventing Management Problems
differences among members of the class. One way to approach this
sort of diversity, obviously, is to plan different content or activities
for different students or groups of students. While one group works
on Task A, another group works on Task B; one group works on
relatively easy math problems, for example, while another works
on harder ones. Differentiating instruction in this way complicates
a teacher's job, but it can be done and has in fact been done by
many teachers (it also makes teaching more interesting!). In the next
chapter, we describe some classroom management strategies that
help with such multitasking.

Providing Moderate Amounts of Structure and
Detail

Chances are that at some point in your educational career you
have wished that a teacher would clarify or explain an assignment
more fully, and perhaps give it a clearer structure or organization.
Students' desire for clarity is especially common with assignments
that are by nature open-ended, such as long essays, large projects,
or creative works. Simply being told to "write an essay critiquing the
novel," for example, leaves more room for uncertainty (and worry)
than being given guidelines about what questions the essay should
address, what topics or parts it should have, and what its length
or style should be (Chesebro, 2003). As you might suspect, some
students desire clarity more than others, and improve their
performance, especially when provided with plenty of structure
and clarity. Students with certain kinds of learning difficulties, in
particular, often learn effectively and stay on task only if provided
with somewhat explicit, detailed instructions about the tasks
expected of them (Marks, et al., 2003).

   As a teacher, the challenge is to accommodate students' need
for clarity without making guidance so specific or detailed that
students do little thinking for themselves. As a (ridiculously

                                                Preventing Management Problems | 1067
extreme) example, consider a teacher giving "clear" instructions for
an essay by announcing not only exactly which articles to read and
cite in the essay and which topics or issues to cover, but even
requires specific wording of sentences in their essays. This much
specificity may reduce students' uncertainties and make the
teacher's task of evaluating the essays relatively straightforward and
easy. But it also reduces or even eliminates the educational value
of the assignment--assuming, of course, that its purpose is to get
students to think for themselves.

   Ideally, then, structure should be moderate rather than extreme.
There should be just enough to give students some sense of
direction and to stimulate more accomplishment than if they
worked with less structure or guidance. This ideal is an application
of Vygotsky's idea of the zone of proximal development that we
discussed in the chapter, "The learning process": a place
(figuratively speaking) where students get more done with help
than without it. The ideal amount of guidance--the "location" of the
zone of proximal development--varies with the assignment and the
student, and it (hopefully) decreases over time for all students. One
student may need more guidance to do his or her best in math,
but less guidance in order to write her or his best essay. Another
student may need the reverse. But if all goes well, both students may
need less at the end of the year than at the beginning.

Managing Transitions

Transitions between activities are often full of distractions and
"lost" time, and is a time when inappropriate behaviors are
especially likely to occur. Part of the problem is intrinsic to
transitions: students may have to wait before a new activity actually
begins, and therefore get bored at the very moment when the
teacher is preoccupied with arranging materials for the new
activity. From the point of view of the students, transitions may

1068 | Preventing Management Problems
seem essentially like unsupervised group time, when seemingly any
behavior is tolerated.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=136#oembed-3

Video 9.2.3. Tight Transitions offers advice for easy and fast
transitions.

   Minimizing such problems requires two strategies, one of which
is easier to implement than the other. The easier strategy is for you,
as a teacher, to organize materials as well as possible ahead of time
so that you minimize the time needed to begin a new activity. The
advice sounds simple, and mostly is, but it sometimes takes a bit
of practice to implement smoothly. When Kelvin (remember from
the beginning of this chapter?) first began teaching university, for
example, particular papers or overhead transparencies sometimes
got lost in the wrong folder in spite of Kelvin's efforts to keep them
where they were easy to find. The resulting delays in finding them
slowed the pace of the class and caused frustrations.

   A second, more complex strategy is to teach students ways to
manage their own behavior during transitions (Marzano & Marzano,
2004). If students talk too loudly at these times, for example, then
discuss with them what constitutes appropriate levels or amounts
of talk, and discuss the need for them to monitor their own sound
level. Or if students stop work early in anticipation of ending an
activity, then talk about--or even practice--waiting for a signal from
yourself to indicate the true ending point for an activity. If certain
students continue working beyond the end of an activity. On the
other hand, try giving them warning of the impending end in
advance, and remind them about to take responsibility for actually

                                                Preventing Management Problems | 1069
finishing work once they hear the advance warning, and so on. The
point of these tactics is to encourage responsibility for behavior
during transitions, and thereby reduce your own need to monitor
students at that crucial time.

   None of these ideas, of course, mean that you, as a teacher, should
give up monitoring students' behavior entirely. Chances are that
you still will need to notice if and when someone talks too loudly,
finishes too early, or continues too long, and you will still need
to give some students appropriate reminders. But the amount of
reminding will be less to the extent that students can remind and
monitor themselves--a welcome trend at any time, but especially
during transitions

Maintaining the Flow of Activities

A lot of classroom management is really about keeping activities
flowing smoothly, both during individual lessons and across the
school day. The trouble is that there is never just "one" event
happening at a time, even if only one activity has been formally
planned and is supposed to be occurring. Imagine, for example,
that everyone is supposed to be attending a single whole-class
discussion on a topic; yet individual students will be having different
experiences at any one moment. Several students may be listening
and contributing comments, for example, but a few others may
be planning what they want to say next and ignoring the current
speakers, still, others may be ruminating about what a previous
speaker said, and still others may be thinking about unrelated
matters--the restroom, food, or sex. Things get even more
complicated if the teacher deliberately plans multiple activities: in
that case, some students may interact with the teacher, for example,
while others do work in an unsupervised group or work
independently in a different part of the room. How is a teacher to
keep activities flowing smoothly in the face of such variety?

1070 | Preventing Management Problems
   A common mistake of beginning teachers in multi-faceted
settings like these is to pay too much attention to any one activity,
student, or small group, at the expense of noticing and responding
to all the others. If you are helping a student on one side of the
room when someone on the other side disturbs classmates with off-
task conversation, it can be less effective either to finish with the
student you are helping before attending to the disruption, or to
interrupt yourself to solve the disruption on the other side of the
room. Although one of these responses may be necessary, either
one involves disruption somewhere. There is a risk that either the
student's chatting may spread to others, or the interrupted student
may become bored with waiting for the teacher's attention and
wander off-task herself.

   A better solution, though one that at first may seem challenging,
is to attend to both events at once--a strategy that was
named withitness in a series of now-classic research studies
several decades ago (Kounin, 1970). Withitness does not mean that
you focus on all simultaneous activities with equal care, but only
that you remain aware of multiple activities, behaviors, and events
to some degree. At a particular moment, for example, you may be
focusing on helping a student, but in some corner of your mind, you
also notice when chatting begins on the other side of the room. You
have, as the saying goes, "eyes in the back of your head." Research
has found that experienced teachers are much more likely to show
withitness than inexperienced teachers, and that these qualities
are associated with managing classrooms successfully (Emmer &
Stough, 2001).

   Simultaneous awareness--withitness--makes possible responses
to the multiple events that are immediate and nearly
simultaneous--what educators sometimes called overlapping. The
teacher's responses to each event or behavior need not take equal
time, nor even be equally noticeable to all students. If you are
helping one student with seat work at the precise moment when
another student begins chatting off-task, for example, a quick
glance to the second student may be enough to bring the second

                                                 Preventing Management Problems | 1071
one back to the work at hand, and may scarcely interrupt your
conversation with the first student, or be noticed by others who are
not even involved. The result is a smoother flow to activities overall.

   As a new teacher, you may find that withitness and overlapping
develop more easily in some situations than in others. It may be
easier to keep an eye (or ear) on multiple activities during familiar
routines, such as taking attendance, but harder to do the same
during activities that are unfamiliar or complex, such as introducing
a new topic or unit that you have never taught before. But skill at
broadening your attention does increase with time and practice. It
helps to keep trying. Merely demonstrating to students that you
are "withit," in fact, even without making deliberate overlapping
responses, can sometimes deter students from off-task behavior.
Someone who is tempted to pass notes in class, for example, might
not do so because she believes that you will probably notice her
doing it anyway, whether or not you are able to notice in fact.

Communicating the Importance of Learning and
Positive Behavior

Altogether, the factors we have discussed--arranging space,
procedures, and rules, and developing withitness-- help
communicate an important message: that in the classroom learning
and positive social behavior are priorities. In addition, teachers can
convey this message by offering timely feedback to students about
performance, by keeping accurate records of the performance, and
by deliberately communicating with parents or caregivers about
their children and about class activities.

   Communicating effectively is so important for all aspects of
teaching. However, here we will focus on only one of its
important aspects: how communication contributes to a smoothly
functioning classroom and in this way helps prevent behavior
problems.

1072 | Preventing Management Problems
Giving Timely Feedback

The term feedback, when used by educators, refers to responses to
students about their behavior or performance. Feedback is essential
if students are to learn and if they are to develop classroom behavior
that is socially skilled and "mature." But feedback can only be fully
effective if offered as soon as possible when it is still relevant to
the task or activity at hand (Reynolds, 1992). A score on a test is
more informative immediately after a test than after a six-month
delay, when students may have forgotten much of the content of
the test. A teacher's comment to a student about an inappropriate,
off-task behavior may not be especially welcome at the moment the
behavior occurs, but it can be more influential and informative then;
later, both teacher and student will have trouble remembering the
details of the off-task behavior, and in this sense may literally "not
know what they are talking about." The same is true for comments
about a positive behavior by a student: hearing a compliment right
away makes it easier to the comment with the behavior, and allows
the compliment to influence the student more strongly. There are
of course practical limits to how fast feedback can be given, but the
general principle is clear: feedback tends to work better when it is
timely.

   The principle of timely feedback is consistent, incidentally, with a
central principle of operant conditioning: reinforcement works best
when it follows a to-be-learned operant behavior closely (Skinner,
1957). In this case, a teacher's feedback serves as a form of
reinforcement. The analogy is easiest to understand when the
feedback takes the form of praise; in operant conditioning terms,
the reinforcing praise then functions like a "reward." When feedback
is negative, it functions as an "aversive stimulus" (in operant terms),
shutting down the behavior criticized. At other times, though,
criticism can also function as an unintended reinforcement. This
happens, for example, if a student experiences criticism as a
reduction in isolation and therefore as an increase in his importance

                                                Preventing Management Problems | 1073
in the class--a relatively desirable change. So the inappropriate
behavior continues, or even increases, contrary to the teacher's
intentions. Example 2 diagrams this sequence of events.

     ATTRACTING ATTENTION AS NEGATIVE
   REINFORCEMENT

        Example of unintended negative reinforcement in the
     classroom:

        Student is isolated socially  Student publicly
     misbehaves  Student gains others' attention

        Reinforcement can happen in class if an undesirable
     behavior, leads to a less aversive state for a student. Social
     isolation can be reduced by public misbehavior, which
     stimulates attention that is reinforcing. Ironically, the effort
     to end misbehavior ends up stimulating the misbehavior.

Maintaining Accurate Records

Although timeliness in responding to students can sometimes
happen naturally during class, there are also situations where
promptness depends on having organized key information ahead of
time. Obvious examples are the scores, marks, and grades returned
to students for their work. A short quiz (such as a weekly spelling
test) may be possible to return quite soon after the quiz--sometimes
you or even the students themselves can mark it during class. More
often, though, assignments and tests require longer processing
times: you have to read, score, or add comments to each paper
individually. Excessive time to evaluate students' work can reduce

1074 | Preventing Management Problems
the usefulness of a teacher's evaluations to students when she
finally does return the work (Black, et al., 2004). During the days
or weeks waiting for a test or assignment to be returned, students
are left without information about the quality or nature of their
performance; at the extreme, they may even have to complete
another test or do another assignment before getting information
about an earlier one. (Perhaps you yourself have experienced this
particular problem!)

   Delays in providing feedback about academic performance can
never be eliminated entirely, but they can be reduced by keeping
accurate, well-organized records of students' work. A number of
computer programs are available to help with this challenge; if your
school does not already have one in use, then there are several
downloadable either free or at low cost from the Internet
(e.g. dmoz.org). Describing these is beyond the scope of this book.
For now, we simply emphasize that grading systems benefit
students' learning the most when they provide feedback as quickly
and frequently as possible (McMillan, 2001), precisely the reason
why accurate, well-organized record-keeping is important to keep.

   Accurate records are helpful not only for scores on tests, quizzes,
or assignments but also for developing descriptive summaries of
the nature of students' academic skills or progress. A common way
to develop a description is the student portfolio, which is a
compilation of the student's work and on-going assessments of it
created by the teacher or in some cases by the student (Moritz
& Christie, 2005; White, 2005). To know how a student's science
project evolved from its beginning, for example, a teacher and
student can keep a portfolio of lab notes, logs, preliminary data,
and the like. To know how a student's writing skills developed,
they could keep a portfolio of early drafts on various writing
assignments. As the work accumulates, the student can discuss
it with the teacher, and write brief reflections on its strengths
thus far or on the steps needed to improve the work further. By
providing a way to respond to work as it evolves, and by including
students in making the assessments, portfolios provide relatively

                                                Preventing Management Problems | 1075
prompt feedback, and in any case provide it sooner than by waiting
for the teacher to review work that is complete or final.

Communicating with Parents and Caregivers

Since parents and caregivers in a sense "donate" their children to
schools (at least figuratively speaking), teachers are responsible for
keeping them informed and involved to whatever extent is practical.
Virtually all parents understand and assume that schools are
generally intended for learning. Detailed communication can enrich
parents' understanding, of how learning is addressed with their
particular child's classroom, and show them more precisely what
their particular child is doing. The better such understanding in
turn encourages parents and caregivers to support their child's
learning more confidently and "intelligently." In this sense, it
contributes indirectly to a positive learning environment in their
child's class.

   There are various ways to communicate with parents, each with
advantages and limitations. Here are three common examples:

   A regular classroom newsletter: A newsletter establishes a link
      with parents or caregivers with comparatively little effort on
      the part of the teacher. At the beginning of the year, for
      example, a newsletter can tell about special materials that
      students will need, important dates to remember (like
      professional development days when there is no school), or
      about curriculum plans for the next few weeks. But
      newsletters also have limitations. They can seem impersonal,
      and they may get lost on the way home and never reach
      parents or caregivers. They can also be impractical for
      teachers with multiple classes, as in high school or in specialist
      subjects (like music or physical education), where each class
      follows a different program or curriculum.

1076 | Preventing Management Problems
   Telephone calls: The main advantage of phoning is its
      immediacy and individuality. Teacher and parent or caregiver
      can talk about a particular student, behavior, or concern, and
      do it now. By the same token, however, phone calls are not an
      efficient way of informing parents about events or activities
      that affect everyone in common. The individuality of phoning
      may explain why teachers often use this method when a
      student has a problem that is urgent or unusual--as when he
      has failed a test, missed classes or misbehaved seriously.
      Rightly or wrongly, a student's successes tend not to prompt
      phone calls to the student's home (though in fairness students
      may be more likely to tell parents about their successes
      themselves, making it less essential for the teacher to do so).

   Parent-teacher conferences: Most schools schedule periodic
      times--often a day or evening per term--when teachers meet
      briefly with parents or caregivers who wish to meet. Under
      good conditions, the conferences have the individuality of
      phone calls, but also the richness of communication possible
      only in face-to-face meetings. Since conferences are available
      to all parents, they need not focus on behavior or academic
      problems, but often simply help to build rapport and
      understanding between parents or caregivers and the teacher.
      Sometimes too, particularly at younger grade levels, teachers
      involve students in leading their own conferences; the
      students display and explain their own work using a portfolio
      or other archive of accumulated materials (Benson & Barnett,
      2005; Stiggins & Chappuis, 2005). In spite of all of these
      advantages, though, parent-teacher conferences have
      limitations. Some parents cannot get to conferences because
      of work schedules, child care, or transportation problems.
      Others may feel intimated by any school-sponsored event
      because they speak limited English or because they remember
      painful experiences from their own school days.

Even if you make several efforts to communicate, some parents may

                                                Preventing Management Problems | 1077
remain out of contact. In these cases, it is important to remember
that the parents may not be indifferent to their child or to the value
of education. Other possibilities exist, as some of our comments
above imply: parents may have difficulties with child care, for
example, have inconvenient work schedules, or feel self-conscious
about their own communication skills (Stevens & Tollafield, 2003).
Even so, there are ways to encourage parents who may be shy,
hesitant, or busy. One is to think about how they can assist the
school even from home--for example, by making materials to be
used in class or (if they are comfortable using English) phoning
other parents about class events. A second way is to have a specific
task for the parents in mind--one with a clear structure, such as
photocopying materials to be used by students later. A third is to
remember to encourage, support, and respect the parents' presence
and contributions when they do show up at school functions. Keep
in mind that parents are experts about their own particular
children, and without them, you would have no students to teach!
CC licensed content, Original

   Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van Hoose. Provided by: Hudson
      Valley Community College. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

   Classroom Seating Arrangements. Provided by: Poorvu Center
      for Teaching and Learning, Yale University. Retrieved from:
      https://poorvucenter.yale.edu/
      ClassroomSeatingArrangements. License: CC BY-NC-ND:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives . License Terms:
      Permission for revisions sought 6/24/2000

1078 | Preventing Management Problems
CC licensed content, Specific attribution
   Teach Like a Champion Technique 15--Circulate. Provided by:
      Kaizan Teaching. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/
      o2KOnHRPd5g. License: All Rights Reserved
   Teach Like a Champion Technique 30--Tight Transitions.
      Provided by: Kaizen Teaching. Retrieved from:
      https://youtu.be/Nmm3XbVs084. License: All Rights Reserved
   Teach Like a Champion Technique 34--Seat Signals. Provided
      by: Kaizen Teaching. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/
      4ZzIAQEP6tA?t=17. License: All Rights Reserved

                                                Preventing Management Problems | 1079
Responding to Student
Misbehavior

So far we have focused on preventing behaviors that are
inappropriate or annoying. The advice has all been proactive or
forward-looking: plan classroom space thoughtfully, create
reasonable procedures and rules, pace lessons and activities
appropriately, and communicate the importance of learning clearly.
Although we consider these ideas important, it would be nave to
imply they are enough to prevent all behavior problems. For various
reasons, students sometimes still do things that disrupt other
students or interrupt the flow of activities. At such moments the
challenge is not about long-term planning but about making
appropriate, but prompt responses. Misbehaviors left alone can be
contagious, a process educators sometimes call the ripple
effect (Kounin, 1970). Chatting between two students, for example,
can gradually spread to six students; rudeness by one can eventually
become rudeness by several; and so on. Because of this tendency,
delaying a response to inappropriate behavior can make the job
of getting students back on track harder than responding to it as
immediately as possible.

   There are many ways to respond to inappropriate behaviors, of
course, and they vary in how much they focus on the immediate
behavior compared to longer-term features or patterns of a
student's behavior. There are so many ways to respond, in fact, that
we can describe only a sample of the possibilities here. None are
effective all of the time, though all do work at least some of the time.
We start with a response that may not seem on the surface like a
remedy at all--simply ignoring misbehaviors.

1080 | Responding to Student
Misbehavior
Ignoring Misbehaviors

A lot of misbehaviors are not important or frequent enough to
deserve any response at all. They are likely to disappear
(or extinguish, in behaviorist terms) simply if left alone. If a student
who is usually quiet during class happens to whisper to a neighbor
once in a while, it is probably less disruptive and just as effective to
ignore the infraction than to respond to it. Some misbehaviors may
not be worth a response even if they are frequent, as long as they
do not seem to bother others. Suppose, for example, that a certain
student has a habit of choosing quiet seat-work times to sharpen
her pencil. She is continually out of her seat to go to the sharpener.
Yet this behavior is not really noticed by others. Is it then really
a problem, however unnecessary or ill-timed it may be? In both
examples ignoring the behavior may be wise because there is little
danger of the behavior disrupting other students or of becoming
more frequent. Interrupting your activities--or the students'--might
cause more disruption than simply ignoring the problem.

   That said, there can still be problems in deciding whether
particular misbehavior is truly minor, infrequent, or unnoticed by
others. Unlike in our example above, students may whisper to each
other more than "rarely" but less than "often": in that case, when
do you decide that the whispering is in fact too frequent and needs
a more active response from you? Or the student who sharpens
her pencil, mentioned above, may not bother most others, but she
may nonetheless bother a few. In that case how many bothered
classmates are "too many"? Five, three, just one, or...? In these
ambiguous cases, you may need more active ways of dealing with
inappropriate behavior, like the ones described in the next sections.

                                               Responding to Student Misbehavior | 1081
Gesturing Nonverbally

Sometimes it works to communicate using gestures, eye contact,
or "body language" that involves little or no speaking. Nonverbal
cues are often appropriate if misbehavior is just a bit too serious
or frequent to ignore, but not serious or frequent enough to merit
taking the time deliberately to speak to or talk with the student. If
two students are chatting off-task for a relatively extended time,
for example, sometimes a glance in their direction, a frown, or even
just moving closer to the students is enough of a reminder to get
them back on task. Even if these responses prove not to be enough,
they may help to keep the off-task behavior from spreading to other
students.

   A risk of relying on nonverbal cues, however, is that some
students may not understand their meaning, or may even fail to
notice them. If the two chatting students mentioned above are
engrossed in their talking, for example, they may not see you glance
or frown at them. Or they might notice but not interpret your cue
as a reminder to get back on task. Misinterpretation of nonverbal
gestures and cues is more likely with young children, who are still
learning the subtleties of adults' nonverbal "language" (Guerrero
& Floyd, 2005; Heimann, et al., 2006). It is also more likely with
students who speak limited English or whose cultural background
differs significantly from your own. These students may have
learned different nonverbal gestures from your own as part of their
participation in their original culture (Marsh, Elfenbein, & Ambady,
2003).

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=137#oembed-1

1082 | Responding to Student Misbehavior
Video 9.4.1. Teach Like a Champion: Getting Everyone's Attention in
Class

Natural and Logical Consequences

Consequences are the outcomes or results of an action. When
managing a classroom, two kinds of consequences are especially
effective for influencing students' behavior: natural consequences
and logical consequences. As the term implies, natural
consequences happen "naturally," without deliberate intention by
anyone. If a student is late for class, for example, a natural
consequence is that he misses information or material that is
needed to do an assignment. Logical consequences are ones that
happen because of the responses of or decisions by others, but
that also have an obvious or "logical" relationship to the original
action. If one student steals another's lunch, for example, a logical
consequence might be for the thief to reimburse the victim for the
cost of the lunch. Natural and logical consequences are often woven
together and thus hard to distinguish: if one student picks a fight
with another student, a natural consequence might be injury not
only to the victim, but also to the aggressor (an inherent byproduct
of fighting), but a logical consequence might be to lose friends (the
response of others to fighting). In practice, both may occur.

   In general, research has found that both natural and logical
consequences can be effective for minimizing undesirable
behaviors, provided they are applied in appropriate situations
(Weinstein, Tomlinson-Clarke, & Curran, 2004). Consider a student
who runs impulsively down school hallways. The student is likely
to have "traffic accidents," and thus (hopefully) see that running
is not safe and reduce the frequency of running. Or consider a
student who chronically talks during class instead of working on an
assigned task. The student may have to make up the assignment
later, possibly as homework. Because the behavior and the

                                              Responding to Student Misbehavior | 1083
consequence are connected logically, the student is relatively likely
to see the drawback of choosing to talk and to reduce how much
he or she talks on subsequent occasions. In either case, whether
natural or logical, the key features that make consequences work
are (a) that they are appropriate to the misbehavior and (b) that
the student understands the connection between the consequences
and the original behavior.

   Notice, though, that natural and logical consequences do not
always work; if they did, there would be no further need for
management strategies! One limitation is that misbehaviors can
sometimes be so serious that no natural or logical consequence
seems sufficient or appropriate. Suppose, for example, that one
student deliberately breaks another student's eyeglasses. There may
be a natural consequence for the victim (he or she will not be able to
see easily), but not for the student who broke the glasses. There may
also be no consequences for the aggressor that are both logical and
fully satisfactory: the aggressor student will not be able to repair the
broken glasses himself, and may not be able to pay for new glasses
either.

   Another limitation of natural and logical consequences is that
their success depends on the motives of the misbehaving student.
If the student is seeking attention or acceptance by others, then
consequences often work well. Bullying in order to impress others,
for example, is more likely to lose friends than to win them--so
bullying motivated in this way is self-limiting. If a student is seeking
power over others, on the other hand, then the consequences of
bullying may not reduce the behavior. Bullying in order to control
others' actions by definition actually achieves its own goal, and its
"natural" result (losing friends) would be irrelevant. Of course, a
bully might also act from a combination of motives, so that natural
and logical consequences limit bullying behavior, but only partially.

   A third problem with natural and logical consequences is that
they can easily be confused with deliberate punishment (Kohn,
2006). The difference is important. Consequences are focused on
repairing damage and restoring relationships, and in this sense, they

1084 | Responding to Student Misbehavior
focus on the future. Punishments highlight a mistake or wrongdoing
and in this sense focus on the past. Consequences tend to be more
solution-focused. Punishments tend to highlight the person who
committed the action, and they often shame or humiliate the
wrongdoer. (Table below summarizes these and other differences.)

Table 9.4.1: Differences between consequences and punishments

Focused on future solutions      Focused on past mistakes

Focused on individual's actions  Focused on character of student
                                 or child

Focused on repairing mistakes    Focused on establishing blame

Focused on restoring positive    Focused on isolating wrong-doer
relationships

Tend to reduce emotional pain and Tend to impose emotional pain or

conflict                         conflict

Classroom examples of the differences between consequences and
punishment are plentiful. If a student fails to listen to the teacher's
instructions, then a consequence is that he or she misses important
information, but punishment may be that the teacher criticizes or
reprimands the student. If a student speaks rudely to the teacher,
a consequence may be that the teacher does not respond to the
comment, or simply reminds the student to speak courteously. A
punishment may be that the teacher scolds the student in the
presence of others, or even imposes detention ("Stay after school
for 15 minutes").

           One or more interactive elements has been excluded
           from this version of the text. You can view them online
here:
https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=137#oembed-2

Video 9.4.2. Teach Like a Champion-Discipline describes discipline
                                              Responding to Student Misbehavior | 1085
as a noun that refers to the process of teaching someone the right
way to do something or to the state of being able to do something
the right way: "I have discipline" or "I teach discipline." This sense
of the word is also captured in the meaning of self-discipline: the
ability to make oneself do things all the way through.

Conflict Resolution and Problem-Solving

When a student misbehaves persistently and disruptively, you will
need strategies that are more active and assertive than the ones
discussed so far, and that focus on conflict resolution--the
reduction of disagreements that persist over time. Conflict
resolution strategies that educators and teachers tend to use
usually have two parts (Jones, 2004). First, they involve ways of
identifying precisely what is "the" problem. Second, they remind
the student of classroom expectations and rules with simple clarity
and assertiveness, but without apology or harshness. When used
together, the two strategies not only reduce conflicts between a
teacher and an individual student but also provide a model for other
students to follow when they have disagreements of their own. The
next sections discuss the nature of assertion and clarification for
conflict resolution in more detail.

Step 1: Clarifying and Focusing: Problem
Ownership

Classrooms can be emotional places even though their primary
purpose is to promote thinking rather than an expression of
feelings. The emotions can be quite desirable: they can give
teachers and students "passion" for learning and a sense of care
among members of the class. But feelings can also cause trouble

1086 | Responding to Student Misbehavior
if students misbehave: at those moments negative
feelings--annoyance, anger, discomfort--can interfere with
understanding exactly what is wrong and how to set things right
again. Gaining a bit of distance from the negative feelings is exactly
what those moments need, especially on the part of the teacher, the
person with (presumably) the greatest maturity.

   In a widely cited approach to conflict resolution called Teacher
Effectiveness Training, the educator Thomas Gordon describes this
challenge as an issue of problem ownership, or deciding whose
problem behavior or conflict it really is (Gordon, 2003). The "owner"
of the problem is the primary person who is troubled or bothered
by it. The owner can be the student committing the behavior, the
teacher, or another student who merely happens to see the
behavior. Since the owner of a problem needs to take primary
responsibility for solving it, identifying ownership makes a
difference in how to deal with the behavior or problem effectively.

   Suppose, for example, that a student named David makes a
remark that the teacher finds offensive (like "Sean is fat"). Is this
remark the student's problem or the teacher's? If David made the
comment privately to the teacher and is unlikely to repeat it, then
maybe it is only the teacher's problem. If he is likely to repeat it
to other students or to Sean himself, however, then maybe the
problem is really David's. On the other hand, suppose that a
different student, Sarah, complains repeatedly that classmates
refuse to let her into group projects. This is less likely to be the
teacher's problem rather than Sarah's: her difficulty may affect her
ability to do her own work, but not really affect the teacher or
classmates directly. As you might suspect, too, a problem may
sometimes affect several people at once. David, who criticized Sean,
may discover that he offended not only the teacher but also
classmates, who therefore avoid working with him. At that point,
the whole class begins to share in some aspect of "the" problem:
not only is David prevented from working with others comfortably
but also classmates and the teacher begin dealing with bad feelings
about David.

                                              Responding to Student Misbehavior | 1087
                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=137#oembed-3

Video 9.4.3. Teach Like a Champion-What to Do discusses ownership
of a problem. We often see behavior issues as defiance of the
student, but there are other sources to these misbehaviors,
including teacher behaviors.

Step 2: Active, Empathetic Listening

Diagnosing accurately who really has a problem with a
behavior--who "owns" it--is helped by a number of strategies. One
is active listening--attending carefully to all aspects of what a
student says and attempting to understand or empathize as fully as
possible, even if you do not agree with what is being said (Cooper &
Simonds, 2003). Active listening involves asking questions in order
continually to check your understanding. It also involves
encouraging the student to elaborate on his or her remarks, and
paraphrasing and summarizing what the student says in order to
check your perceptions of what is said. It is important not to move
too fast toward solving the problem with advice, instructions, or
scolding, even if these are responses that you might, as a teacher,
feel responsible for making. Responding too soon with solutions
can shut down communication prematurely, and leave you with
inaccurate impressions of the source or nature of the problem.

1088 | Responding to Student Misbehavior
Step 3: Assertive Discipline and "I"-Messages

Once you have listened well to the student's point of view, it helps to
frame your responses and comments in terms of how the student's
behavior affects you in particular, especially in your role as the
teacher. The comments should have several features:

   They should be assertive--neither passive and apologetic, nor
      unnecessarily hostile and aggressive (Cantor, 1996). State the
      problem as matter-of-factly as possible: "Joe, you are talking
      while I'm explaining something," instead of either "Joe, do you
      think you could be quiet now?" or "Joe, be quiet!"

   The comments should emphasize I-messages (Gordon, 1981),
      which are comments that focus on how the problem behavior
      is affecting the teacher's ability to teach, as well as how the
      behavior makes the teacher feel. They are distinct from you-
      messages, which focus on evaluating the mistake or problem
      which the student has created. An I-message might be, "Your
      talking is making it hard for me to remember what I'm trying to
      say." A you-message might be, "Your talking is rude."

   The comments should encourage the student to think about
      the effects of his or her actions on others--a strategy that in
      effect encourages the student to consider the ethical
      implications of the actions (Gibbs, 2003). Instead of simply
      saying: "When you cut in line ahead of the other kids, that was
      not fair to them," you can try saying, "How do you think the
      other kids feel when you cut in line ahead of them?"

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online

                                              Responding to Student Misbehavior | 1089
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=137#oembed-4

Video 9.4.4. Teach Like a Champion-What to Do (part 2) provides
suggestions for providing assertive redirection and correction of
misbehavior without being harsh.

Step 4: Negotiation

The first three steps describe ways of interacting that are desirable,
but also fairly specific in scope and limited in duration. But in
themselves, they may not be enough when conflict persists over
time and develops a number of complications or confusing features.
A student may persist in being late for class, for example, in spite of
efforts by the teacher to modify this behavior. Or two students may
repeatedly speak rudely to each other, even though the teacher has
mediated this conflict in the past. Or a student may fail to complete
homework, time after time. Because these problems develop over
time, and because they may involve repeated disagreements, they
can eventually become stressful for the teacher, the student, and
any classmates who may be affected. Their persistence can tempt
a teacher simply to dictate a resolution--a decision that can leave
everyone feeling defeated, including the teacher.

   Often in these situations, it is better to negotiate a solution,
which means systematically discussing options and compromising
one if possible. Although negotiation always requires time and
effort, it is often less time or effort than continuing to cope with the
original problem, and the results can be beneficial to everyone. A
number of experts on conflict resolution have suggested strategies
for negotiating with students about persistent problems (Davidson

1090 | Responding to Student Misbehavior
& Wood, 2004). The suggestions vary in detail, but usually include
some combination of the steps we have already discussed above,
along with a few others:

   Decide as accurately as possible what the problem is. Usually,
      this step involves a lot of the active listening described above.

   Brainstorm possible solutions, and then consider their
      effectiveness. Remember to include students in this step;
      otherwise, you end up simply imposing a solution on others,
      which is not what negotiation is supposed to achieve.

   If possible, choose a solution by consensus. Complete agreement
      on the choice may not be possible, but strive for it as best you
      can. Remember that taking a vote may be a democratic,
      acceptable way to settle differences in some situations, but if
      feelings are running high, voting does not work as well. In that
      case, voting may simply allow the majority to impose its will on
      the minority, leaving the underlying conflict unresolved.

   Pay attention to how well the solution works after it is
      underway. For many reasons, things may not work out the way
      you or students hope or expect. You may need to renegotiate
      the solution at a later time.

CC licensed content, Original

   Responding to Student Misbehavior. Authored by: Nicole
      Arduini-Van Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community
      College. Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      edpsy/chapter/responding-to-misbehavior/%20. License: CC
      BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/

                                               Responding to Student Misbehavior | 1091
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Specific attribution

   Teach Like a Champion: Getting Everyone's Attention in Class.
      Provided by: Wiley. Retrieved from:
      https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EC0ltKOwF_A. License:
      All Rights Reserved

   Teach Like a Champion--Discipline. Provided by: Kaizen
      Teaching. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/-
      hFpLMNVs4U?t=29. License: All Rights Reserved

   Teach Like a Champion Technique 37--What do Do (part 1).
      Provided by: Kaizen Teaching. Retrieved from:
      https://youtu.be/JosdS0mBUgQ. License: Public Domain: No
      Known Copyright

   Teach Like a Champion Technique 37--What do Do (part 2).
      Provided by: Kaizen Teaching. Retrieved from:
      https://youtu.be/ikaeRstTyYE. License: All Rights Reserved

1092 | Responding to Student Misbehavior
Chapter Summary: Classroom

Management

There are two primary messages from this chapter. One is that
management issues are important, complex, and deserving of
serious attention. The other is that strategies exist that can reduce,
if not eliminate, management problems when and if they occur. We
have explained some of those strategies--including some intended
to prevent problems and others intended to remedy problems.

   But there is an underlying assumption about management that
this chapter emphasized fully: that good classroom management is
not an end in itself, but a means for creating a classroom where
learning happens and students are motivated. Amidst the stresses
of handling a problem behavior, there is a risk of losing sight of
this idea. Telling a student to be quiet is never a goal in itself,
for example; it is desirable only because (or when) it allows all
students to hear the teacher's instructions or classmates' spoken
comments, or because it allows students to concentrate on their
work. There may actually be moments when students' keeping quiet
is not appropriate, such as during a "free choice" time in an
elementary classroom or during a group work task in a middle
school classroom. As teachers, we need to keep this perspective
firmly in mind. Classroom management should serve students'
learning, and not the other way around. The next chapter is based
on this idea, because it discusses ways not just to set the stage
for learning, as this chapter has done, but ways to plan directly for
students' learning.

   Classroom management is the coordination of lessons and
activities to make learning as productive as possible. It is important
because classrooms are complex and somewhat unpredictable,
because students respond to teachers' actions in diverse ways, and
because society requires that students attend school. There are two

                                                                Chapter Summary: Classroom
                                                                              Management | 1093
major features of management: preventing problems before they
occur and responding to them after they occur. Many management
problems can be prevented by attending to how classroom space
is used, by establishing daily procedures, routines, and rules, by
pacing and structuring activities appropriately, and by
communicating the importance of learning and of positive behavior
to students and parents. There are several ways of dealing with
a management problem after it occurs, and the choice depends
on the nature of the problem. A teacher can simply ignore a
misbehavior, gesture or cue students nonverbally, rely on natural
and logical consequences, or engage conflict resolution strategies.
Whatever tactics the teacher uses, it is important to keep in mind
their ultimate purpose: to make learning possible and effective.

1094 | Chapter Summary: Classroom Management
Glossary

                                                                                    Glossary | 1095
References

Benson, B. & Barnett, S. (2005). Student-led conferencing using
   showcase portfolios. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.

Britt, T. (2005). Effects of identity-relevance and task difficulty on
   task motivation, stress, and performance. Motivation and
   Emotion, 29(3), 189-202.

Brookfield, S. (2006). The skillful teacher: On technique, trust, and
   responsiveness in the classroom, 2nd edition. San Francisco:
   Jossey-Bass.

Brophy, J. (2004). Motivating students to learn, 2nd edition. Mahwah,
   NJ: Erlbaum.

Chesebro, J. (2003). Effects of teacher clarity and nonverbal
   immediacy on student learning, receiver apprehension, and
   affect. Communication Education, 52(2), 135-147.

Cooper, P. & Simonds, C. (2003). Communication for the classroom
   teacher, 7th edition. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.

Davidson, J. & Wood, C. (2004). A conflict resolution model. Theory
   into Practice, 43(1), 6-13.
   Emmer, E. & Stough, L. (2001). Classroom management: A critical

part of educational psychology, with implications for teacher
education. Educational Psychologist, 36(2), 103-112.
Gibbs, J. (2003). Moral development and reality: Beyond the theories

   of Kohlberg and Hoffman. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Good, T. & Brophy, J. (2002). Looking in classrooms, 9th edition.

   Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Gordon, T. (2003). Teacher effectiveness training. New York: Three

   Rivers Press.
Guerrero, L. & Floyd, K. (2005). Nonverbal communication in close

   relationships. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Harvey EJ, Kenyon MC. (2013). Classroom Seating Considerations for

   21st Century Students and Faculty. Journal of Learning Spaces,
   2(1).

1096 | References
Heimann, M., Strid, K., Smith, L., Tjus, T., Ulvund, S. & Meltzoff,

A. (2006). Exploring the relation between memory, gestural

communication, and the emergence of language in infancy: a

longitudinal study. Infant and Child Development, 15(3), 233-249.

Institute of Educational Science [IES]. (2022). Strategy: teaching

classroom                            routines. Retrieved

from https://www.classroomcheckup.org/teaching-classroom-

routines.

Jones, T. (2004). Conflict resolution education: The field, the

findings, and the future. Conflict Resolution Quarterly, 22(1-2),

233-267.

Kohn, A. (2006). Beyond discipline: From compliance to community.

Reston, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum

Development.

Kounin, J. (1970). Discipline and group management in classrooms.

New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.

Marks, L. (2003). Instructional management tips for teachers of

students with autism-spectrum disorder. Teaching Exceptional

Children, 35(4), 50-54.

Marsh, A., Elfenbein, H. & Ambady, N. (2003). Nonverbal "accents":

cultural differences in facial expressions of emotion. Psychological

Science, 14(3), 373-376.

Marzano, R. & Marzano, J. (2004). The key to classroom

management. Educational Leadership, 62, pp. 2-7.

McCafferty, S., Jacobs, G., & Iddings, S. (Eds.). (2006). Cooperative

learning and second language teaching. New York: Cambridge

University Press.

McCorskey, J. C. & McVetta, R. W. (1978). Classroom seating

arrangements: instructional communication theory versus student

preferences. Communication Education, 27, 99-111.

Moritz, J. & Christie, A. (2005). It's elementary: Using elementary

portfolios with young students. In C. Crawford (Ed.), Proceedings

of the Society for Information Technology and Teacher Education

International Conference 2005 (pp. 144-151). Chesapeake, VA:

Association for the Advancement of Computing in Education.

                                                   References | 1097
   Nations, S. & Boyett, S. (2002). So much stuff, so little space:
Creating and managing the learner-centered classroom. Gainesville,
FL: Maupin House.

   Rands, M. L. & Gansemer-Topf, A. N. (2017). The room itself is
active: how classroom design impacts student engagement. Journal
of Learning Spaces, 6(1).

   Reynolds, A. (1992). What is competent beginning
teaching? Review of Educational Research, 62(1), 1-35.
Rinne, C. H. (1982). Low-profile classroom controls. The Phi Delta

   Kappan, 64(1), 53. Retrieved from https://www.jstor.org/stable/
   20386554.
Skinner, B. F. (1957). Verbal behavior. New York: Appleton-Century-
   Crofts.
Stevens, B. & Tollafield, A. (2003). Creating comfortable and
   productive parent/teacher conferences. Phi Delta Kappan, 84(7),
   521-525.
Stiggins, R. & Chappuis, J. (2005). Using student-involved classroom
   assessment to close achievement gaps. Theory Into Practice 44(1),
   11-18.
Thorson, S. (2003). Listening to students: Reflections on secondary
   classroom management. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Turiel, E. (2006). The development of morality. In W. Damon, R.
   Lerner, & N. Eisenberg (Eds.), Handbook of Child Psychology, 3,
   789-857. New York: Wiley.
Van Meerionboer, J., Kirschner, P., & Kester, L. (2003). Taking the
   cognitive load off a learner's mind: Instructional design for
   complex learning. Educational Psychologist, 38(1), 5-13.
Weinstein, C., Tomlinson-Clarke, S., & Curran, M. (2004). Toward
   a conception of culturally responsive classroom management.
   Journal of Teacher Education, 55(1), 25-38.

1098 | References
ASSESSMENT AND
EVALUATION

     Theme: Options in Assessment and Standardized
   Testing

        Overview of Concepts:

          Assessment Planning
          Developing Classroom Tests
          Performance Assessment
          Standardized Tests and Scores
          Testing and Accountability
        Learning Objectives:

          Describe how assessment is used in educational
             decision making

          Explain why developing an assessment plan is
             important

          Discuss the importance of grading procedures
          Discuss the importance of validity, reliability,

             fairness/equivalence, and practicality in test
             construction
          Explain how test blueprint is used to develop a
             good test
          Discuss the usefulness of various test item formats
             and scoring considerations
          Describe the benefits of item analysis

                                                          Assessment and Evaluation | 1099
          Define performance assessment and examples of
             formative and summative assessment

          Define authentic assessment and the
             characteristics

          Describe the purpose of standardized tests
          Explain the difference between criterion-

             referenced and norm-referenced
          Explain normal distribution
          Explain validity and reliability of standardized tests
          Explain how NCLB is considered high-stakes, and 3

             problems with the law
          Explain how teachers can avoid the 6 negative

             outcomes of high-stakes testing
          Explain how accommodations improve validity of

             test scores
          Explain the difference between test fairness and

             test bias

1100 | Assessment and Evaluation
Assessment

Assessment is an integrated process of gaining information about
students' learning and making value judgments about their progress
(Linn & Miller, 2005). Information about students' progress can be
obtained from a variety of sources including projects, portfolios,
performances, observations, and tests. The information about
students' learning is often assigned specific numbers or grades and
this involves measurement. Measurement answers the question,
"How much?" and is used most commonly when the teacher scores a
test or product and assigns numbers (e.g. 28 /30 on the biology test;
90/100 on the science project). Evaluation is the process of making
judgments about the assessment information (Airasian, 2005). These
judgments may be about individual students (e.g. should Jacob's
course grade take into account his significant improvement over the
grading period?), the assessment method used (e.g. is the multiple-
choice test a useful way to obtain information about problem-
solving), or one's own teaching (e.g. most of the students this year
did much better on the essay assignment than last year so my new
teaching methods seem effective).

                                                                                 Assessment | 1101
          Figure 10.1.1. Purposes of assessment and evaluation.

We will first explore assessment for learning, where the priority
is designing and using assessment strategies to enhance student
learning and development. Sometimes a teacher might begin the
lesson, unit, or academic term with a diagnostic assessment. These
assessments are used to determine students' previous knowledge,
skills, and understandings prior to teaching. This `pre-test' helps the
teacher determine what students already know, what they need to
know, and how to adjust the curriculum to meet the needs of the
students.

   Assessment for learning is most often formative assessment, i.e.
it takes place during the course of instruction by providing
information that teachers can use to revise their teaching and
students can use to improve their learning (Black, Harrison, Lee,
Marshall & Wiliam, 2004). Formative assessment includes
both informal assessment involving spontaneous unsystematic
observations of students' behaviors (e.g. during a question and
answer session or while the students are working on an assignment)
and formal assessment involving the pre-planned, systematic
gathering of data.

   Assessment of learning is a formal assessment that involves
assessing students in order to certify their competence and fulfill
accountability mandates. Assessment of learning is
typically summative, that is, administered after the instruction is
completed (e.g. a final examination in an educational psychology
course). Summative assessments provide information about how
well students mastered the material, whether students are ready for
the next unit, and what grades should be given (Airasian, 2005).

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online

1102 | Assessment
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=142#oembed-1

Video 10.1.1. Formative vs. Summative vs. Diagnostic
Assessments explains the different uses and implementations for
different types of assessments.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=142#oembed-2

Video 10.1.2. Formal vs. Informal Assessments and Examples provides
explanation of the differences between these types of assessments.

Assessment for Learning: An Overview of the
Process

                                                                                Assessment | 1103
Using assessment to advance students' learning not just check on
learning requires viewing assessment as a process that is integral
to all phases of teaching including planning, classroom interactions
and instruction, communication with parents, and self-reflection
(Stiggins, 2002). Essential steps in assessment for learning are laid
out below.

Step 1: Having Clear Instructional Goals and
Communicating Them to Students

Teachers must think carefully about the purposes of each lesson
and unit. This may be hard for beginning teachers. For example,
Vanessa, a middle school social studies teacher, might say that the
goal of her next unit is: "Students will learn about the Civil War."
Clearer goals require that Vanessa decides what it is about the US
Civil War she wants her students to learn, e.g. the dates and names
of battles, the causes of the US Civil War, the differing perspectives
of those living in the North and the South, or the day-to-day
experiences of soldiers fighting in the war. Vanessa cannot devise
appropriate assessments of her students' learning about the US Civil
War until she is clear about her own purposes.

   For effective teaching, Vanessa also needs to communicate clearly
the goals and objectives to her students so they know what is
important for them to learn. No matter how thorough a teacher's
planning has been, if students do not know what they are supposed
to learn they will not learn as much.

                                                                                                   | 1105
Step 2: Selecting Appropriate Assessment
Techniques

Selecting and administrating assessment techniques that are
appropriate for the goals of instruction as well as the developmental
level of the students are crucial components of effective assessment
for learning. Teachers need to know the characteristics of a wide
variety of classroom assessment techniques and how these
techniques can be adapted for various content, skills, and student
characteristics. They also should understand the role reliability,
validity, and the absence of bias should play is choosing and using
assessment techniques. Finally, teachers must consider the
practicality of an assessment. Is there adequate time and resources
for successfully employing a particular assessment? Much of this
chapter focuses on this information.

Step 3: Using Assessment to Enhance Motivation
and Confidence

Students' motivation and confidence are influenced by the type of
assessment used as well as the feedback given about the assessment
results. Consider, Samantha a college student who takes a history
class in which the professor's lectures and textbook focus on really
interesting major themes. However, the assessments are all
multiple-choice tests that ask about facts, and Samantha, who
initially enjoys the classes and readings, becomes angry, loses
confidence she can do well, and begins to spend less time on the
class material. In contrast, some instructors have observed that
many students in educational psychology classes like the one you
are now taking will work harder on assessments that are case
studies rather than more traditional exams or essays. The type of

1106 |
feedback provided to students is also important and we elaborate
on these ideas later in this chapter.

Step 4: Adjusting Instruction Based on
Information

An essential component of assessment for learning is that the
teacher uses the information gained from assessment to adjust
instruction. These adjustments occur in the middle of a lesson when
a teacher may decide that students' responses to questions indicate
sufficient understanding to introduce a new topic, or that her
observations of students' behavior indicate that they do not
understand the assignment and so need further explanation.
Adjustments also occur when the teacher reflects on the instruction
after the lesson is over and is planning for the next day. We provide
examples of adjusting instruction in this chapter and consider
teacher reflection in more detail in Appendix C.

Step 5: Communicating with Parents and
Guardians

Students' learning and development are enhanced when teachers
communicate with parents regularly about their children's
performance. Teachers communicate with parents in a variety of
ways including newsletters, telephone conversations, email, school
district websites, and parent-teacher conferences. Effective
communication requires that teachers can clearly explain the
purpose and characteristics of the assessment as well as the
meaning of students' performance. This requires a thorough
knowledge of the types and purposes of teacher-made and
standardized assessments and well as clear communication skills.

                                                                                                   | 1107
   We now consider each step in the process of assessment for
learning in more detail. In order to be able to select and administer
appropriate assessment techniques, teachers need to know about
the variety of techniques that can be used as well as what factors
ensure that the assessment techniques are high quality. We begin
by considering high-quality assessments.
CC licensed content, Original

   Assessment. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van Hoose. Provided
      by: Hudson Valley Community College. Retrieved from:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/chapter/
      assessment/. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

   Foundations of Education. Provided by: SUNY Oneonta.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-
      oneonta-education106/chapter/6-1-assessment-and-
      evaluation/. License: CC BY: Attribution

CC licensed content, Specific attribution

   Formative vs. Summative vs. Diagnostic Assessment . Provided
      by: Teachings in Education. Retrieved from: https://youtu.be/
      JI-YgK-l4Sg?t=4. License: All Rights Reserved

   Formal vs. Information Assessment and Examples. Provided by:
      Teachings in Education. Retrieved from:
      https://youtu.be/_WDfT46nijA. License: All Rights Reserved

1108 |
Selecting High-Quality
Assessments

For an assessment to be high quality it needs to have good validity
and reliability as well as absence from bias.

Validity

Validity is the evaluation of the "adequacy and appropriateness of
the interpretations and uses of assessment results" for a given
group of individuals (Linn & Miller, 2005, p. 68). For example, is
it appropriate to conclude that the results of a mathematics test
on fractions given to recent immigrants accurately represent their
understanding of fractions? Is it appropriate for the teacher to
conclude, based on her observations, that a kindergarten student,
Jasmine, has Attention Deficit Disorder because she does not follow
the teacher's oral instructions? Obviously, in each situation, other
interpretations are possible that the immigrant students have poor
English skills rather than mathematics skills, or that Jasmine may be
hearing impaired.

   It is important to understand that validity refers to
the interpretation and uses made of the results of an assessment
procedure, not of the assessment procedure itself. For example,
making judgments about the results of the same test on fractions
may be valid if the students all understand English well. A teacher
concluding from her observations that the kindergarten student has
Attention Deficit Disorder (ADD) may be appropriate if the student
has been screened for hearing and other disorders (although the
classification of a disorder like ADD cannot be made by one teacher).
Validity involves making an overall judgment of the degree to which

                                                                          Selecting High-Quality
                                                                               Assessments | 1109
the interpretations and uses of the assessment results are justified.

Validity is a matter of degree (e.g. high, moderate, or low validity)

rather than all-or-none (e.g. totally valid vs invalid) (Linn & Miller,

2005).

Three sources of evidence are considered when assessing

validity--content,  construct,             and  predictive. Content

validity evidence is associated with the question: How well does

the assessment include the content or tasks it is supposed to? For

example, suppose your educational psychology instructor devises a

mid-term test and tells you this includes chapters one to seven in

the textbook. Obviously, all the items in the test should be based

on the content from educational psychology, not your methods

or cultural foundations classes. Also, the items in the test should

cover content from all seven chapters and not just chapters three

to seven--unless the instructor tells you that these chapters have

priority.

Teachers' have to be clear about their purposes and priorities

for instruction before they can begin to gather evidence related

to content validity. Content validation determines the degree that

which assessment tasks are relevant and representative of the tasks

judged by the teacher (or test developer) to represent their goals

and objectives (Linn & Miller, 2005). It is important for teachers

to think about content validation when devising assessment tasks

and one way to help do this is to devise a Table of Specifications.

An example, based on Pennsylvania's State standards for grade 3

geography, is in the table below. In the left-hand column is the

instructional content for a 20-item test the teacher has decided to

construct with two kinds of instructional objectives: identification

and uses or locates. The second and third columns identify the

number of items for each content area and each instructional

objective. Notice that the teacher has decided that six items should

be devoted to the sub-area of geographic representations- more

than any other sub-area. Devising a table of specifications helps

teachers determine if some content areas or concepts are over-

1110 | Selecting High-Quality Assessments
sampled (i.e. there are too many items) and some concepts are
under-sampled (i.e. there are too few items).

Table 10.2.1. Example of Table of Specifications: grade 3 basic
geography literacy

Content                       Instructional            Total     Percent
                              objective                number    of
                                                       of items  items
                                              Uses
                              Identifies or                      30%
                                                                 10%
                                              locates            10%

Identify geography tools and their uses                          15%
                                                                 25%
Geographic representations:                                      10%

e.g., maps, globe, diagrams,  3                3       6         100%

and photographs

Spatial information: sketch & thematic maps 1  1       2

Mental maps                   1                1       2

Identify and locate places and regions

Physical features (e.g. lakes, continents) 1   2       3

Human features (countries, states, cities) 3   2       5

Regions with unifying                          1       3
geographic characteristics e.g. 1
river basins

Total number of items         10               10      20

Total percentage of items     50%              50%

Construct validity evidence is more complex than content validity
evidence. Often we are interested in making broader judgments
about students' performances than specific skills such as doing
fractions. The focus may be on constructs such as mathematical
reasoning or reading comprehension. A construct is a characteristic
of a person we assume exists to help explain behavior. For example,
we use the concept of test anxiety to explain why some individuals
when taking a test have difficulty concentrating, have physiological
reactions such as sweating, and perform poorly on tests but not

                              Selecting High-Quality Assessments | 1111
in-class assignments. Similarly, mathematics reasoning and reading
comprehension are constructs as we use them to help explain
performance on an assessment. Construct validation is the process
of determining the extent to which performance on an assessment
can be interpreted in terms of the intended constructs and is not
influenced by factors irrelevant to the construct. For example,
judgments about recent immigrants' performance on a
mathematical reasoning test administered in English will have low
construct validity if the results are influenced by English language
skills that are irrelevant to mathematical problem-solving. Similarly,
construct validity of end-of-semester examinations is likely to be
poor for those students who are highly anxious when taking major
tests but not during regular class periods or when doing
assignments. Teachers can help increase construct validity by trying
to reduce factors that influence performance but are irrelevant to
the construct being assessed. These factors include anxiety, English
language skills, and reading speed (Linn & Miller 2005).

   The third form of validity evidence is called criterion-related
validity. Selective colleges in the USA use the ACT or SAT among
other criteria to choose who will be admitted because these
standardized tests help predict freshman grades, i.e. have high
criterion-related validity. Some K-12 schools give students math or
reading tests in the fall semester in order to predict which are
likely to do well on the annual state tests administered in the spring
semester and which students are unlikely to pass the tests and will
need additional assistance. If the tests administered in the fall do
not predict students' performances accurately then the additional
assistance may be given to the wrong students illustrating the
importance of criterion-related validity.

Reliability

Reliability refers to the consistency of the measurement (Linn &

1112 | Selecting High-Quality Assessments
Miller 2005). Suppose Mr. Garcia is teaching a unit on food
chemistry in his tenth-grade class and gives an assessment at the
end of the unit using test items from the teachers' guide. Reliability
is related to questions such as: How similar would the scores of
the students be if they had taken the assessment on a Friday or
Monday? Would the scores have varied if Mr. Garcia had selected
different test items, or if a different teacher had graded the test? An
assessment provides information about students by using a specific
measure of performance at one particular time. Unless the results
from the assessment are reasonably consistent over different
occasions, different raters, or different tasks (in the same content
domain) confidence in the results will be low and so cannot be
useful in improving student learning.

   Obviously, we cannot expect perfect consistency. Students'
memory, attention, fatigue, effort, and anxiety fluctuate and so
influence performance. Even trained raters vary somewhat when
grading assessments such as essays, science projects, or oral
presentations. Also, the wording and design of specific items
influence students' performances. However, some assessments are
more reliable than others and there are several strategies teachers
can use to increase reliability.

   First, assessments with more tasks or items typically have higher
reliability. To understand this, consider two tests one with five
items and one with 50 items. Chance factors influence the shorter
test more than the longer test. If a student does not understand
one of the items in the first test the total score is very highly
influenced (it would be reduced by 20 percent). In contrast, if there
was one item in the test with 50 items that were confusing, the total
score would be influenced much less (by only 2 percent). Obviously,
this does not mean that assessments should be inordinately long,
but, on average, enough tasks should be included to reduce the
influence of chance variations. Second, clear directions and tasks
help increase reliability. If the directions or wording of specific
tasks or items are unclear, then students have to guess what they
mean undermining the accuracy of their results. Third, clear scoring

                                               Selecting High-Quality Assessments | 1113
criteria are crucial in ensuring high reliability (Linn & Miller, 2005).
Later in this chapter, we describe strategies for developing scoring
criteria for a variety of types of assessment.

Absence of Bias

Bias occurs in assessment when there are components in the
assessment method or administration of the assessment that distort
the performance of the student because of their personal
characteristics such as gender, ethnicity, or social class (Popham,
2005). Two types of assessment bias are
important: offensiveness and unfair penalization. An assessment is
most likely to be offensive to a subgroup of students when negative
stereotypes are included in the test. For example, the assessment
in a health class could include items in which all the doctors were
men and all the nurses were women. Or, a series of questions in a
social studies class could portray Latinos and Asians as immigrants
rather than native-born Americans. In these examples, some female,
Latino or Asian students are likely to be offended by the stereotypes
and this can distract them from performing well on the assessment.

   Unfair penalization occurs when items disadvantage one group
not because they may be offensive but because of differential
background experiences. For example, an item for math assessment
that assumes knowledge of a particular sport may disadvantage
groups not as familiar with that sport (e.g. American football for
recent immigrants). Or an assessment on teamwork that asks
students to model their concept of a team on a symphony orchestra
is likely to be easier for those students who have attended orchestra
performances--probable students from affluent families. Unfair
penalization does not occur just because some students do poorly
in class. For example, asking questions about a specific sport in a
physical education class when information on that sport had been
discussed in class is not unfair penalization as long as the questions

1114 | Selecting High-Quality Assessments
do not require knowledge beyond that taught in class that some
groups are less likely to have.

   It can be difficult for new teachers to teach in multi-ethnic
classrooms to devise interesting assessments that do not penalize
any groups of students. Teachers need to think seriously about the
impact of students' differing backgrounds on the assessment they
use in class. Listening carefully to what students say is important as
is learning about the backgrounds of the students.
CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

                                               Selecting High-Quality Assessments | 1115
Teacher-Made Assessments

One of the challenges for beginning teachers is to select and use
appropriate assessment techniques. In this section, we summarize
the wide variety of types of assessments that classroom teachers
use. First, we discuss the informal techniques teachers use during
instruction that typically require instantaneous decisions. Then we
consider formal assessment techniques that teachers plan before
instruction and allow for reflective decisions.

Teachers' Observation, Questioning, and
Record-Keeping

During teaching, teachers not only have to communicate the
information they planned but also continuously monitor students'
learning and motivation in order to determine whether
modifications have to be made (Airasian, 2005). Beginning teachers
find this more difficult than experienced teachers because of the
complex cognitive skills required to improvise and be responsive
to students' needs while simultaneously keeping in mind the goals
and plans of the lesson (Borko & Livingston, 1989). The informal
assessment strategies teachers most often use during instruction
are observation and questioning.

Observation

Effective teachers observe their students from the time they enter
the classroom. Some teachers greet their students at the door not
only to welcome them but also to observe their mood and

1116 | Teacher-Made Assessments
motivation. Are Hannah and Naomi still not talking to each other?
Does Ethan have his materials with him? Gaining information on
such questions can help the teacher foster student learning more
effectively (e.g. suggesting Ethan goes back to his locker to get his
materials before the bell rings or avoiding assigning Hannah and
Naomi to the same group).

   During instruction, teachers observe students' behavior to gain
information about students' level of interest and understanding of
the material or activity. Observation includes looking at non-verbal
behaviors as well as listening to what the students are saying. For
example, a teacher may observe that a number of students are
looking out of the window rather than watching the science
demonstration, or a teacher may hear students making comments
in their group indicating they do not understand what they are
supposed to be doing. Observations also help teachers decide which
student to call on next, whether to speed up or slow down the pace
of the lesson, when more examples are needed, whether to begin or
end an activity, how well students are performing a physical activity,
and if there are potential behavior problems (Airasian, 2005). Many
teachers find that moving around the classroom helps them observe
more effectively because they can see more students from a variety
of perspectives. However, the fast pace and complexity of most
classrooms make it difficult for teachers to gain as much
information as they want.

Questioning

Teachers ask questions for many instructional reasons including
keeping students' attention on the lesson, highlighting important
points and ideas, promoting critical thinking, allowing students to
learn from each other's answers, and providing information about
students' learning. Devising good appropriate questions and using
students' responses to make effective instantaneous instructional

                                                           Teacher-Made Assessments | 1117
decisions is very difficult. Some strategies to improve questioning
include planning and writing down the instructional questions that
will be asked, allowing sufficient wait time for students to respond,
listening carefully to what students say rather than listening for
what is expected, varying the types of questions asked, making
sure some of the questions are higher level, and asking follow-up
questions.

   While the informal assessment based on spontaneous observation
and questioning is essential for teaching there are inherent
problems with the validity, reliability, and bias of this information
(Airasian, 2005; Stiggins 2005). We summarize these issues and
some ways to reduce the problems in the table below.

1118 | Teacher-Made Assessments
Table 10.3.1. Validity and reliability of observation and questioning

Problem              Strategies to alleviate the problem

Teachers lack        Try to make sure you are not only seeing what you
objectivity about    want to see. Teachers typically want to feel good
overall class        about their instruction so it is easy to look for
involvement and      positive student interactions. Occasionally,
understanding        teachers want to see negative student reactions to
                     confirm their beliefs about an individual student
                     or class.

Tendency to focus    Remember to concentrate on student learning,
on process rather    not just involvement. Most of the teachers'
than learning        observations focus on process--student attention,
                     facial expressions posture--rather than pupil
                     learning. Students can be active and engaged but
                     not develop new skills.

Limited              Make sure you observe a variety of
information and      students--not just those who are typically
selective sampling   very good or very bad. Walk around the
                     room to observe more students "up close"
                     and view the room from multiple
                     perspectives. Call on a wide variety of
                     students--not just those with their hands up,
                     or those who are skilled as the subject, or
                     those who sit in a particular place in the
                     room. Keep records.

Fast pace of         If you want to know if you are missing important
classrooms inhibits  information ask a peer to visit your classroom and
corroborative        observe the students' behaviors. Classrooms are
evidence             complex and fast-paced and one teacher cannot
                     see much of what is going on while trying to also
                     teach.

Cultural and         Be cautious in the conclusions that you draw from
individual           your observations and questions. Remember that
differences in the   the meaning and expectations of certain types of
meaning of verbal    questions, wait time, social distance, and the role
and nonverbal        of "small talk" varies across cultures. Some
behaviors            students are quiet because of their personalities
                     not because they are uninvolved, keeping up with
                     the lesson, nor depressed or tired.

Record Keeping

Keeping records of observations improves reliability and can be
                                                          Teacher-Made Assessments | 1119
used to enhance the understanding of one student, a group, or
the whole class' interactions. Sometimes this requires help from
other teachers. For example, Alexis, a beginning science teacher is
aware of the research documenting that longer wait time enhances
students' learning (e.g. Rowe, 2003) but is unsure of her behaviors
so she asks a colleague to observe and record her wait times during
one class period. Alexis learns her wait times are very short for all
students so she starts practicing silently counting to five whenever
she asks students a question.

   Teachers can keep anecdotal records about students without help
from peers. These records contain descriptions of incidents of a
student's behavior, the time and place the incident takes place,
and a tentative interpretation of the incident. For example, the
description of the incident might involve Joseph, a second-grade
student, who fell asleep during the mathematics class on a Monday
morning. A tentative interpretation could be the student did not get
enough sleep over the weekend, but alternative explanations could
be the student is sick or is on medications that make him drowsy.
Obviously, additional information is needed and the teacher could
ask Joseph why he is so sleepy and also observe him to see if he
looks tired and sleepy over the next couple of weeks.

   Anecdotal records often provide important information and are
better than relying on one's memory but they take time to maintain
and it is difficult for teachers to be objective. For example, after
seeing Joseph fall asleep the teacher may now look for any signs
of Joseph's sleepiness--ignoring the days he is not sleepy. Also, it is
hard for teachers to sample a wide enough range of data for their
observations to be highly reliable.

   Teachers also conduct more formal observations, especially for
students with special needs who have IEPs. An example of the
importance of informal and formal observations in a preschool
follows:

1120 | Teacher-Made Assessments
   The class of preschoolers in a suburban neighborhood
of a large city has eight special needs students and four
students--the peer models--who have been selected
because of their well-developed language and social
skills. Some of the special needs students have been
diagnosed with delayed language, some with behavior
disorders, and several with autism.

   The students are sitting on the mat with the teacher
who has a box with sets of three "cool" things of varying
sizes (e.g. toy pandas) and the students are asked to put
the things in order by size, big, medium, and small.
Students who are able to are also requested to point to
each item in turn and say "This is the big one," "This is
the medium one," and "This is the little one." For some
students, only two choices (big and little) are offered
because that is appropriate for their developmental
level.

   The teacher informally observes that one of the boys
is having trouble keeping his legs still so she quietly asks
the aid for a weighted pad that she places on the boy's
legs to help him keep them still. The activity continues
and the aide carefully observes students' behaviors and
records on IEP progress cards whether a child meets
specific objectives such as: "When given two picture or
object choices, Mark will point to the appropriate object
in 80 percent of the opportunities." The teacher and
aides keep records of the relevant behavior of the
special needs students during the half-day they are in
preschool. The daily records are summarized weekly. If
there are not enough observations that have been

                                                  Teacher-Made Assessments | 1121
       recorded for a specific objective, the teacher and aide
       focus their observations more on that child, and if
       necessary, try to create specific situations that relate to
       that objective. At the end of each month, the teacher
       calculates whether the special needs children are
       meeting their IEP objectives.

Selected Response Items

Common formal assessment formats used by teachers are multiple-
choice, matching, and true/false items. In selected-response items,
students have to select a response provided by the teacher or test
developer rather than constructing a response in their own words
or actions. Selected response items do not require that
students recall the information but rather recognize the correct
answer. Tests with these items are called objective because the
results are not influenced by scorers' judgments or interpretations
and so are often machine scored. Eliminating potential errors in
scoring increases the reliability of tests but teachers who only use
objective tests are liable to reduce the validity of their assessment
because objective tests are not appropriate for all learning goals
(Linn & Miller, 2005). Effective assessment for learning as well as the
assessment of learning must be based on aligning the assessment
technique to the learning goals and outcomes.

   For example, if the goal is for students to conduct an experiment
then they should be asked to do that rather than being asked
about conducting an experiment.

1122 | Teacher-Made Assessments
Common problems

Selected response items are easy to score but are hard to devise.
Teachers often do not spend enough time constructing items and
common problems include:

   Unclear wording in the items
         True or False: Although George Washington was born into
            a wealthy family, his father died when he was only 11, he
            worked as a youth as a surveyor of rural lands, and later
            stood on the balcony of Federal Hall in New York when he
            took his oath of office in 1789.

   Cues that are not related to the content being examined.
         A common clue is that all the true statements on a true/
            false test or the corrective alternatives on a multiple-
            choice test are longer than the untrue statements or the
            incorrect alternatives.

   Using negatives (or double negatives) for the items.
         A poor item: "True or False: None of the steps made by the
            student was unnecessary."
         A better item: True or False: "All of the steps were
            necessary."
         Students often do not notice the negative terms or find
            them confusing so avoiding them is generally
            recommended (Linn & Miller 2005). However, since
            standardized tests often use negative items, teachers
            sometimes deliberately include some negative items to
            give students practice in responding to that format.

   Taking sentences directly from the textbook or lecture notes.
      Removing the words from their context often makes them
      ambiguous or can change the meaning. For example, a
      statement from Chapter 3 taken out of context suggests all
      children are clumsy. "Similarly with jumping, throwing, and

                                                          Teacher-Made Assessments | 1123
      catching: the large majority of children can do these things,
      though often a bit clumsily." A fuller quotation makes it clearer
      that this sentence refers to 5-year-olds: "For some fives,
      running still looks a bit like a hurried walk, but usually it
      becomes more coordinated within a year or two. Similarly with
      jumping, throwing, and catching: the large majority of children
      can do these things, though often a bit clumsily, by the time
      they start school, and most improve their skills noticeably
      during the early elementary years." If the abbreviated form was
      used as the stem in a true/false item it would obviously be
      misleading.
   Avoid trivial questions e.g. Jean Piaget was born in what year?

         While it is important to know approximately when Piaget
            made his seminal contributions to the understanding of
            child development, the exact year of his birth (1880) is not
            important.

Strengths and weaknesses

All types of selected-response items have a number of strengths and
weaknesses. True/False items are appropriate for measuring factual
knowledge such as vocabulary, formulae, dates, proper names, and
technical terms. They are very efficient as they use a simple
structure that students can easily understand and take little time
to complete. They are also easier to construct than multiple-choice
and matching items. However, students have a 50 percent
probability of getting the answer correct through guessing so it
can be difficult to interpret how much students know from their
test scores. Examples of common problems that arise when devising
true/false items are in the table below.

1124 | Teacher-Made Assessments
Table 10.3.2. Common errors in selected-response items

Type of   Common errors Example
item

True/     The statement    T/F: The President of the United
False     is not           States is elected to that office. This
          absolutely       is usually true but the US Vice
          true--typically  President can succeed the
          because it       President.
          contains a
          broad
          generalization.

True/     The item is      T/F: Education for K-12 students is
False     opinion not      improved through policies that
          fact             support charter schools. Some
                           people believe this, some do not.

True/     Two ideas are    T/F: George H Bush the 40th
False     included in      president of the US was defeated by
          item             William Jefferson Clinton in
                           1992. The 1st idea is false; the 2nd is
                           true making it difficult for students
                           to decide whether to circle T or F.

True/     Irrelevant       T/F: The President of the United
False     cues             States is usually elected to that
                           office. True items contain words
                           such as usually generally; whereas
                           false items contain terms such as
                           always, all, never.

                           Directions: On the line to the US
                           Civil War Battle write the year or
                           confederate general in Column B

Matching  Columns do       Column A          Column B
          not contain
          homogeneous        Ft Sumter        General
          information        2nd Battle of        Stonewall
                                                   Jackson
                                 Bull Run
                             Ft Henry         General
                                                   Johnson

                                               1861
                                               1862

Matching  Too many         Column B is a mixture of generals
          items in each    and dates.
          list
                           Lists should be relatively short (4-7)
                           in each column. More than 10 are
                           too confusing.

                           Teacher-Made Assessments | 1125
Table 10.3.2. Common errors in selected-response items

Matching  Responses are   In the example with Spanish and
          not in logical  English words (Exhibit 1) should be
          order           in a logical order (they are
                          alphabetical). If the order is not
                          logical, students spend too much
                          time searching for the correct
                          answer.

Multiple  Problem (i.e.   New Zealand
Choice    the stem) is
          not clearly       Is the worlds' smallest
          stated                continent
          problem
                            Is home to the kangaroo
                            Was settled mainly by colonists

                                from Great Britain
                            Is a dictatorship

                          This is really a series of true-false
                          items. Because the correct answer is
                          3, a better version with the problem
                          in the stem is Much of New Zealand
                          was settled by colonists from

                           1. Great Britain
                          2. Spain
                          3. France
                          4. Holland

1126 | Teacher-Made Assessments
Table 10.3.2. Common errors in selected-response items

Multiple  Some of the    Who is best known for their work
Choice    alternatives   on the development of the morality
          are not        of justice?
          plausible
                          1. Gerald Ford
                         2. Vygotsky
                         3. Maslow
                         4. Kohlberg

                         Obviously Gerald Ford is not a
                         plausible alternative.

Multiple Irrelevant       Correct alternative is longer
Choice cues               Incorrect alternatives are not

                             grammatically correct with the
                             stem
                          Too many correct alternatives
                             are in position "b" or "c" making
                             it easier for students to guess.
                             All the options (e.g. a, b, c, d)
                             should be used in approximately
                             equal frequently (not exact as
                             that also provides clues).

Multiple Use of "All of  If all of the "above is used" then the
Choice above"            other items must be correct. This
                         means that a student may read the
                         1st response, mark it correct, and
                         move on. Alternatively, a student
                         may read the 1st two items, and
                         seeing they are true does not need
                         to read the other alternatives to
                         know to circle "all of the above."
                         The teacher probably does not want
                         either of these options.

In matching items, two parallel columns containing terms, phrases,
symbols, or numbers are presented and the student is asked to
match the items in the first column with those in the second
column. Typically there are more items in the second column to
make the task more difficult and to ensure that if a student makes
one error they do not have to make another. Matching items most

                                                          Teacher-Made Assessments | 1127
often are used to measure lower-level knowledge such as persons
and their achievements, dates and historical events, terms and
definitions, symbols and concepts, plants or animals, and
classifications (Linn & Miller, 2005). An example of Spanish language
words and their English equivalents is in Example 1.

     EXample 1: SPANISH AND ENGLISH
   TRANSLATION

   Directions: On the line to the right of the Spanish word in
Column A, write the letter of the English word in Column B
that has the same meaning.

Column A       Column B

1. Casa ___    1. Aunt
2. Beb ___    2. Baby
3. Gata ___    3. Brother
4. Perro ___   4. Cat
5. Hermano___  5. Dog
               6. Father
               7. House

While matching items may seem easy to devise it is hard to create
homogenous lists. Other problems with matching items and
suggested remedies are in Table 10.3.2.

   Multiple Choice items are the most commonly used type of
objective test items because they have a number of advantages over
other objective test items. Most importantly they can be adapted to
assess higher levels of thinking such as application as well as lower-
level factual knowledge. The first example in Example 2 assesses
knowledge of a specific fact whereas the second example assesses
the application of knowledge.

1128 | Teacher-Made Assessments
     Example 2: MULTIPLE-CHOICE EXAMPLES

        Who is best known for their work on the development of
     the morality of justice?

         1. Erikson
        2. Vygotsky
        3. Maslow
        4. Kohlberg

        Which one of the following best illustrates the law of
     diminishing returns?

         1. A factory doubled its labor force and increased
             production by 50 percent

        2. The demand for an electronic product increased
             faster than the supply of the product

        3. The population of a country increased faster than
             agricultural self-sufficiency

        4. A machine decreased in efficacy as its parts became
             worn out

        (Adapted from Linn and Miller 2005, p, 193).

There are several other advantages of multiple-choice items.
Students have to recognize the correct answer not just know the
incorrect answer as they do in true/false items. Also, the
opportunity for guessing is reduced because four or five alternatives
are usually provided whereas in true/false items students only have
to choose between two choices. Also, multiple-choice items do not
need homogeneous material as matching items do. However,
creating good multiple-choice test items is difficult and students
(maybe including you) often become frustrated when taking a test

                                                          Teacher-Made Assessments | 1129
with poor multiple-choice items. Three steps have to be considered
when constructing a multiple-choice item: formulating a clearly
stated problem, identifying plausible alternatives, and removing
irrelevant clues to the answer. Common problems in each of these
steps are summarized in Table 10.3.3 (below).

Constructed Response Items

Formal assessment also includes constructed-response items in
which students are asked to recall information and create an
answer--not just recognize if the answer is correct--so guessing is
reduced. Constructed response items can be used to assess a wide
variety of kinds of knowledge and two major kinds are discussed:
completion or short answer (also called short response) and
extended response.

Completion and Short Answer

Completion and short-answer items can be answered in a word,
phrase, number, or symbol. These types of items are essentially
the same only varying in whether the problem is presented as a
statement or a question (Linn & Miller 2005). Look at Example 3 for
a sample:

1130 | Teacher-Made Assessments
     Example 3: COMPLETION AND SHORT
   ANSWER QUESTIONS

        Completion: The first traffic light in the US was invented
     by ________.

        Short Answer: Who invented the first traffic light in the
     US?

        These items are often used in mathematics tests, for
     example:

        3 + 10 = ____?
        If x = 6, what does x(x - 1) = ________
        Draw the line of symmetry on the following shape:

A major advantage of these items is that they are easy to construct.
However, apart from their use in mathematics they are unsuitable
for measuring complex learning outcomes and are often difficult
to score. Completion and short-answer tests are sometimes called
objective tests as the intent is that there is only one correct answer
and so there is no variability in scoring but unless the question
is phrased very carefully, there are frequently a variety of correct
answers. For example, consider the short answer question "Where
was President Lincoln born?"

   The teacher may expect the answer "in a log cabin" but other
correct answers are also "on Sinking Spring Farm," "in Hardin
County," or "in Kentucky." Common errors in these items are
summarized in the table below.

                                                          Teacher-Made Assessments | 1131
Table 10.3.3. Common errors in constructed response items

Type of     Common        Examples
item        errors

Completion  There is      Where was US President Lincoln born? The
and short   more than     answer could be in a log cabin, in Kentucky,
answer      one           etc.
            possible
            answer.

Completion  Too many      In ________ theory, the first stage,
and short   blanks are    ________ is when infants process through
answer      in the        their ________
            completion    and________ ________.
            item so it
            is too
            difficult or
            doesn't
            make
            sense.

Completion  Clues are     Three states are contiguous to New
and short   given by      Hampshire: ________ is to the West,
answer      length of     ________ is to the East, and ________ is
            blanks in     to the South.
            completion
            items.

Extended    Ambiguous     Was the US Civil War avoidable? Students
response    questions     could interpret this question in a wide variety
                          of ways, perhaps even stating "yes" or "no." One
                          student may discuss only political causes,
                          another moral, political and economic causes.
                          There is no guidance in the question for
                          students.

Extended    Poor          The teacher does not use a scoring rubric and
response    reliability   so is inconsistent in how he scores answers
            in grading    especially unexpected responses, irrelevant
                          information, and grammatical errors.

Extended    Perception    By spring semester the teacher has developed
response    of student    expectations of each student's performance
            influences    and this influences the grading (numbers can
            grading       be used instead of names). The test consists
                          of three constructed responses and the
                          teacher grades the three answers on each
                          students' paper before moving to the next
                          paper. This means that the grading of
                          questions 2 and 3 are influenced by the
                          answers to question 1 (teachers should grade
                          all the 1st question then the 2nd etc).

1132 | Teacher-Made Assessments
Table 10.3.3. Common errors in constructed response items

Extended  Choices      Testing experts recommend not giving
response  are given    choices in tests because then students are
          on the test  not really taking the same test creating equity
          and some     problems.
          answers
          are easier
          than
          others

Extended Response

Extended response items are used in many content areas and
answers may vary in length from a paragraph to several pages.
Questions that require longer responses are often called essay
questions. Extended response items have several advantages and
the most important is their adaptability for measuring complex
learning outcomes-- particularly integration and application. These
items also require that students write and therefore provide
teachers a way to assess writing skills. A commonly cited advantage
to these items is their ease in construction; however, carefully
worded items that are related to learning outcomes and assess
complex learning are hard to devise (Linn & Miller, 2005). Well-
constructed items phrase the question so the task of the student is
clear. Often this involves providing hints or planning notes. In the
first example below the actual question is clear not only because of
the wording but because of the format (i.e. it is placed in a box). In
the second and third examples planning notes are provided:

                       Teacher-Made Assessments | 1133
     EXAMPLE 4: THIRD GRADE
   MATHEMATICS

        The owner of a bookstore gave 14 books to the school.
     The principal will give an equal number of books to each of
     three classrooms and the remaining books to the school
     library. How many books could the principal give to each
     student and the school?

        Show all your work on the space below and on the next
     page. Explain in words how you found the answer. Tell why
     you took the steps you did to solve the problem.

        (From Illinois Standards Achievement Test, 2006;
     (http://www.isbe.state.il.us/assessment/isat.htm))

     Example 5: FIFTH GRADE SCIENCE: THE
   GRASS IS ALWAYS GREENER

        Jose and Maria noticed three different types of soil, black
     soil, sand, and clay, were found in their neighborhood. They
     decided to investigate the question, "How does the type of
     soil (black soil, sand, and clay) under grass sod affect the
     height of grass?"

        Plan an investigation that could answer their new
     question. In your plan, be sure to include:

          Prediction of the outcome of the investigation

1134 | Teacher-Made Assessments
     Materials needed to do the investigation
     Procedure that includes:

             logical steps to do the investigation
             one variable kept the same (controlled)
             one variable changed (manipulated)
             any variables being measure and recorded
             how often measurements are taken and

                recorded
   (From Washington State 2004 assessment of student
learning (http://www.k12.wa.us/assessment/WASL/
default.aspx))

 Example 6: GRADES 9-11 ENGLISH

  Writing prompt

   Some people think that schools should teach students
how to cook. Other people think that cooking is something
that ought to be taught in the home. What do you think?
Explain why you think as you do.

  Planning notes

   Choose One:

                                                    Teacher-Made Assessments | 1135
          I think schools should teach students how to cook
          I think cooking should l be taught in the home

        I think cooking should be taught in
     ____________ because
     ________________________.

        (From Illinois Measure of Annual Growth in English
     (http://www.isbe.state.il.us/assessment/image.htm))

A major disadvantage of extended-response items is the difficulty
in reliable scoring. Not only do various teachers score the same
response differently but also the same teacher may score an
identical response differently on various occasions (Linn & Miller
2005). A variety of steps can be taken to improve the reliability
and validity of scoring. First, teachers should begin by writing an
outline of a model answer. This helps make it clear what students
are expected to include. Second, a sample of the answers should be
read. This assists in determining what the students can do and if
there are any common misconceptions arising from the question.
Third, teachers have to decide what to do about irrelevant
information that is included (e.g. is it ignored or are students
penalized) and how to evaluate mechanical errors such as grammar
and spelling. Then, a point scoring or a scoring rubric should be
used.

   In point-scoring components of the answer are assigned points.
This provides some guidance for evaluation and helps consistency
but point-scoring systems often lead the teacher to focus on facts
(e.g. naming risk factors) rather than higher-level thinking which
may undermine the validity of the assessment if the teachers'
purposes include higher-level thinking. A better approach is to use
a scoring rubric that describes the quality of the answer or
performance at each level.

1136 | Teacher-Made Assessments
     Example 7: Point Scoring for Written Response

        For example, if students were asked: What are the nature,
     symptoms, and risk factors of hyperthermia?

        Point Scoring Guide:

          Definition (natures) 2 pts
          Symptoms (1 pt for each) 5 pts
          Risk Factors (1 point for each) 5 pts
          Writing 3 pts

Scoring Rubrics

A rubric is a scoring guide used to assess performance given a set of
criteria.

   A basic scoring rubric could be a list of the required components
for evaluating the assignment. More advanced rubrics divide an
assignment into all component parts and provide explicit
expectations of acceptable and unacceptable levels of performance
for each component. More complex scoring rubrics can be
holistic or analytical. In holistic scoring rubrics, general
descriptions of performance are made and a single overall score is
obtained.

   Rubrics help teachers carefully plan assignments and
expectations of the students before giving the assignment. The
guidance provided by the rubric may reduce the time clarifying
assignment requirements for students and helps students know
precisely what is expected from them when completing the work.
When students have clear expectations, the quality of student work

                                                          Teacher-Made Assessments | 1137
increases. Rubrics usually reduce time spent grading, but still be
able to give constructive feedback to students. Finally, student
complaints and questions about grades will decrease when it is clear
why they received a particular score. It takes time to create a rubric,
but you only have to create it once for each assignment. However, in
the long run, a rubric is a time-saver, because you'll spend less time
clarifying and grading.

Checklists

The least complex type of scoring rubric is the checklist. A checklist
allows the rater to simply indicate the presence of the expected
component, but it does not indicate the quality of the element,
a pass/fail of sorts. These rubrics do tend to be quick and easy
to administer, they do not provide much feedback to the student.
Checklists may be most useful for providing feedback on minor
assignments or drafts of assignments. If the teacher wants to
provide feedback about the quality of work, a rating scale would be
more appropriate.

     Example 8: Checklist: Question Response
   Checklist

        Assignment: read the chapter and write a reply to the
     assigned question. Define relevant terms and apply
     concepts in a real-world setting.

1138 | Teacher-Made Assessments
Basic Rating Scales

Rating scales are like checklists with the addition of evaluating the
quality of criteria using a scoring system. While rating scales may
be more informative than checklists, the meaning of the numeric
ratings is vague. Without a narrative for the ratings, the raters must
make a judgment based on their perception of the meanings of the
rating scale. For example, for an assignment, one rater might score
it a "3," presuming that it means "good" and another rater might
also choose "3" but believe the work was "marginal." Similarly, the
rating may not mean the same thing to the student as it does to the
teacher. The vagueness of the basic rating scale can be corrected by
adding descriptors for the ratings, making it a holistic rubric.

     Example 9: Basic Rating scale: Wiki Group

                                                          Teacher-Made Assessments | 1139
   Project

        Assignment: students work with a group to create a wiki
     page on a given topic.

Holistic Scoring Rubrics

Holistic scoring rubrics use a short narrative of characteristics
associated with each numeric score based on an overall impression
of a student's performance on a task. The descriptions tend to be
1140 | Teacher-Made Assessments
rather vague because the same score descriptions are applied to
multiple components of the assignment. This type of rubric does
not provide specific areas of strengths and weaknesses for each
element and therefore the feedback is less directive for teachers
and students to focus improvement efforts.

   A holistic rubric may be more appropriate when the assignments
to be assessed will vary significantly (e.g., independent study
projects submitted in a capstone course) or when practicality
dictates a speedier assessment due to the number of assignments
or time limitations (e.g., reviewing all the essays from applicants to
determine who will need developmental courses).

   An example from grade 2 language arts in Los Angeles Unified
School District classifies responses into four levels: not proficient,
partially proficient, proficient, and advanced is on Example 4.

     Example 10: HOLISTIC SCORING RUBRIC:
   ENGLISH LANGUAGE ARTS GRADE 2

        Assignment: write about an interesting, fun, or exciting
     story you have read in class this year. Some of the things
     you could write about are:

          What happened in the story (the plot or events)
          Where the events took place (the setting)
          People, animals, or things in the story ( the

             characters)
        In your writing make sure you use facts and details from
     the story to describe everything clearly. After you write
     about the story, explain what makes the story interesting,
     fun or exciting.

                                                          Teacher-Made Assessments | 1141
Scoring Rubric

Level           Poin  Criteria
             ts
                       The response demonstrates
Advanc Scor               well-developed reading
                          comprehension skills.
ed           e 4
                       Major story elements (plot,
                          setting, or characters) are clearly and
                          accurately described.

                       Statements about the plot, setting,
                          or characters are arranged in a
                          manner that makes sense.

                       Ideas or judgments (why the story
                          is interesting, fun, or exciting) are
                          clearly supported or explained with
                          facts and details from the story.

Profici Scor           The response demonstrates solid
                          reading comprehension skills.
ent          e 3
                       Most statements about the plot,
                          setting, or characters are clearly
                          described.

                       Most statements about the plot,
                          setting, or characters are arranged in
                          a manner that makes sense.

                       Ideas or judgments are supported
                          with facts and details from the story.

   Partiall  Scor      The response demonstrates some
y                         reading comprehension skills
Proficient e 1
                       There is an attempt to describe
                          the plot, setting, or characters

                       Some statements about the plot,
                          setting, or characters are arranged in
                          a manner that makes sense.

                       Ideas or judgments may be
                          supported with some facts and
                          details from the story.

1142 | Teacher-Made Assessments
Scoring Rubric

Not  Scor        The response demonstrates little
                    or no skill in reading comprehension.
Proficient e 1
                 The plot, setting, or characters are
                    not described, or the description is
                    unclear.

                 Statements about the plot, setting,
                    or characters are not arranged in a
                    manner that makes sense.

                 Ideas or judgments are not stated,
                    and facts and details from the text
                    are not used.

   Source: Adapted from English Language Arts Grade 2 Los
Angeles Unified School District, 2001 (http://www.cse.ucla.edu/
resources/justforteachers_set.htm)

Analytical rubrics provide descriptions of levels of student
performance on a variety of characteristics. For example, six
characteristics used for assessing writing developed by the
Northwest Regional Education Laboratory (NWREL) are:

   ideas and content
   organization
   voice
   word-choice
   sentence fluency
   conventions

Descriptions of the high, medium, and low responses for each
characteristic are available from Education Northwest.

   Holistic rubrics have the advantages that they can be developed
more quickly than analytical rubrics. They are also faster to use
as there is only one dimension to examine. However, they do not
provide students with feedback about which aspects of the

                                                          Teacher-Made Assessments | 1143
response are strong and which aspects need improvement (Linn
& Miller, 2005). This means they are less useful for
assessment for learning. An important use of rubrics is to use them
as teaching tools and provide them to students before the
assessment so they know what knowledge and skills are expected.

Analytic Scoring Rubrics

A scoring rubric that includes specific performance expectations for
each rating for each criterion is an analytic scoring rubric. Analytic
rating scales are especially appropriate for complex assignments
with multiple criteria. These rubrics help raters with consistency
and provide the most detailed feedback for teacher and student
improvement. The disadvantage of using this type of rubric is that it
can be time-consuming to construct and score.

   Teachers can use scoring rubrics as part of instruction by giving
students the rubric during instruction, providing several responses,
and analyzing these responses in terms of the rubric. For example,
the use of accurate terminology is one dimension of the science
rubric in Example 11. An elementary science teacher could discuss
why it is important for scientists to use accurate terminology, give
examples of inaccurate and accurate terminology, provide that
component of the scoring rubric to students, distribute some
examples of student responses (maybe from former students), and
then discuss how these responses would be classified according
to the rubric. This strategy of assessment for learning should be
more effective if the teacher (a) emphasizes to students why using
accurate terminology is important when learning science rather
than how to get a good grade on the test (we provide more details
about this in the section on motivation later in this chapter); (b)
provides an exemplary response so students can see a model; (c)
emphasizes that the goal is student improvement on this skill not
ranking students.

1144 | Teacher-Made Assessments
 Example 11: Analytic Scoring Rubric:

   Assignment: write a response to questions using the
correct terminology, supporting details. Synthesize and
apply relevant information to demonstrate understanding
of the topic.

                                                    Teacher-Made Assessments | 1145
   Level of         Use of          Use of         Synthesis Applicati
understanding    accurate        supporting
                 scientific      details       of            on of
                 terminology
                                               information information

    There is        The use         Pertinent     The           An
 evidence in     of accurate     and           response      effective
 the response    scientific      complete      reflects a    application
 that the        terminology     supporting    complete      of the
4                enhances        details       synthesis of  concept to
 student has a   the             demonstrate   information.  a practical
 full and        response.       integration                 problem or
 complete                        of ideas.                   real-world
 understanding.                                              situation
                                                             reveals an
                                                             insight into
                                                             scientific
                                                             principles.

    There is        The use         The           The           The
 evidence in     of accurate     supporting    response      concept has
 the response    scientific      details are   reflects      been
3that the        terminology     generally     some          applied to a
 student has a   strengthens     complete.     synthesis of  practical
 good            the                           information.  problem or
 understanding.  response.                                   real-world
                                                             situation.

    There is        The use         The           The           The
 evidence in     of accurate     supporting    response      application
 the response    scientific      details are   provides      of the
2that the        terminology     adequate.     little or no  concept to
 student has a   may be                        synthesis of  a practical
 basic           present in                    information.  problem or
 understanding.  the                                         real-world
                 response.                                   situation is
                                                             inadequate.

    There is        The use         The           The           The
 evidence in     of accurate     supporting    response      application,
 the response    scientific      details are   addresses     if
1that the        terminology     only          the           attempted,
 student has     is not          minimally     question.     is irrelevant.
 some            present in      effective.
 understanding.  the
                 response.

0 The student has no understanding of the question or problem. The
 response is completely incorrect or irrelevant.

1146 | Teacher-Made Assessments
     Rubric Maker

          There are several online tools available to help teachers
     create rubrics. Rubric Maker is a website that offers sample
     rubrics for different subjects and activities, as well as allows

                          you to create custom rubrics.

Performance Assessments

Typically in performance assessments, students complete a specific
task while teachers observe the process or procedure (e.g. data
collection in an experiment) as well as the product (e.g. completed
report) (Popham, 2005; Stiggens, 2005). The tasks that students
complete in performance assessments are not simple--in contrast
to selected-response items--and include the following:

   playing a musical instrument
   athletic skills
   artistic creation
   conversing in a foreign language
   engaging in a debate about political issues
   conducting an experiment in science
   repairing a machine
   writing a term paper
   using interaction skills to play together

These examples all involve complex skills but illustrate that the term
performance assessment is used in a variety of ways. For example,
the teacher may not observe all of the processes (e.g. she sees a

                                                          Teacher-Made Assessments | 1147
draft paper but the final product is written during out-of-school
hours) and essay tests are typically classified as performance
assessments (Airasian, 2000). In addition, in some performance
assessments there may be no clear product (e.g. the performance
may be group interaction skills).

   Two related terms, alternative assessment, and authentic
assessment are sometimes used instead of performance assessment
but they have different meanings (Linn & Miller, 2005). Alternative
assessment refers to tasks that are not pencil-and-paper and while
many performance assessments are not pencil-and-paper tasks
some are (e.g. writing a term paper, essay tests). Authentic
assessment is used to describe tasks that students do that are
similar to those in the "real world." Classroom tasks vary in the
level of authenticity (Popham, 2005). For example, in a Japanese
language class taught in a high school in Chicago conversing in
Japanese in Tokyo is highly authentic-- but only possible in a study
abroad program or a trip to Japan. Conversing in Japanese with
native Japanese speakers in Chicago is also highly authentic, and
conversing with the teacher in Japanese during class is moderately
authentic. Much less authentic is a matching test on English and
Japanese words. In a language arts class, writing a letter (to an
editor) or a memo to the principal is highly authentic as letters
and memos are common work products. However, writing a five-
paragraph paper is not as authentic as such papers are not used in
the world of work. However, a five-paragraph paper is a complex
task and would typically be classified as a performance assessment.

Advantages and Disadvantages of Performance
Assessments

There are several advantages of performance assessments (Linn &
Miller 2005). First, the focus is on complex learning outcomes that
often cannot be measured by other methods. Second, performance

1148 | Teacher-Made Assessments
assessments typically assess the process or procedure as well as the
product. For example, the teacher can observe if the students are
repairing the machine using the appropriate tools and procedures
as well as whether the machine functions properly after the repairs.
Third, well-designed performance assessments communicate the
instructional goals and meaningful learning clearly to students. For
example, if the topic in a fifth-grade art class is a one-point
perspective the performance assessment could be drawing a city
scene that illustrates a one-point perspective. This assessment is
meaningful and clearly communicates the learning goal. This
performance assessment is a good instructional activity and has
good content validity--common with well-designed performance
assessments (Linn & Miller 2005).

   One major disadvantage of performance assessments is that they
are typically very time-consuming for students and teachers. This
means that fewer assessments can be gathered so if they are not
carefully devised fewer learning goals will be assessed--which can
reduce content validity. State curriculum guidelines can be helpful
in determining what should be included in a performance
assessment. For example, Eric, a dance teacher in a high school
in Tennessee learns that the state standards indicate that dance
students at the highest level should be able to do demonstrate
consistency and clarity in performing technical skills by:

   performing complex movement combinations to music in a
      variety of meters and styles

   performing combinations and variations in a broad dynamic
      range

   demonstrating improvement in performing movement
      combinations through self-evaluation

   critiquing a live or taped dance production based on given
      criteria

Eric devises the following performance task for his eleventh-grade
modern dance class:

                                                          Teacher-Made Assessments | 1149
   In groups of 4-6, students will perform a dance at least 5 minutes
in length. The dance selected should be multifaceted so that all the
dancers can demonstrate technical skills, complex movements, and
a dynamic range (Items 1-2). Students will videotape their rehearsals
and document how they improved through self-evaluation (Item
3). Each group will view and critique the final performance of one
other group in class (Item 4). Eric would need to scaffold most
steps in this performance assessment. The groups probably would
need guidance in selecting a dance that allowed all the dancers
to demonstrate the appropriate skills; critiquing their own
performances constructively; working effectively as a team, and
applying criteria to evaluate a dance.

   Another disadvantage of performance assessments is they are
hard to assess reliably which can lead to inaccuracy and unfair
evaluation. As with any constructed response assessment, scoring
rubrics is very important. A rubric designed to assess the process of
group interactions is in the table below.

1150 | Teacher-Made Assessments
Table 10.3.4: Example of group interaction rubric

Score Time management  Participation and           Shared
                       performance in roles        involvement

          Group did not
0 stay on task and Group did not assign or Single individual so task was not share roles. did the task.

          completed.

   Group was                                       Group totally

   off-task the        Groups assigned roles disregarded

1  majority of the but members did not             comments and

   time but task was use these roles.              ideas from some

   completed.                                      members.

                                                   Group accepted

   Group stayed on Groups accepted and             some ideas but did

2  task most of the used some but not all not give others

   time.               roles.                      adequate

                                                   consideration

   Group stayed on

   task throughout Group accepted and              Groups gave equal

3  the activity and used roles and actively consideration to

   managed time        participated.               all ideas

   well.

   Group defined       Group defined and used Groups made
   their own           roles not mentioned to specific efforts to

   approach in a
4 way that more them. Role changes took involve all group
                                                   members
   effectively         place that maximized
                       individuals' expertise. including the
   managed the                                     reticent members.

   activity.

Source: Adapted from Group Interaction (GI) SETUP (2003). Issues,
Evidence and You. Ronkonkomo, NY Lab-Aids, (http://cse.edc.org/
products/assessment/middleschool/scorerub.asp).

This rubric was devised for middle-grade science but could be used
in other subject areas when assessing the group process. In some
performance assessments, several scoring rubrics should be used.
In the dance performance example above, Eric should have scoring
rubrics for the performance skills, the improvement based on self-
evaluation, teamwork, and the critique of the other group.
Obviously, devising a good performance assessment is complex and
Linn and Miller (2005) recommend that teachers should:

   Create performance assessments that require students to use

                                                          Teacher-Made Assessments | 1151
      complex cognitive skills. Sometimes teachers devise
      assessments that are interesting and that the students enjoy
      but do not require students to use higher-level cognitive skills
      that lead to significant learning. Focusing on high-level skills
      and learning outcomes is particularly important because
      performance assessments are typically so time-consuming.
   Ensure that the task is clear to the students. Performance
      assessments typically require multiple steps so students need
      to have the necessary prerequisite skills and knowledge as well
      as clear directions. Careful scaffolding is important for
      successful performance assessments.
   Specify expectations of the performance clearly by providing
      students with scoring rubrics during the instruction. This not
      only helps students understand what it expected but it also
      guarantees that teachers are clear about what they expect.
      Thinking this through while planning the performance
      assessment can be difficult for teachers but is crucial as it
      typically leads to revisions of the actual assessment and
      directions provided to students.
   Reduce the importance of unessential skills in completing the
      task. What skills are essential depends on the purpose of the
      task? For example, for a science report, is the use of publishing
      software essential? If the purpose of the assessment is for
      students to demonstrate the process of the scientific method
      including writing a report, then the format of the report may
      not be significant. However, if the purpose includes integrating
      two subject areas, science, and technology, then the use of
      publishing software is important. Because performance
      assessments take time, it is tempting to include multiple skills
      without carefully considering if all the skills are essential to the
      learning goals.

1152 | Teacher-Made Assessments
Portfolios

"A portfolio is a meaningful collection of student work that tells the
story of student achievement or growth" (Arter, Spandel, & Culham,
1995, p. 2). Portfolios are a purposeful collection of student work
not just folders of all the work a student does. Portfolios are used
for a variety of purposes and developing a portfolio system can
be confusing and stressful unless the teachers are clear on their
purpose. The varied purposes can be illustrated in four dimensions
(Linn & Miller 2005):

          Assessment for Learning  Assessment of learning
          Current Accomplishments  Progress
          Best Work Showcase  Documentation
          Finished  Working

When the primary purpose is assessment for learning, the emphasis
is on student self-reflection and responsibility for learning.
Students not only select samples of their work they wish to include,
but also reflect and interpret their own work. Portfolios containing
this information can be used to aid communication as students
can present and explain their work to their teachers and parents
(Stiggins, 2005). Portfolios focusing on the assessment of learning
contain students' work samples that certify accomplishments for
a classroom grade, graduation, state requirements, etc. Typically,
students have less choice in the work contained in such portfolios
as some consistency is needed for this type of assessment. For
example, the writing portfolios that fourth and seventh graders
are required to submit in Kentucky must contain a self-reflective
statement and an example of three pieces of writing (reflective,

                                                          Teacher-Made Assessments | 1153
personal experience or literary, and transactive). Students do
choose which of their pieces of writing in each type to include in the
portfolio (Kentucky Student Performance Standards).

   Portfolios can be designed to focus on student progress or
current accomplishments. For example, audio recordings of English
language learners speaking could be collected over one year to
demonstrate growth in learning. Student progress portfolios may
also contain multiple versions of a single piece of work. For example,
a writing project may contain notes on the original idea, outline,
first draft, comments on the first draft by peers or teacher, second
draft, and the final finished product (Linn & Miller 2005). If the
focus is on current accomplishments, only recently completed work
samples are included.

   Portfolios can focus on documenting student activities or
highlighting important accomplishments. Documentation portfolios
are inclusive containing all the work samples rather than focusing
on one special strength, best work, or progress. In contrast,
showcase portfolios focus on the best work. The best work is
typically identified by students. One aim of such portfolios is that
students learn how to identify products that demonstrate what they
know and can do. Students are not expected to identify their best
work in isolation but also use feedback from their teachers and
peers.

   A final distinction can be made between a finished
portfolio--which may be used for a job application--versus a
working portfolio that typically includes day-to-day work samples.
Working portfolios evolve over time and are not intended to be used
for the assessment of learning. The focus of a working portfolio
is on developing ideas and skills so students should be allowed to
make mistakes, freely comment on their own work, and respond
to teacher feedback (Linn & Miller, 2005). Finished portfolios are
designed for use with a particular audience and the products
selected may be drawn from a working portfolio. For example, in
a teacher education program, the working portfolio may contain
work samples from all the courses taken. A student may develop one

1154 | Teacher-Made Assessments
finished portfolio to demonstrate she has mastered the required
competencies in the teacher education program and a second
finished portfolio for her job application.

Advantages and Disadvantages of Portfolios

Portfolios used well in classrooms have several advantages. They
provide a way of documenting and evaluating growth in a much
more nuanced way than selected-response tests can. Also,
portfolios can be integrated easily into instruction, i.e. used for
assessment for learning. Portfolios also encourage student self-
evaluation and reflection, as well as ownership for learning
(Popham, 2005). Using classroom assessment to promote student
motivation is an important component of assessment for learning
which is considered in the next section.

   However, there are some major disadvantages of portfolio use.
First, a good portfolio assessment takes an enormous amount of
teacher time and organization. The time is needed to help students
understand the purpose and structure of the portfolio, decide
which work samples to collect, and self-reflect. Some of this time
needs to be conducted in one-to-one conferences. Reviewing and
evaluating the portfolios out of class time is also enormously time-
consuming. Teachers have to weigh if the time spent is worth the
benefits of portfolio use.

   Second, evaluating portfolio reliability and eliminating bias can
be even more difficult than in a constructed response assessment
because the products are more varied. The experience of the state-
wide use of portfolios for assessment in writing and mathematics
for fourth and eighth graders in Vermont is sobering. Teachers used
the same analytic scoring rubric when evaluating the portfolio. In
the first two years of implementation samples from schools were
collected and scored by an external panel of teachers. In the first
year, the agreement among raters (i.e. inter-rater reliability) was

                                                          Teacher-Made Assessments | 1155
poor for mathematics and reading; in the second year, the
agreement among raters improved for mathematics but not for
reading. However, even with the improvement in mathematics, the
reliability was too low to use the portfolios for individual student
accountability (Koretz, Stecher, Klein & McCaffrey, 1994). When
reliability is low, validity is also compromised because unstable
results cannot be interpreted meaningfully.

   If teachers do use portfolios in their classroom, the series of steps
needed for implementation are outlined in the table below. If the
school or district has an existing portfolio system these steps may
have to be modified.

1156 | Teacher-Made Assessments
Table 10.3.4 Steps in implementing a classroom portfolio program

1. Make sure       Talk to your students about your ideas of the portfolio,
students own       the different purposes, and the variety of work
their portfolios.  samples. If possible, have them help make decisions
                   about the kind of portfolio you implement.

2. Decide on       Will the focus be on growth or current
the purpose.       accomplishments? Best work showcase or
                   documentation? Good portfolios can have multiple
                   purposes but the teacher and students need to be clear
                   about the purpose.

3. Decide what     For example, in writing, is every writing assignment
work samples       included? Are early drafts as well as final products
to collect.        included?

4. Collect and     Decide where the work sample will be stored. For
store work         example, will each student have a file folder in a file
samples.           cabinet or a small plastic tub on a shelf in the
                   classroom?

5. Select          If possible, work with students to develop scoring
criteria to        rubrics. This may take considerable time as different
evaluate           rubrics may be needed for a variety of work samples. If
samples.           you are using existing scoring rubrics, discuss with
                   students possible modifications after the rubrics have
                   been used at least once.

6. Teach and       Help students learn to evaluate their own work using
require            agreed-upon criteria. For younger students, the
students           self-evaluations may be simple (strengths, weaknesses,
conduct            and ways to improve); for older students, a more
self-evaluations   analytic approach is desirable including using the same
of their own       scoring rubrics that the teachers will use.
work.

7. Schedule and    Teacher-student conferences are time-consuming but
conduct            conferences are essential for the portfolio process to
portfolio          significantly enhance learning. These conferences
conferences.       should aid students' self-evaluation and should take
                   place frequently.

8. Involve         Parents need to understand the portfolio process.
parents.           Encourage parents to review the work samples. You
                   may wish to schedule parent, teacher-students
                   conferences in which students talk about their work
                   samples.

Source: Adapted from Popham (2005)

Assessment that Enhances Motivation and

                                                          Teacher-Made Assessments | 1157
Student Confidence

Studies on testing and learning conducted more than 20 years ago
demonstrated that tests promote learning and that more frequent
tests are more effective than less frequent tests (Dempster &
Perkins, 1993). Frequent smaller tests encourage continuous effort
rather than last-minute cramming and may also reduce test anxiety
because the consequences of errors are reduced. College students
report preferring more frequent testing over infrequent testing
(Bangert-Downs, Kulik, Kulik, 1991). More recent research indicates
that teachers' assessment purposes and beliefs, the type of
assessment selected, and the feedback given contribute to the
assessment climate in the classroom which influences students'
confidence and motivation. The use of self-assessment is also
important in establishing a positive assessment climate.
CC licensed content, Original

   Teacher-Made Assessments. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van
      Hoose. Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/
      chapter/teacher-made-assessments/. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Retrieved from:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/educationalpsychology.
      License: CC BY: Attribution

   Creating Rrubrics. Authored by: Tom Lombardo. Provided by:
      Rock Valley College. Retrieved from:
      https://www.rockvalleycollege.edu/Academics/ATLE/
      upload/Creating-Rubrics.pdf. License: CC BY-NC-SA:
      Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

1158 | Teacher-Made Assessments
Teacher's Purpose and Belief

Student motivation can be enhanced when the purpose of
assessment is promoting student learning and this is clearly
communicated to students by what teachers say and do (Harlen,
2006). This approach to assessment is associated with what the
psychologist, Carol Dweck, (2000) calls an incremental view of
ability or intelligence. An incremental view assumes that ability
increases whenever an individual learns more. This means that
effort is valued because effort leads to knowing more and therefore
having more ability. Individuals with an incremental view also ask
for help when needed and respond well to constructive feedback
as the primary goal is increased learning and mastery. In contrast,
a fixed view of ability assumes that some people have more ability
than others and nothing much can be done to change that.
Individuals with a fixed view of ability often view effort in opposition
to ability ("Smart people don't have to study") and so do not try as
hard, and are less likely to ask for help as that indicates that they are
not smart. While there are individual differences in students' beliefs
about their views of intelligence, teachers' beliefs and classroom
practices influence students' perceptions and behaviors.

   Teachers with an incremental view of intelligence communicate
to students that the goal of learning is mastering the material and
figuring things out. Assessment is used by these teachers to
understand what students know so they can decide whether to
move to the next topic, re-teach the entire class, or provide
remediation for a few students. Assessment also helps students
understand their own learning and demonstrate their competence.
Teachers with these views say things like, "We are going to practice
over and over again. That's how you get good. And you're going
to make mistakes. That's how you learn." (Patrick, Anderman, Ryan,
Edelin, Midgley, 2001, p. 45).

   In contrast, teachers with a fixed view of ability are more likely

                                                         Teacher's Purpose and Belief | 1159
to believe that the goal of learning is doing well on tests especially
outperforming others. These teachers are more likely to say things
that imply fixed abilities e.g. "This test will determine what your
math abilities are," or stress the importance of interpersonal
competition, "We will have speech competition and the top person
will compete against all the other district schools and last year
the winner got a big award and their photo in the paper." When
teachers stress interpersonal competition some students may be
motivated but there can only be a few winners so there are many
more students who know they have no chance of winning. Another
problem with interpersonal competition in assessment is that the
focus can become winning rather than understanding the material.

   Teachers who communicate to their students that ability is
incremental and that the goal of assessment is promoting learning
rather than ranking students, awarding prizes to those who did
very well, or catching those who did not pay attention, are likely to
enhance students' motivation.

Choosing Assessments

The choice of assessment task also influences students' motivation
and confidence. First, assessments that have clear criteria that
students understand and can meet rather than assessments that pit
students against each other in interpersonal competition enhance
motivation (Black, Harrison, Lee, Marshall, Wiliam, 2004). This is
consistent with the point we made in the previous section about
the importance of focusing on enhancing learning for all students
rather than ranking students. Second, meaningful assessment tasks
enhance student motivation. Students often want to know why they
have to do something and teachers need to provide meaningful
answers. For example, a teacher might say, "You need to be able to
calculate the area of a rectangle because if you want new carpet you
need to know how much carpet is needed and how much it would

1160 | Teacher's Purpose and Belief
cost." Well-designed performance tasks are often more meaningful
to students than selected-response tests so students will work
harder to prepare for them.

   Third, providing choices of assessment tasks can enhance
students' sense of autonomy and motivation according to self-
determination theory. Kym, the sixth-grade teacher whose story
began this chapter, reports that giving students choices was very
helpful. Another middle school social studies teacher, Aaron, gives
his students a choice of performance tasks at the end of the unit
on the US Bill of Rights. Students have to demonstrate specified
key ideas but can do that by making up a board game, presenting a
brief play, composing a rap song, etc. Aaron reports that students
work much harder on this performance assessment which allows
them to use their strengths than previously when he did not provide
any choices and gave a more traditional assignment. Measurement
experts caution that the danger of giving choices is that the
assessment tasks are no longer equivalent and so the reliability
of scoring is reduced so it is particularly important to use well-
designed scoring rubrics. Fourth, assessment tasks should be
challenging but achievable with reasonable effort (Elliott, McGregor
& Thrash, 2004). This is often hard for beginning teachers to do,
who may give assessment tasks that are too easy or too hard
because they have to learn to match their assessment to the skills of
their students.
CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

                                                         Teacher's Purpose and Belief | 1161
Providing Feedback

When the goal is assessment for learning, providing constructive
feedback that helps students know what they do and do not
understand as well as encouraging them to learn from their errors is
fundamental. Effective feedback should be given as soon as possible
as the longer the delay between students' work and feedback the
longer students will continue to have some misconceptions. Also,
delays reduce the relationship between students' performance and
the feedback as students can forget what they were thinking during
the assessment. Effective feedback should also inform students
clearly what they did well and what needs modification. General
comments just as "good work, A," or "needs improvement" do not
help students understand how to improve their learning. Giving
feedback to students using well-designed scoring rubrics helps
clearly communicate strengths and weaknesses. Obviously, grades
are often needed but teachers can minimize the focus by placing
the grade after the comments or on the last page of a paper. It can
also be helpful to allow students to keep their grades private making
sure when returning assignments that the grade is not prominent
(e.g. not using red ink on the top page) and never asking students
to read their scores aloud in class. Some students choose to share
their grades--but that should be their decision, not their teachers.

   When grading, teachers often become angry at the mistakes that
students make. It is easy for teachers to think something like: "With
all the effort I put into teaching, this student could not even be
bothered to follow the directions or spell check!" Many experienced
teachers believe that communicating their anger is not helpful, so
rather than saying: "How dare you turn in such shoddy work," they
rephrase it as, "I am disappointed that your work on this assignment
does not meet the standards set" (Sutton, 2004). Research evidence
also suggests that comments such as "You are so smart" for a high-
quality performance can be counterproductive. This is surprising

1162 | Providing Feedback
to many teachers but if students are told they are smart when
they produce a good product, then if they do poorly on the next
assignment the conclusion must be they are "not smart" (Dweck,
2000). More effective feedback focuses on positive aspects of the
task (not the person), as well as strategies, and effort. The focus of
the feedback should relate to the criteria set by the teacher and how
improvements can be made.

   When the teacher and student are from different racial/ethnic
backgrounds providing feedback that enhances motivation and
confidence but also includes criticism can be particularly
challenging because the students of color have historical reasons
to distrust negative comments from a white teacher. Research by
Cohen Steele, and Ross (1999) indicates that "wise" feedback from
teachers needs three components: positive comments, criticisms,
and an assurance that the teacher believes the student can reach
higher standards.

Self and Peer Assessment

In order to reach a learning goal, students need to understand the
meaning of the goal, the steps necessary to achieve a goal, and
if they are making satisfactory progress towards that goal (Sadler,
1989). This involves self-assessment and recent research has
demonstrated that well-designed self-assessment can enhance
student learning and motivation (Black & Wiliam, 2006). For self-
assessment to be effective, students need explicit criteria such as
those in an analytical scoring rubric. These criteria are either
provided by the teacher or developed by the teacher in
collaboration with students. Because students seem to find it easier
to understand criteria for assessment tasks if they can examine
other students' work alongside their own, self-assessment often
involves peer assessment. An example of a strategy used by teachers
involves asking students to use "traffic lights" to indicate their

                                                                      Providing Feedback | 1163
confidence in their assignment or homework. Red indicates that
they were unsure of their success, orange that they were partially
unsure, and green that they were confident of their success. The
students who labeled their own work as orange and green worked in
mixed groups to evaluate their own work while the teacher worked
with the students who had chosen red (Black & Wiliam, 2006).

   If self and peer assessment are used, it is particularly important
that the teachers establish a classroom culture for assessment that
is based on incremental views of ability and learning goals. If the
classroom atmosphere focuses on interpersonal competition,
students have incentives in self and peer assessment to inflate their
own evaluations (and perhaps those of their friends) because there
are limited rewards for good work.

Adjusting Instruction Based on Assessment

Using assessment information to adjust instruction is fundamental
to the concept of assessment for learning. Teachers make these
adjustments "in the moment" during classroom instruction as well
as during reflection and planning periods. Teachers use the
information they gain from questioning and observation to adjust
their teaching during classroom instruction. If students cannot
answer a question, the teacher may need to rephrase the question,
probe understanding of prior knowledge, or change the way the
current idea is being considered. It is important for teachers to
learn to identify when only one or two students need individual
help because they are struggling with the concept, and when a large
proportion of the class is struggling so whole group intervention is
needed.

   After the class is over, effective teachers spend time analyzing
how well the lessons went, what students did and did not seem to
understand, and what needs to be done the next day. Evaluation
of student work also provides important information for teachers.

1164 | Providing Feedback
If many students are confused about a similar concept the teacher
needs to reteach it and consider new ways of helping students
understand the topic. If the majority of students complete the tasks
very quickly and well, the teacher might decide that the assessment
was not challenging enough. Sometimes teachers become
dissatisfied with the kinds of assessments they have assigned when
they are grading--perhaps because they realize there was too much
emphasis on lower-level learning, that the directions were not clear
enough, or the scoring rubric needed modification. Teachers who
believe that assessment data provide information about their own
teaching and that they can find ways to influence student learning
have high teacher efficacy or beliefs that they can make a difference
in students' lives. In contrast, teachers who think that student
performance is mostly due to fixed student characteristics or the
homes they come from (e.g. "no wonder she did so poorly
considering what her home life is like") have low teacher efficacy
(Tschannen-Moran, Woolfolk Hoy, & Hoy, 1998).
CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

                                                                      Providing Feedback | 1165
Grading and Reporting

Assigning students grades is an important component of teaching
and many school districts issue progress reports, interim reports,
or midterm grades as well as final semester grades. Traditionally
these reports were printed on paper and sent home with students
or mailed to students' homes. Increasingly, school districts are using
web-based grade management systems that allow parents to access
their child's grades on each individual assessment as well as the
progress reports and final grades.

   Grading can be frustrating for teachers as there are many factors
to consider. In addition, report cards typically summarize in brief
format a variety of assessments and so cannot provide much
information about students' strengths and weaknesses. This means
that report cards focus more on the assessment of learning than
assessment for learning. There are a number of decisions that have
to be made when assigning students' grades and schools often have
detailed policies that teachers have to follow. In the next section, we
consider the major questions associated with grading.

Weighting Assignments and Assessments

Students typically complete a variety of assignments during a
grading period such as homework, quizzes, performance
assessments, etc. Teachers have to decide--preferably before the
grading period begins--how each assignment will be weighted. For
example, a sixth-grade math teacher may decide to weigh the
grades in the following manner:

   Weekly quizzes 35%
   Homework 15%
   Performance Assessment 30%

1166 | Grading and Reporting
   Class participation 20%

Deciding how to weight assignments should be done carefully as
it communicates to students and parents what teachers believe
is important, and also may be used to decide how much effort
students will exert (e.g. "If homework is only worth 5 percent, it is
not worth completing twice a week").

   Should social skills or effort be included? Elementary school
teachers are more likely than middle or high school teachers to
include some social skills in report cards (Popham, 2005). These may
be included as separate criteria in the report card or weighted into
the grade for that subject. For example, the grade for mathematics
may include an assessment of group cooperation or self-regulation
during mathematics lessons. Some schools and teachers endorse
including social skills arguing that developing such skills is
important for young students and that students need to learn to
work with others and manage their own behaviors in order to be
successful. Others believe that grades in subject areas should be
based on the cognitive performances--and that if assessments of
social skills are made they should be clearly separated from the
subject grade on the report card. Obviously, clear criteria such as
those contained in analytical scoring rubrics should be used if social
skills are graded.

   Teachers often find it difficult to decide whether effort and
improvement should be included as a component of grades. One
approach is for teachers to ask students to submit drafts of an
assignment and make improvements based on the feedback they
received. The grade for the assignment may include some
combination of the score for the drafts, the final version, and the
amount of improvement the students made based on the feedback
provided. A more controversial approach is basing grades on effort
when students try really hard day after day but still cannot complete
their assignments well. These students could have identified special
needs or be recent immigrants that have limited English skills. Some
school districts have guidelines for handling such cases. One

                                                                 Grading and Reporting | 1167
disadvantage of using improvement as a component of grades is that
the most competent students in the class may do very well initially
and have little room for improvement--unless teachers are skilled
at providing additional assignments that will help challenge these
students.

   Teachers often use "hodgepodge grading," i.e. a combination of
achievement, effort, growth, attitude or class conduct, homework,
and class participation. A survey of over 8,500 middle and high
school students in the US state of Virginia supported the
hodgepodge practices commonly used by their teachers (Cross &
Frary, 1999).

Calculating Grades

Two options are commonly used: absolute grading and relative
grading. In absolute grading, grades are assigned based on criteria
the teacher has devised. If an English teacher has established a level
of proficiency needed to obtain an A and no student meets that level
then no As will be given. Alternatively, if every student meets the
established level then all the students will get A's (Popham, 2005).
Absolute grading systems may use letter grades or pass/fail.

   In relative grading, the teacher ranks the performances of
students from worst to best (or best to worst) and those at the top
get high grades, those in the middle moderate grades, and those
at the bottom low grades. This is often described as "grading on
the curve" and can be useful to compensate for an examination
or assignment that students find much easier or harder than the
teacher expected. However, relative grading can be unfair to
students because the comparisons are typically within one class, so
an A in one class may not represent the level of performance of an A
in another class. Relative grading systems may discourage students
from helping each other improve as students are in competition for
limited rewards. In fact, Bishop (1999) argues that grading on the

1168 | Grading and Reporting
curve gives students a personal interest in persuading each other
not to study as a serious students makes it more difficult for others
to get good grades.

Grade Descriptions

Traditionally a letter grade system is used (e.g. A, B, C, D, F ) for
each subject. The advantages of these grade descriptions are they
are convenient, simple, and can be averaged easily. However, they
do not indicate what objectives the student has or has not met nor
students' specific strengths and weaknesses (Linn & Miller 2005).
Elementary schools often use a pass-fail (or satisfactory-
unsatisfactory) system and some high schools and colleges do as
well. Pass-fail systems in high school and college allow students to
explore new areas and take risks on subjects that they may have
limited preparation for, or is not part of their major (Linn & Miller
2005). While a pass/fail system is easy to use, it offers even less
information about students' level of learning.

   A pass-fail system is also used in classes that are taught under
a mastery-learning approach in which students are expected to
demonstrate mastery of all the objectives in order to receive course
credit. Under these conditions, it is clear that a pass means that the
student has demonstrated mastery of all the objectives.

   Some schools have implemented a checklist of the objectives in
subject areas to replace the traditional letter grade system, and
students are rated on each objective using descriptors such as
Proficient, Partially Proficient, and Needs Improvement. For
example, the checklist for students in a fourth-grade class in
California may include the four types of writing that are required by
the English language state content standards.

   writing narratives
   writing responses to literature

                                                                 Grading and Reporting | 1169
   writing information reports
   writing summaries
The advantages of this approach are that it communicates students'
strengths and weaknesses clearly, and it reminds the students and
parents of the objectives of the school. However, if too many
objectives are included then the lists can become so long that they
are difficult to understand.
CC licensed content, Shared previously
   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and

      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

1170 | Grading and Reporting
Communication with Parents

Clear communication with parents about classroom assessment is
important--but often difficult for beginning teachers. The same
skills that are needed to communicate effectively with students
are also needed when communicating with parents and guardians.
Teachers need to be able to explain to parents the purpose of the
assessment, why they selected this assessment technique, and what
the criteria for success are. Some teachers send home newsletters
monthly or at the beginning of a major assessment task explaining
the purpose and nature of the task, any additional support that is
needed (e.g. materials, library visits), and due dates. Some parents
will not be familiar with performance assessments or the use of self
and peer assessment so teachers need to take time to explain these
approaches carefully.

   Many school districts now communicate through websites that
have mixtures of public information available to all parents in the
class (e.g. curriculum and assessment details) as well as information
restricted to the parents or guardians of specific students (e.g. the
attendance and grades). Teachers report this is helpful as parents
have access to their child's performance immediately and when
necessary, can talk to their child and teacher quickly.

   The recommendations we provided above on the type of feedback
that should be given to students also apply when talking to parents.
That is, the focus should be on students' performance on the task,
what was done well and what needs work, rather than general
comments about how "smart" or "weak" the child is. If possible,
comments should focus on strategies that the child uses well or
needs to improve (e.g. reading test questions carefully, organization
in a large project). When the teacher is white and the student or
parents are a minority, trust can be an issue so using "wise"
feedback when talking to parents may help.
CC licensed content, Shared previously

                                                         Communication with Parents | 1171
   Educational Psychology. Retrieved from:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/educationalpsychology.
      License: CC BY: Attribution

1172 | Communication with Parents
Standardized Tests

Standardized tests are created by a team--usually test experts from
a commercial testing company who consult classroom teachers and
university faculty--and are administered in standardized ways.
Students not only respond to the same questions they also receive
the same directions and have the same time limits. Explicit scoring
criteria are used. Standardized tests are designed to be taken by
many students within a state, province, or nation, and sometimes
across nations. Teachers help administer some standardized tests
and test manuals are provided that contain explicit details about
the administration and scoring. For example, teachers may have to
remove all the posters and charts from the classroom walls, read
directions out loud to students using a script, and respond to
student questions in a specific manner.

   Criterion-referenced standardized tests measure student
performance against a specific standard or criterion. For example,
newly hired firefighters in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
in the United States have to meet physical fitness standards by
successfully completing a standardized physical fitness test that
includes stair climbing, using a ladder, advancing a hose, and
simulating a rescue through a doorway (Human Resources Division,
n.d.). Criterion-referenced tests currently used in US schools are
often tied to state content standards and provide information about
what students can and cannot do. For example, one of the content
standards for fourth-grade reading in Kentucky is "Students will
identify and describe the characteristics of fiction, nonfiction,
poetry or plays" (Combined Curriculum Document Reading 4.1,
2006) and so a report on an individual student would indicate if the
child can accomplish this skill. The report may state the number or
percentage of items that were successfully completed (e.g. 15 out of
20, i.e. 75 percent) or include descriptions such as basic, proficient,

                                                                       Standardized Tests | 1173
or advanced which are based on decisions made about the percent
of mastery necessary to be classified into these categories.

   Norm-referenced standardized tests report students'
performance relative to others. For example, if a student scores on
the seventy-second percentile in reading it means she outperforms
72 percent of the students who were included in the test's norm
group. A norm group is a representative sample of students who
completed the standardized test while it was being developed. For
state tests, the norm group is drawn from the state whereas for
national tests the sample is drawn from the nation. Information
about the norm groups is provided in a technical test manual that is
not typically supplied to teachers but should be available from the
person in charge of testing in the school district.

   Reports from criterion and norm-referenced tests provide
different information. Imagine a nationalized mathematics test
designed for basic test skills in second grade. If this test is norm-
referenced, and Alisha receives a report indicating that she scored
in the eighty-fifth percentile this indicates that she scored better
than 85 percent of the students in the norm group who took the test
previously. If this test is criterion-referenced Alisha's report may
state that she mastered 65 percent of the problems designed for
her grade level. The relative percentage reported from the norm-
referenced test provides information about Alisha's performance
compared to other students whereas the criterion-referenced test
attempts to describe what Alisha or any student can or cannot do
with respect to whatever the test is designed to measure. When
planning instruction classroom teachers need to know what
students can and cannot do so criterion-referenced tests are
typically more useful (Popham, 2004). The current standard-based
accountability and NCLB rely predominantly on criterion-based
tests to assess the attainment of content-based standards.
Consequently, the use of standardized norm-referenced tests in
schools has diminished and is largely limited to the diagnosis and
placement of children with specific cognitive disabilities or
exceptional abilities (Haertel & Herman, 2005).

1174 | Standardized Tests
                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here:
        https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=149#oembed-1

Video 10.8.1. Criterion vs. Norm-Referenced Assessment explains the
difference between these types of assessments and provides
examples.

   Some recent standardized tests can incorporate both criterion-
referenced and norm-referenced elements in the same test (Linn &
Miller, 2005). That is, the test results not only provide information
on mastery of a content standard but also the percentage of
students who attained that level of mastery.

   Standardized tests can be high stakes i.e. performance on the
test has important consequences. These consequences can be for
students, e.g. passing a high school graduation test is required in
order to obtain a diploma, or passing PRAXIS II is a prerequisite to
gaining a teacher license. These consequences can be for schools,
e.g. under NCLB an increasing percentage of students in every
school must reach proficiency in math and reading each year.
Consequences for schools that fail to achieve these gains include
reduced funding and restructuring of the school building. Under
NCLB, the consequences are designed to be for the schools not
individual students (Popham, 2005) and their test results may not
accurately reflect what they know because students may not try
hard when the tests have low stakes for them (Wise & DeMars,
2005).

                                                                       Standardized Tests | 1175
Uses of Standardized Tests

Standardized tests are used for a variety of reasons and the same
test is sometimes used for multiple purposes.

Assessing students' progress in a wider context

Well-designed teacher assessments provide crucial information
about each student's achievement in the classroom. However,
teachers vary in the types of assessments they use so teacher
assessments do not usually provide information on how students'
achievement compares to externally established criteria. Consider
two eighth-grade students, Brian and Joshua, who received As in
their middle school math classes. However, on the standardized
norm-referenced math test Brian scored in the fiftieth percentile
whereas Joshua scored in the ninetieth percentile. This information
is important to Brian and Joshua, their parents, and the school
personnel. Likewise, two third-grade students could both receive Cs
on their report cards in reading but one may pass 25 percent and
the other 65 percent of the items on the Criterion-Referenced State
Test.

   There are many reasons that students' performance on teacher
assessments and standardized assessments may differ. Students
may perform lower on the standardized assessment because their
teachers have easy grading criteria, or there is poor alignment
between the content they were taught and that on the standardized
test, or they are unfamiliar with the type of items on the
standardized tests, or they have test anxiety, or they were sick
on the day of the test. Students may perform higher on the
standardized test than on classroom assessments because their
teachers have hard grading criteria, or the student does not work
consistently in class (e.g. does not turn in homework) but will focus

1176 | Standardized Tests
on a standardized test, or the student is adept at the multiple-
choice items on the standardized tests but not at the variety of
constructed response and performance items the teacher uses. We
should always be very cautious about drawing inferences from one
kind of assessment.

   In some states, standardized achievement tests are required for
home-schooled students in order to provide parents and state
officials with information about the students' achievement in a
wider context. For example, in New York, home-schooled students
must take an approved standardized test every other year in grades
four through eight, and every year in grades nine through twelve.
These tests must be administered in a standardized manner and the
results filed with the Superintendent of the local school district. If
a student does not take the tests or scores below the thirty-third
percentile the homeschooling program may be placed on probation
(New York State Education Department, 2005).

Diagnosing Student's Strengths and Weaknesses

Standardized tests, along with interviews, classroom observations,
medical examinations, and school records are used to help diagnose
students' strengths and weaknesses. Often the standardized tests
used for this purpose are administered individually to determine
if the child has a disability. For example, if a kindergarten child is
having trouble with oral communication, a standardized language
development test could be administered to determine if there are
difficulties with understanding the meaning of words or sentence
structures, noticing sound differences in similar words, or
articulating words correctly (Peirangelo & Guiliani, 2002). It would
also be important to determine if the child was a recent immigrant,
had a hearing impairment, or had an intellectual disability. The
diagnosis of learning disabilities typically involves the
administration of at least two types of standardized tests--an

                                                                       Standardized Tests | 1177
aptitude test to assess general cognitive functioning and an
achievement test to assess knowledge of specific content areas
(Peirangelo & Guiliani, 2006). We discuss the difference between
aptitude and achievement tests later in this chapter.

Selecting Students for Specific Programs

Standardized tests are often used to select students for specific
programs. For example, the SAT (Scholastic Assessment Test) and
ACT (American College Test) are norm-referenced tests used to help
determine if high school students are admitted to selective colleges.
Norm-referenced standardized tests are also used, among other
criteria, to determine if students are eligible for special education or
gifted and talented programs. Criterion-referenced tests are used
to determine which students are eligible for promotion to the next
grade or graduation from high school. Schools that place students in
ability groups including high school college preparation, academic,
or vocational programs may also use norm-referenced or criterion-
referenced standardized tests. When standardized tests are used as
essential criteria for placement they are obviously high stakes for
students.

Assisting Teachers' Planning

Norm-referenced and criterion-referenced standardized tests,
among other sources of information about students, can help
teachers make decisions about their instruction. For example, if a
social studies teacher learns that most of the students did very
well on a norm-referenced reading test administered early in the
school year he may adapt his instruction and use additional primary
sources. A reading teacher after reviewing the poor end-of-the-

1178 | Standardized Tests
year criterion-referenced standardized reading test results may
decide that next year she will modify the techniques she uses. A
biology teacher may decide that she needs to spend more time
on genetics as her students scored poorly on that section of the
standardized criterion-referenced science test. These are examples
of assessment for learning which involves data-based decision-
making. It can be difficult for beginning teachers to learn to use
standardized test information appropriately, understanding that
test scores are important information but also remembering that
there are multiple reasons for students' performance on a test.

Accountability

Standardized test results are increasingly used to hold teachers and
administrators accountable for students' learning. Prior to 2002,
many States required public dissemination of students' progress but
under NCLB school districts in all states are required to send report
cards to parents and the public that include results of standardized
tests for each school. Providing information about students'
standardized tests is not new as newspapers began printing
summaries of students' test results within school districts in the
1970s and 1980s (Popham, 2005). However, public accountability
of schools and teachers has been increasing in the US and many
other countries and this increased accountability impacts the public
perception and work of all teachers including those teaching in
subjects or grade levels not being tested.

   For example, Erin, a middle school social studies teacher, said:

       As a teacher in a "non-testing" subject area, I spend
       substantial instructional time supporting the standardized
       testing requirements. For example, our school has instituted
       "word of the day," which encourages teachers to use, define,
       and incorporate terminology often used in the tests (e.g.

                                                                       Standardized Tests | 1179
       "compare," "oxymoron," etc.). I use the terms in my class as
       often as possible and incorporate them into written
       assignments. I also often use test questions of similar formats
       to the standardized tests in my own subject assessments (e.g.
       multiple choice questions with double negatives, short answer
       and extended response questions) as I believe that practice in
       the test question formats will help students be more successful
       in those subjects that are being assessed.

Accountability and standardized testing are two components of
Standards-Based Reform in Education that were initiated in the
USA in the 1980s. The two other components are academic content
standards and teacher quality.

Types of Standardized Tests

Achievement Tests

K-12 achievement tests are designed to assess what students have
learned in a specific content area. These tests include those
specifically designed by states to access mastery of state academic
content standards as well as general tests such as the California
Achievement Tests, The Comprehensive Tests of Basic Skills, Iowa
Tests of Basic Skills, Metropolitan Achievement Tests, and the
Stanford Achievement Tests. These general tests are designed to be
used across the nation and so will not be as closely aligned with
state content standards as specifically designed tests. Some states
and Canadian Provinces use specifically designed tests to assess the
attainment of content standards and also a general achievement
test to provide normative information.

   Standardized achievement tests are designed to be used for
students in kindergarten through high school. For young children,

1180 | Standardized Tests
questions are presented orally, and students may respond by
pointing to pictures, and the subtests are often not timed. For
example, on the Iowa Test of Basic Skills designed for students who
are young as kindergarten the vocabulary test assesses listening
vocabulary. The teacher reads a word and may also read a sentence
containing the word. Students are then asked to choose one of three
pictorial response options.

   Achievement tests are used as one criterion for obtaining a
license in a variety of professions including nursing, physical
therapy, social work, accounting, and law. Their use in teacher
education is recent and is part of the increased accountability of
public education and most States require that teacher education
students take achievement tests in order to obtain a teaching
license. For those seeking middle school and high school licensure,
these tests are in the content area of the major or minor (e.g.
mathematics, social studies); for those seeking licenses in early
childhood and elementary the tests focus on knowledge needed to
teach students of specific grade levels. The most commonly used
tests, the PRAXIS series, tests I and II, developed by Educational
Testing Service, include three types of tests:

   Subject Assessments, these test general and subject-specific
      teaching skills and knowledge. They include both multiple-
      choice and constructed-response test items.

   Principles of Learning and Teaching (PLT) Tests assess general
      pedagogical knowledge at four grade levels: Early Childhood,
      K-6, 5-9, and 7-12. These tests are based on case studies and
      include constructed-response and multiple-choice items.
      Much of the content in this textbook is relevant to the PLT
      tests.

   Teaching Foundations Tests assess pedagogy in five areas:
      multi-subject (elementary), English, Language Arts,
      Mathematics, Science, and Social Science.

These tests include constructed-response and multiple-choice

                                                                       Standardized Tests | 1181
items which test teacher education students. The scores needed in
order to pass each test vary and are determined by each state.

Diagnostic Tests

Some standardized tests are designed to diagnose strengths and
weaknesses in skills, typically reading or mathematics skills. For
example, an elementary school child may have difficulty in reading
and one or more diagnostic tests would provide detailed
information about three components: (1) word recognition, which
includes phonological awareness (pronunciation), decoding, and
spelling; (2) comprehension which includes vocabulary as well as
reading and listening comprehension, and (3) fluency (Joshi 2003).
Diagnostic tests are often administered individually by school
psychologists, following standardized procedures. The examiner
typically records not only the results on each question but also
observations of the child's behavior such as distractibility or
frustration. The results from the diagnostic standardized tests are
used in conjunction with classroom observations, school, and
medical records, as well as interviews with teachers, parents, and
students to produce a profile of the student's skills and abilities, and
where appropriate diagnose a learning disability.

Aptitude tests

Aptitude tests, like achievement tests, measure what students have
learned, but rather than focusing on specific subject matter learned
in school (e.g. math, science, English, or social studies), the test
items focus on verbal, quantitative, and problem-solving abilities
that are learned in school or in the general culture (Linn & Miller,
2005). These tests are typically shorter than achievement tests and

1182 | Standardized Tests
can be useful in predicting general school achievement. If the
purpose of using a test is to predict success in a specific subject (e.g.
language arts) the best prediction is past achievement in language
arts and so scores on a language arts achievement test would be
useful. However, when the predictions are more general (e.g.
success in college) aptitude tests are often used. According to the
test developers, both the ACT and SAT Reasoning tests are used to
predict success in college, assess general educational development
and reasoning, analysis, and problem-solving as well as questions on
mathematics, reading, and writing. The SAT Subject Tests that focus
on mastery of specific subjects like English, history, mathematics,
science, and language are used by some colleges as entrance criteria
and are more appropriately classified as achievement tests than
aptitude tests even though they are used to predict the future.

   Tests designed to assess general learning ability have traditionally
been called Intelligence Tests but are now often called learning
ability tests, cognitive ability tests, scholastic aptitude tests, or
school ability tests. The shift in terminology reflects the extensive
controversy over the meaning of the term intelligence and that
its traditional use was associated with inherited capacity (Linn &
Miller 2005). The more current terms emphasize that tests measure
developed ability in learning not innate capacity. The Cognitive
Abilities Test assesses K-12 students' abilities to reason with words,
quantitative concepts, and nonverbal (spatial) pictures. The
Woodcock-Johnson III contains cognitive abilities tests as well as
achievement tests for ages 2 to 90 years.
CC licensed content, Original

   Standardized Tests. Authored by: Nicole Arduini-Van Hoose.
      Provided by: Hudson Valley Community College. Retrieved
      from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/edpsy/chapter/
      standardized-tests/%20. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-
      NonCommercial-ShareAlike

CC licensed content, Shared previously

                                                                      Standardized Tests | 1183
   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

CC licensed content, Specific attribution
   Criterion vs. Norm-Referenced Assessment: Examples and
      Evaluation. Provided by: Teachings in Education. Retrieved
      from: https://youtu.be/O5hJNpO0JPE?t=4. License: All Rights
      Reserved

1184 | Standardized Tests
High-Stakes Testing

While many states had standardized testing programs prior to 2000,
the number of state-wide tests has grown enormously since then
because the No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB) required that all states
test students in reading and mathematics annually in grades third
through eighth and at least once in high school by 2005-06.
Twenty-three states expanded their testing programs during
2005-06 and additional tests are being added as testing in science
is required by 2007-08. Students with disabilities and English
language learners must be included in the testing and provided a
variety of accommodations so the majority of staff in school districts
are involved in testing in some way (Olson, 2005). In this section,
we focus on these tests and their implications for teachers and
students.

Standards-Based Assessment

Academic content standards

NCLB mandates that states must develop academic content
standards that specify what students are expected to know or be
able to do at each grade level. These content standards used to
be called goals and objectives and it is not clear why the labels
have changed (Popham, 2004). Content standards are not easy to
develop--if they are too broad and not related to grade level,
teachers cannot hope to prepare students to meet the standards.

   An example, a broad standard in reading is:

   "Students should be able to construct meaning through

                                                                     High-Stakes Testing | 1185
      experiences with literature, cultural events and philosophical
      discussion" (no grade level indicated). (American Federation of
      Teachers, 2006, p. 6).

Standards that are too narrow can result in a restricted curriculum.
An example of a narrow standard might be:

   Students can define, compare and contrast, and provide a
      variety of examples of synonyms and antonyms.

A stronger standard is:

   "Students should apply knowledge of word origins, derivations,
      synonyms, antonyms, and idioms to determine the meaning of
      words" (grade 4) (American Federation of Teachers, 2006, p. 6).

The American Federation of Teachers conducted a study in 2005-6
and reported that some of the standards in reading, math, and
science were weak in 32 states. States set the strongest standards
in science followed by mathematics. Standards in reading were
particularly problematic and with one-fifth of all reading standards
redundant across the grade levels, i.e. word-by-word repetition
across grade levels at least 50 percent of the time (American
Federation of Teachers, 2006).

   Even if the standards are strong, there are often so many of
them that it is hard for teachers to address them all in a school
year. Content standards are developed by curriculum specialists
who believe in the importance of their subject area so they tend
to develop large numbers of standards for each subject area and
grade level. At first glance, it may appear that there are only several
broad standards, but under each standard, there are subcategories
called goals, benchmarks, indicators or objectives (Popham, 2004).
For example, Idaho's first-grade mathematics standard, judged to be
of high quality (AFT 2000) contains five broad standards, including
10 goals and a total of 29 objectives (Idaho Department of Education,
2005-6).

1186 | High-Stakes Testing
Alignment of standards, testing and classroom
curriculum

The state tests must be aligned with strong content standards in
order to provide useful feedback about student learning. If there is a
mismatch between the academic content standards and the content
that is assessed then the test results cannot provide information
about students' proficiency on the academic standards. A mismatch
not only frustrates the students taking the test, teachers, and
administrators it undermines the concept of accountability and the
"theory of action" that underlies the NCLB. Unfortunately, the 2006
Federation of Teachers study indicated that in only 11 states were
all the tests aligned with state standards (American Federation of
Teachers, 2006).

   State standards and their alignment with state assessments
should be widely available--preferably posted on the state's
websites so they can be accessed by school personnel and the
public. A number of states have been slow to do this. Table
10.9.1 summarizes which states had strong content standards, tests
that were aligned with state standards, and adequate documents
online. Only 11 states were judged to meet all three criteria in 2006.

                                                                     High-Stakes Testing | 1187
Table 10.9.1. Strong content standards, alignment, and transparency:
evaluation for each state in 2006 (Adapted from American Federation
of Teachers, 2006).

State        Standards      Test documents   Testing
             are strong     match standards  documents are
                                             online

Alabama                                      +

Alaska                      +                +

Arizona                     +                +

Arkansas                    +

California   +              +                +

Colorado                                     +

Connecticut                 +

Delaware

District of Columbia + +

Florida                     +                +

Georgia      +                               +

Hawaii                      +

Idaho        +                               +

Illinois                                     +

Indiana                     +                +

Iowa                        +

Kansas                      +                +

Kentucky                    +                +

Louisiana    +              +                +

Maine                       +

Maryland                    +

Massachusetts +             +

Michigan     +              +

Minnesota                   +                +

Mississippi                                  +

1188 | High-Stakes Testing
Table 10.9.1. Strong content standards, alignment, and transparency:
evaluation for each state in 2006 (Adapted from American Federation
of Teachers, 2006).

Missouri

Montana

Nebraska

Nevada        +   +  +

New Hampshire + +

New Jersey    +

New Mexico +      +  +

New York      +   +  +

North Carolina +

North Dakota +    +

Ohio          +   +  +

Oklahoma          +  +

Oregon            +  +

Pennsylvania         +

Rhode Island      +  +

South
Carolina

South Dakota +       +

Tennessee     +   +  +

Texas             +  +

Utah                 +

Sampling Content

When numerous standards have been developed it is impossible
for tests to assess all of the standards every year, so the
tests sample the content, i.e. measure some but not all the

                                                                     High-Stakes Testing | 1189
standards every year. Content standards cannot be reliably assessed
with only one or two items so the decision to assess one content
standard often requires not assessing another. This means if there
are too many content standards a significant proportion of them
are not measured each year. In this situation, teachers try to guess
which content standards will be assessed that year and align their
teaching on those specific standards. Of course, if these guesses are
incorrect students will have studied content not on the test and not
studied content that is on the test. Some argue that this is a very
serious problem with current state testing and Popham (2004) an
expert on testing even said: "What a muddleheaded way to run a
testing program" (p. 79).

Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP)

Under NCLB three levels of achievement, basic, proficient, and
advanced, must be specified for each grade level in each content
area by each state. States were required to set a time table from
2002 that insured an increasing percentage of students would reach
the proficient levels such that by 2013-14, so every child is
performing at or the proficient level. Schools and school districts
that meet this timetable are said to meet adequate yearly progress
(AYP).

   Because every child must reach proficiency by 2013-14 greater
increases are required for those schools that had larger percentages
of initially lower-performing students.

   Figure 1 illustrates the progress needed in three hypothetical
schools. School A, initially the lowest-performing school, has to
increase the number of students reaching proficiency by an average
of 6 percent each year, the increase is 3 percent for School B, and
the increase is only 1 percent for School C. Also, the checkpoint
targets in the timetables are determined by the lower performing
schools. This is illustrated on the figure by the arrow--it is obvious

1190 | High-Stakes Testing
that School A has to make significant improvements by 2007-08
but School C does not have to improve at all by 2007-08. This
means that schools that are initially lower-performing are much
more likely to fail to make AYP during the initial implementation
years of NCLB.

    Figure 10.9.1. Adequate Yearly Progress requires greater student
   improvement in schools with lower levels of initial proficiency.
   Schools A, B, and C all must reach 10 percent student proficiency
by 2013-14. However, the school that initially has the lowest level
of performance (A) has to increase the percentage of students
proficient at a greater rate than schools with middle (B) or high (C)
levels of initial proficiency rates.

Subgroups

For a school to achieve AYP not only must overall percentages of
                                                                     High-Stakes Testing | 1191
the students reach proficiency but subgroups must also reach
proficiency in a process called desegregation. Prior to NCLB state
accountability systems typically focused on overall student
performance but this did not provide incentives for schools to focus
on the neediest students, e.g. those children living below the
poverty line (Hess & Petrilli, 2006). Under NCLB the percentages
for each racial/ethnic group in the school (white, African American,
Latino, Native American, etc.), low-income students, students with
limited English proficiency, and students with disabilities are all
calculated if there are enough students in the subgroup. A school
may fail AYP if one group, e.g. English language learners do not make
adequate progress. This means that it is more difficult for large
diverse schools (typically urban schools) that have many subgroups
to meet the demands of AYP than smaller schools with
homogeneous student body (Novak & Fuller, 2003). Schools can also
fail to make AYP if too few students take the exam. The drafters of
the law were concerned that some schools might encourage low-
performing students to stay home on the days of testing in order to
artificially inflate the scores. On average, at least 95 percent of any
subgroup must take the exams each year or the school may fail to
make AYP (Hess & Petrilli, 2006).

Sanctions

Schools failing to meet AYP for consecutive years, experience a
series of increasing sanctions. If a school fails to make AYP for
two years in row it is labeled "in need of improvement" and school
personnel must come up with a school improvement plan that is
based on "scientifically based research." In addition, students must
be offered the option of transferring to a better performing public
school within the district. If the school fails for three consecutive
years, free tutoring must be provided to needy students. A fourth-
year of failure requires "corrective actions" which may include

1192 | High-Stakes Testing
staffing changes, curriculum reforms or extensions of the school
day or year. If the school fails to meet AYP for five consecutive
years the district must "restructure" which involves major actions
such as replacing the majority of the staff, hiring an educational
management company, turning the school over to the state.

Growth or Value-Added Models

One concern with how AYP is calculated is that it is based on an
absolute level of student performance at one point in time and
does not measure how much students improve during each year.
To illustrate this, Figure 2 shows six students whose science test
scores improved from fourth to fifth grade. The circle represents
a student's score in fourth grade and the tip of the arrow the test
score in fifth grade. Note that students 1, 2, and 3 all reach the level
of proficiency (the horizontal dotted line) but students 4, 5, and 6 do
not. However, also notice that students 2, 5, and 6 improved much
more than students 1, 3, and 4. The current system of AYP rewards
students for reaching the proficiency level rather than students'
growth. This is a particular problem for low performing schools who
may be doing an excellent job of improving achievement (students 5
and 6) but do not make the proficiency level. The US Department of
Education in 2006 allowed some states to include growth measures
into their calculations of AYP. While growth models traditionally
tracked the progress of individual students, the term is sometimes
used to refer to the growth of classes or entire schools (Shaul, 2006).

                                                                     High-Stakes Testing | 1193
     Figure 10.9.2. An illustration of the value-added vs. proficiency
 approach to assessment. Each arrow represents the mathematics
  achievement results of one student who was tested in the fourth
grade (shown by the dot) and also the fifth grade (shown by the tip

                                      of the arrow).
   Some states include growth information on their report cards. For
example, Tennessee provides details on which schools meet the AYP
but also whether the students' scores on tests represent average
growth, above average, or below-average growth within the state.
Figure 3 illustrates in a simple way the kind of information that is
provided. Students in schools A, B, and C all reached proficiency
and AYP but in Schools D, E, and F did not. However, students
in schools A and D had low growth, schools B and E had average
growth, in schools C and F had high growth. Researchers have found
that in some schools students have high levels of achievement but
do not grow as much as expected (School A), and also that in some

1194 | High-Stakes Testing
schools, the achievement test scores are not high but the students
are growing or learning a lot (School F). These are called "school
effects" and represent the effect of the school on the learning of the
students.

    Figure 10.9.3. Proficiency and growth information

Growth Over One Year

Schools can vary on overall school achievement (proficiency) as well
as the amount of growth in student learning, For example, schools
A, B, and C all have high achievement levels but only in School C
do students have, on average, high growth. Schools D, C, and F all
have low levels of proficiency but only in school D do students, on
average, have low growth.

   Growth models have an intuitive appeal to teachers as they focus
on how much a student learned during the school year--not what
the student knew at the start of the school year. The current
research evidence suggests that teachers matter a lot--i.e. students
learn much more with some teachers than with others. For example,
in one study low-achieving fourth-grade students in Dallas, Texas
were followed for three years and 90 percent of those who had
effective teachers passed the seventh-grade math test whereas only
42 percent of those with ineffective teachers passed (cited in Bracey,
2004). Unfortunately, the same study reported that low achieving
students were more likely to be assigned to ineffective teachers

                                                                     High-Stakes Testing | 1195
for three years in a row than high achieving students. Some
policymakers believe that teachers who are highly effective should
receive rewards including higher salaries or bonuses and that a
primary criterion of effectiveness is assessed by growth models, i.e.
how much students learn during a year (Hershberg, 2004). However,
using growth data to make decisions about teachers is controversial
as there is much more statistical uncertainty when using growth
measures for a small group of students (e.g. one teacher's students)
than for larger groups (e.g. all fourth graders in a school district).

   Growth models are also used to provide information about the
patterns of growth among subgroups of students that may arise
from the instructional focus of the teachers. For example, it may
be that the highest-performing students in the classroom gain the
most and the lowest-performing students gain the least. This
suggests that the teacher is focusing on the high-achieving students
and giving less attention to low-achieving students. In contrast, it
may be the highest performing students gain the least and the low-
performing students grow the most suggesting the teacher focuses
on the low-performing students and pays little attention to the
high-performing students. If the teacher focuses on the students
"in the middle" they may grow the most and the highest and lowest
performing students grow the least. Proponents of the value-added
or growth models argue that teachers can use this information
to help them make informed decisions about their teaching
(Hershberg, 2004).

Differing state standards

Under NCLB each state devises its own academic content
standards, assessments, and levels of proficiency. Some researchers
have suggested that the rules of NCLB have encouraged states to
set low levels of proficiency so it is easier to meet AYP each year
(Hoff, 2002). The stringency of state levels of proficiency can be

1196 | High-Stakes Testing
examined by comparing state test scores to scores on a national
achievement test called the National Assessment of Educational
Progress (NAEP). NCLB requires that states administer reading and
math NAEP tests to a sample of fourth and eighth-grade students
every other year. The NAEP is designed to assess the progress of
students at the state-wide or national level, not individual schools
or students, and is widely respected as a well-designed test that
uses current best practices in testing. A large percentage of each
test includes constructed-response questions and questions that
require the use of calculators and other materials.

   Figure 10.9.4 illustrates that two states, Colorado and Missouri
had very different state performance standards for the fourth-grade
reading/language arts tests in 2003. On the state assessment, 67
percent of the students in Colorado but only 21 percent of the
students in Missouri were classified as proficient. However, on the
NAEP tests 34 percent of Colorado students and 28 percent of
Missouri students were classified as proficient (Linn 2005). These
differences demonstrate that there is no common meaning in
current definitions of "proficient achievement" established by the
states.

                                                                     High-Stakes Testing | 1197
    Figure 10.9.4. Relationship between state proficiency levels and
                 scores on NAEP (Adapted from Linn 2005).

     IMPLICATIONS FOR BEGINNING
   TEACHERS

        Dr. Mucci is the principal of a suburban fourth through
     sixth-grade school in Ohio that continues to meet AYP. We
     asked her what beginning teachers should know about
     high-stakes testing by the states. She responded as follows:

        I want beginning teachers to be familiar with the content
     standards in Ohio because they clearly define what all
     students should know and be able to do. Not only does
     teaching revolve around the standards, I only approve
     requests for materials or professional development if these
     are related to the standards. I want beginning teachers to
     understand the concept of data-based decision-making.
     Every year I meet with all the teachers in each grade level
     (e.g. fourth grade) to look for trends in the previous year's
     test results and consider remedies based on these trends.

        I also meet with each teacher in the content areas that
     are tested and discuss every student's achievement in his or
     her class so we can develop an instructional plan for every
     student. All interventions with students are research-
     based. Every teacher in the school is responsible for
     helping to implement these instructional plans, for
     example, the music or art teachers must incorporate some
     reading and math into their classes.

        I also ask all teachers to teach test-taking skills, by using
     similar formats to the state tests, enforcing time limits,

1198 | High-Stakes Testing
     making sure students learn to distinguish between
     questions that required an extended response using
     complete sentences versus those that only require one or
     two words, and ensuring that students answer what is
     actually being asked. We begin this early in the school year
     and continue to work on these skills, so by spring, students
     are familiar with the format, and therefore less anxious
     about the state test. We do everything possible to set each
     student up for success.

The impact of testing on classroom teachers does not just occur in
Dr. Mucci's middle school. A national survey of over 4,000 teachers
indicated that the majority of teachers reported that the state-
mandated tests were compatible with their daily instruction and
were based on curriculum frameworks that all teachers should
follow. The majority of teachers also reported teaching test-taking
skills and encouraging students to work hard and prepare.
Elementary school teachers reported a greater impact of the high-
stakes tests: 56 percent reported the tests influenced their teaching
daily or a few times a week compared to 46 percent of middle school
teachers and 28 percent of high school teachers. Even though the
teachers had adapted their instruction because of the standardized
tests they were skeptical about them with 40 percent reporting that
teachers had found ways to raise test scores without improving
student learning and over 70 percent reporting that the test scores
were not an accurate measure of what minority students know and
can do (Pedulla, Abrams, Madaus, Russell, Ramos, & Miao; 2003).
CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

                                                                    High-Stakes Testing | 1199
International Comparisons

Along with the increasing globalization has come an interest in
international comparisons in educational achievement and
practices and more than 40 countries participate in two major
testing initiatives. The Trends in International Mathematics and
Science Study (TIMSS) have assessed students in fourth and eighth
grades four times through 2007. The Programme for International
Assessment (PISA) has assessed 15-year-olds in reading,
mathematical and science literacy in more than forty countries on
three times since 2000. The items on both series of tests include
multiple-choice, short answer, and constructed response formats
and are translated into more than 30 languages.

   Policymakers are often interested in the comparison of average
students' scores across countries. For example, in eighth-grade
science on the 2003 TIMMS students from Canada, the United
States, Hong Kong, and Australia scored significantly higher than
the international average whereas students from Egypt, Indonesia,
and the Philippines scored significantly below the international
average (TIMMS 2003). On the mathematics test in the 2003 PISA,
15- year-old students from Hong Kong, China, and Finland scored
higher than students from Canada and New Zealand who in turn
scored higher than the students from the United States and Spain,
who in turn scored higher than the student from Mexico and Brazil
(OECD, 2004).

   Both series of tests also collect survey data from students,
teachers, or school principals allowing for information about
instructional practices and student characteristics. For example,
teachers from the Philippines report spending almost twice as much
time teaching science to fourth graders than in the United States
(Martin, Mullis, Gonzalez, & Chrostowski, (2004). Student reports
from PISA indicate that there is considerable cross-country
variation in how much students feel anxiety when doing

1200 | International Comparisons
mathematics. Students in France, Italy, Japan, and Korea report
feeling the most anxious whereas students in Denmark, Finland, the
Netherlands, and Sweden feel the least anxious (OECD 2004).
CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Educational Psychology. License: CC BY: Attribution
   Educational Psychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

                                                           International Comparisons | 1201
Understanding Test Results

In order to understand test results from standardized tests, it is
important to be familiar with a variety of terms and concepts that
are fundamental to "measurement theory," the academic study of
measurement and assessment. Two major areas in measurement
theory, reliability and validity, were discussed earlier in this chapter
we focus on concepts and terms associated with test scores.

The Basics of Statistics

Frequency Distributions

A frequency distribution is a listing of the number of students who
obtained each score on a test. If 31 students take a test, and the
scores range from 11 to 30 then the frequency distribution might
look like Table 10.11.1. We also show the same set of scores on a
histogram or bar graph in Figure 10.11.1. The horizontal (or x-axis)
represents the score on the test and the vertical axis (y-axis)
represents the number or frequency of students. Plotting a
frequency distribution helps us see what scores are typical and how
much variability there is in the scores. We describe more precise
ways of determining typical scores and variability next.

1202 | Understanding Test Results
Table 10.11.1, Frequency distribution for 30 scores

Score on test Frequency Central tendency measures

17     1

18     1

19     0

20     3

21     2

22     6   Mode

23     3   Median

24     2   Mean

25     0

26     2

27     6   Mode

28     2

29     2

30     1

TOTAL  31

                   Understanding Test Results | 1203
      Figure 10.11.1. Tests scores from Table 1 represented as a bar
                                           graph

Central Tendency and Variability

There are three common ways of measuring central tendency or
which score(s) are typical. The mean is calculated by adding up all
the scores and dividing by the number of scores. In the example
in Table 1, the mean is 24. The median is the "middle" score of the
distribution--that is half of the scores are above the median and
half are below. The median on the distribution is 23 because 15
scores are above 23 and 15 are below. The mode is the score that
occurs most often. In Table 1 there are actually two modes: 22 and
27. Thus, this distribution is described as bimodal. Calculating the
mean, median and mode are important as each provides different
information for teachers. The median represents the score of the
"middle" students, with half scoring above and below, but does not
tell us about the scores on the test that occurred most often. The
mean is important for some statistical calculations but is highly
influenced by a few extreme scores (called outliers) but the median
is not. To illustrate this, imagine a test out of 20 points taken by 10
students, and most do very well but one student does very poorly.
The scores might be 4, 18, 18, 19, 19, 19, 19, 19, 20, 20. The mean is
17.5 (175/10) but if the lowest score (4) is eliminated the mean is now
1.5 points higher at 19 (171/9). However, in this example, the median
remains at 19 whether the lowest score is included. When there are
some extreme scores the median is often more useful for teachers
in indicating the central tendency of the frequency distribution.

   The measures of central tendency help us summarize scores that
are representative, but they do not tell us anything about how
variable or how spread out are the scores. Figure 2 illustrates sets
of scores from two different schools on the same test for fourth
graders. Note that the mean for each is 40 but in School A the scores

1204 | Understanding Test Results
are much less spread out. A simple way to summarize variability
is the range, which is the lowest score subtracted from the lowest
score. In School A with low variability the range is (45 - 35) = 10; in
the school B the range is (55 - 22 = 33).

   Figure 10.11.2. Fourth-grade math scores in two different schools
                with the same mean but different variability

   However, the range is only based on two scores in the
distribution, the highest and lowest scores, and so does not
represent variability in all the scores. The standard deviation is
based on how much, on average, all the scores deviate from the
mean. In the example, in Figure 10.11.2 the standard deviations are
7.73 for School A and 2.01 for School B. In Exhibit 1 below we
demonstrate how to calculate the standard deviation.

                                                          Understanding Test Results | 1205
     EXHIBIT 1: CALCULATING A STANDARD
   DEVIATION

        The scores from 11 students on a quiz are 4, 7, 6, 3, 10, 7, 3,
     7, 5, 5, and 9. Complete the following steps:

         1. Order scores.
        2. Calculate the mean score.
        3. Calculate the deviations from the mean.
        4. Square the deviations from the mean.
        5. Calculate the mean of the squared deviations from

             the mean (i.e. sum the squared deviations from the
             mean then divide by the number of scores). This
             number is called the variance.
        6. Take the square root and you have calculated the
             standard deviation.

1206 | Understanding Test Results
Completing the Steps

   Score (Step     Deviation from     Squared deviation
1: Order)       the mean           from the mean

   3               -3                 9
   3               -3                 9
   4               -2                 4
   5               -1                 1
   5               -1                 1
   6               0                  0
   7               1                  1
   7               1                  1
   7               1                  1
   9               3                  9
   10              4                  4
   Total: 66                           52

The Normal Distribution

Knowing the standard deviation is particularly important when the
distribution of the scores falls on a normal distribution. When a
standardized test is administered to a very large number of students
the distribution of scores is typically similar, with many students
scoring close to the mean, and fewer scoring much higher or lower
than the mean. When the distribution of scores looks like the bell

                                                          Understanding Test Results | 1207
shape shown in Figure 3 it is called a normal distribution. In the
diagram we did not draw in the scores of individual students as we
did in Figure 2, because distributions typically only fall on a normal
curve when there are a large number of students; too many to
show individually. A normal distribution is symmetric, and the mean,
median, and mode are all the same.

          Figure 10.11.3. Bell-shaped curve of normal distribution
   Normal curve distributions are very important in education and
psychology because of the relationship between the mean, standard
deviation, and percentiles. In all normal distributions, 34 percent of
the scores fall between the mean and one standard deviation of the
mean. Intelligence tests often are constructed to have a mean of 100
and a standard deviation of 15 and we illustrate that in the figure
below.

1208 | Understanding Test Results
    Figure 10.11.4. Normal distribution for an IQ test with a mean of
                         100 and standard deviation of 15

   In the above figure, 34 percent of the scores are between 100 and
115 and as well, and 34 percent of the scores lie between 85 and
100. This means that 68 percent of the scores are between -1 and +1
standard deviations of the mean (i.e. 85 and 115). Note that only 14
percent of the scores are between +1 and +2 standard deviations of
the mean and only 2 percent fall above +2 standard deviations of the
mean.

   In a normal distribution, a student who scores the mean value is
always in the fiftieth percentile because the mean and median are
the same. A score of +1 standard deviation above the mean (e.g. 115
in Figure 4) is the 84 percent tile (50 percent and 34 percent of the
scores were below 115). In Exhibit 10 we represent the percentile
equivalents to the normal curve and we also show standard scores.

Kinds of Test Scores

A standard score expresses performance on a test in terms of

                                                          Understanding Test Results | 1209
standard deviation units above or below the mean (Linn & Miller,
2005). There are a variety of standard scores, including z-scores, T-
scores, and stanines.

   One type of standard score is a z-score, in which the mean is
0 and the standard deviation is 1. This means that a z-score tells
us directly how many standard deviations the score is above or
below the mean. For example, if a student receives a z score of 2
her score is two standard deviations above the mean or the eighty-
fourth percentile. A student receiving a z score of -1.5 scored one
and one-half deviations below the mean. Any score from a normal
distribution can be converted to a z score if the mean and standard
deviation is known.

   A T-score has a mean of 50 and a standard deviation of 10. This
means that a T-score of 70 is two standard deviations above the
mean and so is equivalent to a z-score of 2.

   Stanines (pronounced "staynines") are often used for reporting
students' scores and are based on a standard nine-point scale with
a mean of 5 and a standard deviation of 2.

Grade Equivalent Scores

A grade equivalent score provides an estimate of test performance
based on grade level and months of the school year (Popham, 2005,
p. 288). A grade equivalent score of 3.7 means the performance is
at that expected of a third-grade student in the seventh month of
the school year. Grade equivalents provide a continuous range of
grade levels and so can be considered developmental scores. Grade
equivalent scores are popular and seem easy to understand however
they are typically misunderstood. If, James, a fourth-grade student,
takes a reading test and the grade equivalent score is 6.0; this does
not mean that James can do sixth-grade work. It means that James
performed on the fourth-grade test as a sixth-grade student is
expected to perform.

1210 | Understanding Test Results
   Testing companies calculate grade equivalents by giving one test
to several grade levels. For example, a test designed for fourth
graders would also be given to third and fifth graders. The raw
scores are plotted and a trend line is established and this is used
to establish the grade equivalents. Note that in Figure 10.11.5 the
trend line extends beyond the grade levels actually tested so a grade
equivalent above 5.0 or below 3.0 is based solely on the estimated
trend lines.

      Figure 10.11.5. Using trend lines to estimate grade equivalent
                                          scores.

   Grade equivalent scores also assume that the subject matter that
is being tested is emphasized at each grade level to the same
amount and that mastery of the content accumulates at a mostly
constant rate (Popham, 2005). Many testing experts warn that grade
equivalent scores should be interpreted with considerable

                                                           Understanding Test Results | 1211
skepticism and that parents often have serious misconceptions
about grade equivalent scores. Parents of high-achieving students
may have an inflated sense of their child's levels of achievement.
CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

1212 | Understanding Test Results
Issues with Standardized
Tests

Many people have very strong views about the role of standardized
tests in education. Some believe they provide an unbiased way to
determine an individual's cognitive skills as well as the quality of
a school or district. Others believe that scores from standardized
tests are capricious, do not represent what students know, and
are misleading when used for accountability purposes. Many
educational psychologists and testing experts have nuanced views
and make distinctions between the information standardized tests
can provide about students' performances and how the test results
are interpreted and used. In this nuanced view, many of the
problems associated with standardized tests arise from their high
stakes use such as using the performance on one test to determine
selection into a program, graduation, or licensure, or judging a
school as high vs low performing.

Bias in Standardized Tests

In a multicultural society, one crucial question is: Are standardized
tests biased against certain social class, racial, or ethnic groups?
This question is much more complicated than it seems because
bias has a variety of meanings. An everyday meaning of bias often
involves the fairness of using standardized test results to predict
the potential performance of disadvantaged students who have
previously had few educational resources. For example, should
Dwayne, a high school student who worked hard but had limited
educational opportunities because of the poor schools in his
neighborhood and few educational resources in his home, be denied

                                                      Issues with Standardized Tests | 1213
graduation from high school because of his score on one test. It
was not his fault that he did not have the educational resources and
if given a chance with a change in his environment (e.g. by going
to college) his performance may blossom. In this view, test scores
reflect societal inequalities and can punish students who are less
privileged and are often erroneously interpreted as a reflection of a
fixed inherited capacity. Researchers typically consider bias in more
technical ways and three issues will be discussed: item content and
format; the accuracy of predictions, and stereotype threat.

   Item content and format. Test items may be harder for some
groups than others. An example of social class bias in a multiple-
choice item asked students the meaning of the term field. The
students were asked to read the initial sentence in italics and then
select the response that had the same meaning of field (Popham
2004, p. 24):

 1. My dad's field is computer graphics.

       1. The pitcher could field his position
       2. We prepared the field by plowing it
      3. The doctor examined my field of vision
       4. What field will you enter after college?

Children of professionals are more likely to understand this
meaning of field as doctors, journalists and lawyers have "fields,"
whereas cashiers and maintenance workers have jobs so their
children are less likely to know this meaning of the field. (The
correct answer is 4).

   Testing companies try to minimize these kinds of content
problems by having test developers from a variety of backgrounds
review items and by examining statistically if certain groups find
some items easier or harder. However, problems do exist and recent
analyses of the verbal SAT tests indicated that whites tend to score
better on easy items whereas African Americans, Hispanic
Americans, and Asian Americans score better on hard items
(Freedle, 2002). While these differences are not large, they can

1214 | Issues with Standardized Tests
influence test scores. Researchers think that the easy items
involving words that are used in everyday conversation may have
subtly different meanings in different subcultures, whereas the hard
words (e.g. vehemence, sycophant) are not used in every
conversation and do not have these variations in meaning. Test
format can also influence test performance. Females typically score
better at essay questions and when the SAT recently added an essay
component, the females overall SAT verbal scores improved relative
to males (Hoover, 2006).

Accuracy of Predictions

Standardized tests are used among other criteria to determine who
will be admitted to selective colleges. This practice is justified by
predictive validity evidence--i.e. that scores on the ACT or SAT
are used to predict first-year college grades. Recent studies have
demonstrated that the predictions for black and Latino students are
less accurate than for white students and that predictors for female
students are less accurate than for male students (Young, 2004).
However, perhaps surprisingly the test scores tend to slightly over-
predict success in college for black and Latino students, i.e. these
students are likely to attain lower freshman grade point averages
than predicted by their test scores. In contrast, test scores tend
to slightly underpredict success in college for female students, i.e.
these students are likely to attain higher freshman grade point
averages than predicted by their test scores. Researchers are not
sure why there are differences in how accurately the SAT and ACT
test predict freshman grades.

                                                      Issues with Standardized Tests | 1215
Stereotype Threat

Groups that are negatively stereotyped in some areas, such as
women's performance in mathematics, are in danger of stereotype
threat, i.e. concerns that others will view them through the negative
or stereotyped lens (Aronson & Steele, 2005). Studies have shown
that test performance of stereotyped groups (e.g. African
Americans, Latinos, women) declines when it is emphasized to
those taking the test that (a) the test is high stakes, measures
intelligence or math and (b) they are reminded of their ethnicity,
race or gender (e.g. by asking them before the test to complete a
brief demographic questionnaire). Even if individuals believe they
are competent, stereotype threat can reduce working memory
capacity because individuals are trying to suppress the negative
stereotypes. Stereotype threat seems particularly strong for those
individuals who desire to perform well. Standardized test scores
of individuals from stereotyped groups may significantly
underestimate actual their competence in low-stakes testing
situations.

Teaching to the Test

There is evidence that schools and teachers adjust the curriculum
so it reflects what is on the tests and also prepares students for the
format and types of items on the test. Several surveys of elementary
school teachers indicated that more time was spent on mathematics
and reading and less on social studies and sciences in 2004 than in
1990 (Jerald, 2006). Principals in high minority enrollment schools
in four states reported in 2003 that they had reduced time spent on
the arts. Recent research in cognitive science suggests that reading
comprehension in a subject (e.g. science or social studies) requires
that students understand a lot of vocabulary and background

1216 | Issues with Standardized Tests
knowledge in that subject (Recht & Leslie, 1988). This means that
even if students gain good reading skills they will find learning
science and social studies difficult if little time has been spent on
these subjects.

   Taking a test with an unfamiliar format can be difficult so teachers
help students prepare for specific test formats and items (e.g.
double negatives in multiple-choice items; constructed response).
Earlier in this chapter, a middle school teacher, Erin, and Principal
Dr. Mucci described the test preparation emphasis in their schools.
There is growing concern that the amount of test preparation that
is now occurring in schools is excessive and students are not being
educated but trained to do tests (Popham, 2004).

Cheating

It is difficult to obtain good data on how widespread cheating is but
we know that students taking tests cheat and others, including test
administrators, help them cheat (Cizek, 2003; Popham 2006). Steps
to prevent cheating by students include protecting the security
of tests, making sure students understand the administration
procedures, preventing students from bringing in their notes or
unapproved electronic devices as well as looking at each other's
answers. Some teachers and principals have been caught using
unethical test preparation practices such as giving actual test items
to students just before the tests, giving students more time than
is allowed, answering students' questions about the test items, and
actually changing students' answers (Popham, 2006). Concerns in
Texas about cheating led to the creation of an independent task
force in August 2006 with 15 staff members from the Texas
Education Agency assigned investigate test improprieties.
(Jacobson, 2006). While the pressure on schools and teachers to
have their students perform well is large these practices are clearly

                                                      Issues with Standardized Tests | 1217
unethical and have led to school personnel being fired from their
jobs (Cizek, 2003).
CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Provided by: The Saylor Foundation.
      Retrieved from: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
      educationalpsychology. License: CC BY: Attribution

1218 | Issues with Standardized Tests
Chapter Summary:

Assessment and Evaluation

Classroom assessment is the process of gaining information about
students' learning, and judging the quality of their learning. It can be
used either to enhance students' learning (assessment for learning)
or to verify the extent of students' learning (assessment of learning).
Essential steps of assessment for learning include 1) communicating
instructional goals clearly; 2) selecting appropriate, high-quality
assessments that match the instructional goals and students'
backgrounds; 3) using assessments that enhance student motivation
and confidence; 4) adjusting instruction based on results of
assessment; and 5) communicating assessment results to students,
parents, and guardians. Different types of test questions and
assessment practices affect the success of each of these steps.
Action research can help teachers understand and improve their
teaching. A number of questions are important to consider when
devising grading systems.

   Standardized tests are assessments developed by a team of
experts and administered in consistent ways. They are used
primarily to ensure accountability about students' education--to
provide evidence that students are learning desired skills and
knowledge. Most elementary and middle school teachers are likely
to be responsible for helping students attain state content
standards and achieve proficiency on criterion-referenced
achievement tests. In order to interpret test scores and
communicate that information to students and parents, teachers
have to understand basic information about measures of central
tendency and variability, the normal distribution, and several kinds
of test scores. Current evidence suggests that standardized tests
can be biased against certain groups and that many teachers tailor
their curriculum and classroom tests to match the standardized

                                                         Chapter Summary: Assessment and
                                                                                  Evaluation | 1219
tests. A few educators have even been caught cheating--falsifying or
"fudging" test results.
CC licensed content, Shared previously

   Educational Psychology. Authored by: Kelvin Seifert and
      Rosemary Sutton. Retrieved from:
      https://courses.lumenlearning.com/educationalpsychology.
      License: CC BY: Attribution

1220 | Chapter Summary: Assessment and Evaluation
Glossary

                                                                                     Glossary | 1221
References

1222 | References
Airasian, P. W. (2000). Classroom assessment: A concise approach 2nd
ed. Boston: McGraw Hill.

   Airasian, P. W. (2005). Classroom assessment: concepts and
applications (3rd ed.). Boston: McGraw Hill.
American Federation of Teachers. (2006, July) Smart Testing: Let's

   get it right. AFT Policy Brief. Retrieved August 8, 2006, from
   http://www.aft.org/presscenter/releases/2006/smarttesting/
   Testingbrief.pdf
   Aronson, J., & Steele, C. M. (2005). Stereotypes and the fragility of
academic Competence, motivation, and self-concept. In A. J. Elliott
& C. S. Dweck (Eds.). Handbook of competence and
motivation. (pp.436-456) Guilford Publications, New York.
   Bangert-Downs, R. L.,Kulik, J. A., & Kulik, C-L, C. (1991). Effects of
frequent classroom testing. Journal of Educational Research, 85(2),
89-99.
   Bishop, J. H. (1999). Nerd harassment, incentives, school
priorities, and learning. In S. E. Mayer & P. E. Peterson (Eds.)
Earning and learning: how school matters (pp. 231-280).
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Black, P., Harrison, C., Lee, C., Marshall, B. & Wiliam, D. (2004).
   Working inside the black box.: Assessment for learning in the
   classroom. Phi Delta Kappan, 86(1) 9-21.
Black, P., & Wiliam, D. (2006). Assessment for learning in the
   classroom. In J. Gardner (Ed.). Assessment and learning (pp. 9-25).
   Thousand Oaks, CA:Sage.
Borko, H. & Livingston, C. (1989) Cognition and improvisation:
   differences in mathematics instruction by expert and novice
   teachers. American Educational Research Journal, 26, 473-98.
Bracey, G. W. (2004). Value added assessment findings: poor kids get
   poor teachers. Phi Delta Kappan, 86, 331-333.

Cizek, G. J. (2003). Detecting and preventing classroom cheating:
promoting integrity in assessment. Corwin Press, Thousand Oaks,
CA.

   Combined Curriculum Document Reading 4.1 .(2006). Retrieved

                                                                                                  | 1223
November 19, 2006, from http://www.education.ky.gov/KDE/
Instructional+Resources/Curriculum+Documents+and+Resources/
Teaching+Tools/Combined+Curriculum+Documents/default.htm

   Cross, L. H., & Frary, R. B. (1999). Hodgepodge grading: endorsed
by students and teachers alike. Applied Measurement in Education,
21(1) 53-72.

   Dempster, F. N. & Perkins, P. G. (1993). Revitalizing classroom
assessment: using tests to promote learning. Journal of Instructional
Psychology, 20(3) 197-203.

   Dweck, C. S. (2000) Self-theories: Their role in motivation,
personality, and development. Philadelphia, PA: Psychology Press.

   Elliott, A., McGregor, H., & Thrash, T. (2004). The need for
competence. In E. Deci & R. Ryan (Eds.), Handbook of self-
determination research (pp. 361-388). Rochester, NY: University of
Rochester Press.

   Freedle, R. O. (2003). Correcting the SAT's ethnic and social-class
bias: a method for reestimating SAT scores. Harvard Educational
Review, 73(1), 1-42.

1224 |
Haertel, E. & Herman, J. (2005) A historical perspective on validity

arguments for accountability testing. In J. L.Herman & E. H. Haertel

(Eds.) Uses and misuses of data for educational accountability and

improvement. 104th Yearbook of the National Society for the Study of

Education. Malden, MA: Blackwell.

Harlen, W. The role of assessment in developing motivation for

learning. In J. Gardner (Ed.). Assessment and learning (pp. 61-80).

Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Hershberg, T. (2004). Value added assessment: Powerful diagnostics

to improve instruction and promote student

achievement. American Association of School Administrators,

Conference Proceedings. Retrieved August 21 2006

from www.cgp.upenn.edu/ope_news.html

Hess, F. H. Petrilli, M. J. (2006). No Child Left Behind primer. New

York: Peter Lang.

Hoff, D. J. (2002) States revise meaning of proficient. Educational

Week, 22(6) 1,24-25.

Hoover, E. (2006, October 21). SAT scores see largest dip in 31

years. Chronicle of Higher Education, 53(10), A1.

Human Resources Division. (n.d.). Firefighter Commonwealth of

Massachusetts Physical Abilities Test (PAT). Retrieved November 19,

2006,                                                      from

http://www.mass.gov/?pageID=hrdtopic&L=2&L0=Home&L1=Civil+

Service&sid=Ehrd

Jacobson, L. (2006). Probing test irregularities: texas launches

inquiry into cheating on exams. Education Week, 28(1), 28

Jerald, C. D (2006, August).The hidden costs of curriculum

narrowing. Issue Brief, Washington DC: The Center for

Comprehensive School Reform and Improvement. Retrieved

November 21, 2006 from www.centerforcsri.org/

Joshi, R. M. (2003). Misconceptions about the assessment and

diagnosis of reading disability. Reading Psychology, 24, 247-266.

Koretz, D. Stecher, B. Klein, S. & McCaffrey, D. (1994). The evolution

of a portfolio program: The impact and quality of the Vermont

                                                           | 1225
   program in its second year (1992-3). (CSE Technical report 385)
   Los Angeles: University of California, Center for Research on
   Evaluation Standards and Student Testing. Retrieved January 25,
   2006, from http://www.csr.ucla.edu.
Linn, R. L. (2005). Fixing the NCLB accountability system. CRESST
   Policy Brief 8. Retrieved September 21, 2006 from
   http://www.cse.ucla.edu/products/policybriefs_set.htm
   Linn, R. L., & Miller, M. D. (2005). Measurement and assessment in
teaching (9th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.
   Martin, M.O., Mullis, I.V.S., Gonzalez, E.J., & Chrostowski, S.J.
(2004). Findings From IEA's trends in international mathematics and
science study at the fourth and eighth grades. Chestnut Hill, MA:
TIMSS & PIRLS International Study Center, Boston College.
Retrieved September 23, 2006, from http://timss.bc.edu/
timss2003i/scienceD.html
   New York State Education Department (2005). Home Instruction
in New York State. Retrieved November 19, 2006, from
http://www.emsc.nysed.gov/nonpub/part10010.htm
OECD. (2004). Learning for tomorrow's world--first results from PISA
   2003. Retrieve on September 23, 2006, from
   http://www.pisa.oecd.org/document/
Olson, L. (2005, November 30th). State test program mushroom as
   NCLB kicks in. Education Week, 25(13), 10-12.
Pedulla, J Abrams, L. M. Madaus, G. F., Russell, M. K., Ramos, M.
   A., & Miao, J. (2003). Perceived effects of state-mandated testing
   programs on teaching and learning: Findings from a national
   survey of teachers. Boston College, Boston MA National Board on
   Educational Testing and Public Policy. Retrieved September 21
   2006 from http://escholarship.bc.edu/lynch_facp/51/
Popham, W. J. (2004). America's "failing" schools. How parents and
   teachers can copy with No Child Left Behind. New York: Routledge
   Falmer.
   Popham, W. J. (2005). Classroom assessment: what teachers need to
know. Boston, MA: Pearson.

1226 |
Popham, W. J. (2006). Educator cheating on No Child Left Behind
   Tests. Educational Week, 25(32) 32-33.

Recht, D. R. & Leslie, L. (1988). Effect of prior knowledge on good and
   poor readers' memory of text. Journal of Educational Psychology
   80, 16-20.
   Rowe, M. B. (2003). Wait-time and rewards as instructional

variables, their influence on language, logic and fate control: Part
one-wait time. Journal of Research in science Teaching,
40 Supplement, S19-32.

   Shaul, M. S. (2006). No Child Left Behind Act: States face
challenges measuring academic growth. Testimony before the House
Committee on Education and the Workforce Government Accounting
Office. Retrieved September 25, 2006, from www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/
getrpt?GAO-06-948T

Stiggins, R. J. (2002). Assessment crisis: the absence of assessment
FOR learning. Phi Delta Kappan, 83(10), 758-765.
Sutton, R. E. (2004). Emotional regulation goals and strategies of

   teachers. Social Psychology of Education, 7(4), 379-398.
Tschannen-Moran, M., Woolfolk-Hoy, A., & Hoy, W. K. (1998).

   Teacher efficacy: its meaning and measure. Review of Educational
   Research, 68, 202-248.
Wise, S. L. & DeMars, C. W. (2005). Low examinee effort in low-
   stakes assessment: problems and potential solutions. Educational
   Assessment 10(1), 1-17.
   Young, J. W. (2004). Differential validity and prediction: race and
sex differences in college admissions testing. In R. Zwick (Ed).
Rethinking the SAT: The future of standardized testing in university
admissions. New York (pp. 289-301). Routledge Falmer.

                                                                                                   | 1227
About the Author

     Contact

        Email: n.arduinivanhoos@hvcc.edu
        Website: https://sites.google.com/view/profavh
        LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/
     nicolearduinivanhoose/

     Affiliations

        Associate Professor of Psychology
        Social Sciences & Education Department
        Hudson Valley Community College, Troy, NY
        Ph.D., Educational Psychology
        Education Department
        The State University of New York at Albany

                                                                        About the Author | 1229
        Post-Graduate Study, Counseling
        M.S.Ed., Educational Psychology
        B.S., Education
        Lally School of Education
        The College of Saint Rose, Albany, NY

1230 | About the Author
OER Adoption
Form--FACULTY ONLY

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view them online
        here: https://edpsych.pressbooks.sunycreate.cloud/?p=468

                                                              OER Adoption Form--FACULTY
                                                                                         ONLY | 1231
