              TEACHING
                 IN THE

             UNIVERSITY

                                      LEARNING FROM
                               GRADUATE STUDENTS AND

                                EARLY CAREER FACULTY

Edited by Donna Westfall-Rudd, Courtney Vengrin, and Jeremy Elliott-Engel
 e
ed
ers.

                       Teaching in the University: Learning from Graduate Students
                       and Early Career Faculty provides insight and strategies for
                        successful teaching, advising, and mentoring postsecondary
                        students. In particular, the authors offer support and
                        encouragement for implementing student-centered teaching
                        practices relevant to college classrooms. This book is designed
                        for new university teaching faculty and graduate teaching
                        assistants looking for innovative teaching resources.

                        As an Open Educational Resource (OER), this textbook provides
                        university instructors free access to high-quality teaching
                        materials based on the experiences of fellow new instructors.
                        Twenty contributors and two co-editors from the current
                        students and alumni of university teaching scholars programs
                        offer this resource for fellow faculty and graduate students to
                        improve instruction and engagement. Each chapter and
                        vignette come from the experiences and expertise of these
                        talented individuals who speak directly to their peers.

In association with  Cover design: Kindred Grey
                     ISBN: 978-1-949373-48-6
                     DOI: https://doi.org/10.21061/  Licensed with a Creative Commons
                     universityteaching              Attribution-NonCommercial
                                                     4.0 International License.
Teaching in the University
    Teaching in the University

Learning from Graduate Students and Early Career Faculty

                          Edited by
                   Donna Westfall-Rudd

                     Courtney Vengrin
                    Jeremy Elliott-Engel

            PDF AND EPUB FREE ONLINE AT: HTTPS://DOI.ORG/10.21061/UNIVERSITYTEACHING

    VIRGINIA TECH COLLEGE OF AGRICULTURE AND LIFE SCIENCES IN
                   ASSOCIATION WITH VIRGINIA TECH PUBLISHING
                                        BLACKSBURG, VIRGINIA
Copyright (c) 2022, The Contributors.

                Teaching in the University: Learning from Graduate Students and Early
Career Faculty, edited by Donna Westfall-Rudd, Courtney Vengrin, and Jeremy
Elliott-Engel (collection) is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International License, except where
otherwise noted.

You are free to copy, share, adapt, remix, transform, and build on the material
for any primarily noncommercial purpose as long as you follow the terms of the
license: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0.

You must:
   Attribute - You must give appropriate credit, provide a link to the license, and
      indicate if changes were made. You may do so in any reasonable manner, but
      not in any way that suggests the licensor endorses you or your use.

You may not:
   NonCommercial - You may not use the work for primarily commercial use.

   Additional restrictions - You may not add any legal terms or technological
      measures that legally restrict others from doing anything the license permits.

Suggested citation: Westfall-Rudd, D., Vengrin, C., and Elliott-Engel, J.
(eds.) Teaching in the University: Learning from Graduate Students and Early-
Career Faculty. Blacksburg: Virginia Tech College of Agriculture
and Life Sciences. https://doi.org/10.21061/universityteaching. License: CC
BY-NC 4.0.

Publisher: This work is published by the Virginia Tech College of Agriculture
and Life Sciences in association with Virginia Tech Publishing, a division of
the University Libraries at Virginia Tech.

Virginia Tech College of Agriculture and Life Sciences
250 Drillfield Drive
Blacksburg, VA 24061 USA
https://www.cals.vt.edu
Virginia Tech Publishing
560 Drillfield Drive
Blacksburg, VA 24061 USA
https://publishing.vt.edu
publishing@vt.edu

Peer review: This book has undergone blind peer review of chapter abstract
proposals and editorial review.

Accessibility statement: Virginia Tech Publishing is committed to making its
publications accessible in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act of
1990. The Pressbooks, PDF and ePub versions of this text are tagged structurally
and include alternative text, which allows for machine readability.

Publication cataloging information

Names: Donna Westfall-Rudd, Courtney Vengrin, and Jeremy Elliott Engel,

eds.

Title: Teachingin the university: learning from graduate students and early-career

faculty / Donna Westfall-Rudd, Courtney Vengrin, and Jeremy Elliott-Engel (eds).

Identifiers: ISBN 9781949373486 (PDF) | ISBN9781949373493     (paperback) |

ISBN 9781949373837 (ePub) | ISBN 9781949373479 (Pressbooks)

Subjects: LCSH: Graduate teaching assistants -- Training of. | College teachers --

Training of. | College Teaching.

Classification: LB2335.4 $b .T43 2022

DOI: https://doi.org/10.21061/universityteaching
Pressbooks: https://pressbooks.lib.vt.edu/universityteaching

Illustration and cover design: Kindred Grey
Contents

About the Editors and Contributors                            ix

Acknowledgments                                               xvi

Introduction                                                  xvii

Reviewing, Adopting, or Adapting this Book                    xxiii

1. Relational Learning: Creating a "Working Alliance" in the  1

Classroom

Javier S. Garcia

VIGNETTE: Supporting International Graduate Teaching          11

Assistants

Sihui Ma

2. Authenticity                                               19

Chris McCullough

VIGNETTE: Structure and Organization to Facilitate            34

Learning in My Large Class During the COVID-19 Pandemic

Didier Mena-Aguilar

3. Indigenizing Your Classroom: A Practice in Inclusive       39

Pedagogy

Qualla Ketchum

4. Teaching Practices for Student-Centered Learning Online    52

Rachel Mack

5. Technology Makes It Easier                                 72

Nasim Ebadi and Ghadir Asadi

VIGNETTE: No really, I don't have internet                    95

Bethany Wolters

6. Fun Fridays: Incorporating Hands-on Learning into          99

Lecture Courses

Bethany Wolters
7. Using Grade Appeals as a Learning Tool                      119

Emily T. Ott

VIGNETTE: Does "Fairness" Get in the Way of Learning and       139

Equity?

Leah Hamilton

8. How to Oversee a Laboratory Course Taught by Teaching       143

Assistants: Experiences in the Lab and Field

Emily T. Ott and Hannah Z. Angel

VIGNETTE: Use of Personal Response System in                   179

Classrooms

Sihui Ma

9. Teaching, Training, and Mentoring Students in Research      184

Practices Inside and Outside the Classroom

Anne M. Brown

VIGNETTE: Lessons Learned as a First-Time Experiential         197

Learning Program Instructor

Caitlin Cridland

10. The Power of Extension: Research, Teaching, and Outreach   202

for Broader Impacts

Jeremy Elliott-Engel; Courtney Crist; and Gordon Jones

11. Program Planning for Community Engagement and              228

Broader Impacts

Jeremy Elliott-Engel; Courtney Crist; and Gordon Jones

12. Personalized Advising that Is Purposely Inconsistent: The  257

Constants of Great Advisors and the Variability that

Demands Adaptability

William Moore

13. Engaging the Fear: How to Utilize Student Evaluations,     284

Accept Feedback, and Further Teaching Practice

Courtney Vengrin

VIGNETTE: So You've Landed the Job... (or Surviving Your       295

First Semester)

Laura Hanzly
About the Editors

The editing team is composed of the program director, Dr. Donna Westfall-
Rudd, and two previous teaching assistants for the Graduate Teaching
Scholars program within the College of Agriculture and Life Sciences (CALS)
at Virginia Tech: Dr. Courtney Vengrin was part of the first cohort of Scholars
who created the program, and Dr. Jeremy Elliott-Engel conducted the first
extensive evaluation of the program as part of his assistantship. This
collective work informed the continued development and improvement of
the program.

Donna Westfall-Rudd, Ph.D. Planning and teaching formal and nonformal
educational experiences for adults in agriculture is my passion! While I was
a high school agriculture teacher in upstate New York I served three years
as part of a group of teacher leaders who planned and conducted the annual
professional development programs for agricultural education teachers. I
really enjoyed being a part of the planning work and this interest guided my
decision to leave the high school classroom after seven years, to serve as the
State Coordinator for Agricultural Education. During my ten years as state
coordinator I worked with a group of teachers and state staff to design and
implement a number of professional development programs to address the
needs of new and experienced agricultural education teachers. I am very
thankful that I am able to continue working with program planning as a part
of my faculty responsibilities in Agricultural, Leadership, and Community
Education at Virginia Tech. In 2012 I was appointed the Program Director
and Senior Faculty Scholar for the new Graduate Teaching Scholars Program
(GTS). I've worked collaboratively with the GTS students, and their faculty
mentors to create this very unique three-year program for doctoral students
from across the departments in CALS. Acceptance in the program is
competitive and is designed for graduate students who want to focus on
developing their teaching skills along with their research knowledge and
skills.

                                                                About the Editors and Contributors | ix
Courtney Vengrin, Ph.D. I serve as the Senior Director of Assessment of the
International Council for Veterinary Assessment (ICVA). In my role, I conduct
research on assessment practices, conduct a variety of data analyses, and
develop data visualizations. I am originally from Southwest Virginia, where
I earned a B.S. in Biology at Radford University, and then an M.S. in
Agricultural Extension Education and a Ph.D in Agricultural Leadership and
Community Education at Virginia Tech. Following completion of my Ph.D., I
was a postdoctoral research fellow who specialized in academic assessments
working under the Vice Provost for Undergraduate Academic Affairs at
Virginia Tech. Upon completion of my postdoc, I relocated to Ames, Iowa
to become the Coordinator of Assessment and Faculty Development at Iowa
State University's College of Veterinary Medicine. During my time at Iowa
State, I worked to reshape the assessment and faculty development services
offered and created the office of Curricular Assessment and Teaching
Support services, where I was named Director. I am the 2020 recipient of the
Frederick Douglass Patterson Diversity and Inclusion Award at Iowa State
University's College of Veterinary Medicine and I was recently selected as
one of the 12 most impactful women on Iowa State's campus.

Jeremy Elliott-Engel, Ph.D. As a young person I joined 4-H where I grew
in my knowledge of agriculture but also became interested in sharing this
knowledge with my peers and 4-H families. I organized clinics and
workshops across my project areas. This was my first introduction to non-
formal education. This interest for improving people's lives through
knowledge transfer, even as the areas of interest have morphed from the
topic of animal science to youth development, has been constant across my
professional Extension education career. I completed a Ph.D. in Agricultural,
Leadership, and Community Education at Virginia Tech after serving as
the teaching assistant for Graduate Teaching Scholars. I currently serve as
Arizona Cooperative Extension Associate Director--4-H Youth Development
and Associate Extension Specialist in Agricultural Education, Technology,
and Innovation with The University of Arizona. Originally from Upstate New
York I earned a B.T. in Agricultural Business Management from S.U.N.Y.
Cobleskill and M.A.T. from Cornell University. I worked with University of
Missouri Extension as a 4-H Youth Development Regional Specialist in
Newton, McDonald, and Barry counties.

x | About the Editors and Contributors
Contributors

Hannah Angel, M.S. Currently, I am a graduate teaching assistant in the
School of Plant and Environmental Sciences at Virginia Tech (VT). I started
my assistantship in the fall of 2017. Following in Emily Ott's footsteps, I
became the lead TA of Soils Laboratory in the fall of 2018. As Emily worked
toward finishing up her doctorate, she trained me on the setup for each
activity for Soils Laboratory. These labs vary in design, but all include hands-
on exercises, primarily in the lab room but with a few outdoor field trips.
While completing my Master of Science in Forestry at Stephen F. Austin
State University, I taught Dendrology for six semesters. All labs were taught
outdoors, either on or off-campus. I gained experience leading groups of
students in an outdoor environment with various distractions and weather
conditions. As a graduate student at VT, I learned how to adapt my teaching
style to a medium-sized indoor lab room. Soils Lab is unique in that it
involves a combination of lab and field activities and projects and requires
the help of several TAs due to a large number of sections per week.

Ghadir Asadi, Ph.D. I am an Adjunct Professor at Radford University. I
received my Ph.D. in Economics from Virginia Tech. During my graduate
studies, I had the chance to teach multiple courses of different class sizes.
I had my first experience in teaching large classes in the third semester
of my teaching journey. Standing in front of 280 eyes, it was the time that
I realized my engagement techniques were not suitable for a class of 140
students. I started searching for methods to help me keep my students
engaged and interested. I found a few tricks involving technology. I am trying
to summarize parts of my findings here.

Anne M. Brown, Ph.D. From a young age, I have maintained a passion for the
sciences and for serving my communities. Uncovering the unknown, making
connections across topics, and building community continues to keep me
excited to be a scientist and an educator. I earned a B.S. in Biochemistry
and Physics at Roanoke College and completed my Ph.D. in Biochemistry at
Virginia Tech. I am currently an Assistant Professor and Science Informatics
Consultant at Virginia Tech, where I lead a lab of 40+ undergraduate research
students. I teach computational biochemistry, research methods, and data
science while researching computational modeling and drug discovery for
various diseases. I found a passion for working with undergraduate research

                                                                About the Editors and Contributors | xi
students during graduate school and used it as a springboard for innovating
and synergizing both my research and teaching missions as I became a
faculty member.

Courtney A. Crist, Ph.D. My first exposure to Extension was through my
mother as she was a master gardener and took classes through Extension.
It was not until college when I learned more about the scale and scope
of Extension work and the role of Extension in serving stakeholder needs.
As an undergraduate and graduate student in food science, I worked with
Extension faculty and assisted with the development and facilitation of
Extension activities ranging across curriculum development, publications,
programming, and training. Through these unique opportunities, I grew an
appreciation for the role of Extension through extending knowledge and
thereby changing lives. The power of Extension resonated as we are the
nonformal educators making an impact in our community, state, industry,
and nation by bringing technical assistance and knowledge where it can
improve people's lives. I am currently an Assistant Extension Professor in the
Department of Food Science, Nutrition and Health Promotion at Mississippi
State University.

Nasim Ebadi, M.S. I graduated from Virginia Tech with a master's degree
in Agricultural and Applied Economics. I had the opportunity to join the
Graduate Teaching Scholarship program at the College of Agriculture and
Life Science. As part of the program, I had to teach a course of my choice
at the undergraduate level. As an international student, I was aware that
engaging students is hard due to potential language and cultural barriers.
I used the advantages of technology to strengthen my teaching style and
guard against my potential deficiencies. I planned each session in such a
way that I use the most relevant technology in action. Moreover, I added
different sources such as interesting animations, in-class assignments using
Microsoft Excel, and external links. Using technology helped me to become
more focused on teaching and less concerned about the possible constraints.
My students were focused, more engaged, and happier as well. I co-authored
a chapter to share my successful experience with the readers.

Javier S. Garcia, Ph.D. As an undergraduate student, I had the opportunity
to be an undergraduate teaching assistant. I enjoyed working with students,
especially helping them understand the concepts of animal husbandry and
developing their hands-on skills with livestock animals. While working on

xii | About the Editors and Contributors
my Ph.D. I was allowed to further develop my teaching skills through the
Graduate Teaching Scholars program. I became interested in relational
teaching as a graduate teaching assistant and experiencing it in high school.
I learned a lot from my instructors and built a foundation for my teaching on
what I saw displayed before me every weekday. Believing that the classroom
should be a fun learning environment, developing good instructor-student
relationships is a key component in achieving that classroom atmosphere. I
am now a Research Associate with the United States Department of
Agriculture Research Service, U.S. National Poultry Research Center, in
Athens, GA.

Gordon Jones, Ph.D. I came to my understanding of agriculture through
family, teachers, and supervisors at summer jobs. It struck me that some
of these mentors had a real knack for communicating clearly, explaining
complex subjects simply, and connecting the task at hand to the bigger
picture. As I pursue a career in Extension education, I remember those
effective mentors, and strive to make my teaching clear, simple, and well-
connected to the wider world. I completed a Ph.D. in Crop and Soil
Environmental Sciences at Virginia Tech. Now, I am an Assistant Professor of
Practice for Commercial Agriculture in Jackson and Josephine Counties with
Oregon State University Extension.

Qualla  Ketchum. I am a citizen of the Cherokee Nation and grew

up within the Nation's boundaries in what is also known as northeastern

Oklahoma. My technical background is in Biological Systems and Agricultural

Engineering and I am a current Ph.D. student in Virginia Tech's Engineering

Education department. My contributed chapter stems from my experiences

as both an Indigenous student and Indigenous instructor at predominantly

white research institutions. I hope to be part of institutional and systemic

change that incorporates Indigenous knowledge and worldviews into STEM

education. My work is also inspired by my family--both the generations

before, particularly my parents who fostered a love of life-long learning and

curiosity, and the generations to come, including my son.

Rachel Mack. I am a Ph.D. candidate in Virginia Tech's Department of
Agricultural, Leadership, and Community Education. My research interests
include leadership, horticulture, law, and policy. I am always interested in
learning new ways to be a more effective teacher. I am a recent graduate
of the Graduate Teaching Scholars Program. I enjoy teaching online and in-

        About the Editors and Contributors | xiii
person lecture courses, but one of my most memorable teaching moments
comes from teaching labs. I once had a lab student who nervously turned
in a blank quiz response. I returned his paper and asked him to try again.
Composing himself, he remembered the answer!

Chris McCullough, Ph.D. While I was destined for a career as a stand-up
comedian, I found that teaching was more enjoyable than getting produce
thrown at me. As I have continued to teach, I've been learning how much of
my sarcastic, dry humor to let out in the classroom. I know that humor is
how I make myself comfortable in situations, but it isn't always professional.
I want to create a welcoming classroom, but I also want students to come
prepared to learn. For better or worse, I'm figuring out how to present myself
in a professional manner in the classroom that also allows me to be who I am.

William Moore, Ph.D. In 2010, I was asked to teach a microbiology class as
a graduate teaching assistant at Fort Hays State University. It was during
this first year of teaching that I first witnessed a student have a proverbial
"aha" moment. The art of teaching has been a joy to my soul ever since.
As a doctoral student at Virginia Tech, I was afforded the opportunity to
receive formal education in pedagogy as a Graduate Teaching Scholar in the
College of Agriculture and Life Sciences. The mentorship tendered through
that program was invaluable in my development as a career faculty member.
I have certainly had my share of failures and successes as an academic, and
it is my hope that my contributed chapter will allow new faculty members to
learn from these experiences and to be empowered to achieve early success
in academia. I currently serve as an Associate Professor in the Department
of Biology and Chemistry at Liberty University.

Emily Ott, Ph.D. I completed a Ph.D. at Virginia Tech in Crop and Soil
Environmental Science and had a teaching assistantship for the entire time.
Graduate students in the department I was in had either a research
assistantship or a teaching assistantship. Those with a teaching assistantship
were required to teach 20 hours a week. For about three years I was lead
TA for Soils Lab, which typically included about five TAs every semester.
When I first became the lead TA, I started making some changes to the lab
course, such as rewriting our lab manual and notebooks. For my semester as
Instructor of Record for Soils Lab, I made a set of grading rubrics for TAs, and
I did a new final project for students. In my first two years of graduate school,
I completed the Future Professoriate Certificate. During the last three years

xiv | About the Editors and Contributors
of my graduate program, I was a Graduate Teaching Scholar. I am invested
in excellent teaching and my students' success. Along the way, I found some
things that worked and encountered some frustrations. I hope that our
chapter combines my and Hannah's experience with our background and
learning through the Graduate Teaching Scholars Program to help current
and future college laboratory instructors.

Bethany Wolters, Ph.D. I completed my Ph.D. at Virginia Tech in Crop and
Soil Sciences in the School of Plant and Environmental Sciences. I decided
that I wanted to teach at a university after being an undergraduate TA
in the Soils lab at University of Tennessee at Martin. My first year in the
Graduate Teaching Scholars Program I was a TA in Soil Fertility, an upper-
level lecture course, and noticed that despite the students' excitement and
interest in the topic at the beginning of the semester, after a few months
they were disengaged, overwhelmed, and uninterested in soil fertility. It
was my goal to create the same hands-on, engaged learning in the Soil
Fertility lecture course that I saw in the Soils lab. I was inspired by Dr. Mark
Williams at Virginia Tech who used active learning in his lecture class and
coined the term "Fun Fridays." Over the next two years, as a co-instructor
and an Instructor of Record, I created hands-on learning lessons for every
Friday of the semester. I also was a co-creator and co-instructor for Applied
Agronomic Topics in the Mid-Atlantic, a new online graduate course, and
I tried to find ways to bring similar hands-on and authentic learning to
an online format. Almost a decade after my first teaching experience, I am
now the professor teaching Soils lab at UT Martin, with the help of great
undergraduate TAs, and am excited to share my experiences with them and
with you. Feel free to "graft" any of my teaching ideas into the tree of your
teaching practice.

                                                               About the Editors and Contributors | xv
Acknowledgments

Publication of this book was made possible in part by the Open Education
Faculty Initiative Grant program of the University Libraries at Virginia Tech.
http://guides.lib.vt.edu/oer/grants

Chapter Proposal Reviewers

Kirby Barrick, Emeritus Professor and former Associate Dean of Agricultural
Education, University of Florida
Kellie Claflin, Assistant Professor, Agricultural Communication, Education,
and Leadership, The Ohio State University
Tracy Rutherford, Department Head, Agricultural Leadership, and
Community Education, Virginia Tech

Peer Review

Leah Hamilton, Department of Food Science and Technology, Virginia Tech

Editorial

Layout, Accessibility, and Typesetting: Leah Hamilton
Graphics and Cover Design: Kindred Grey
Production Editor: Caitlin Bean
Project Manager / Editor: Anita Walz

xvi | Acknowledgments
Introduction

Here you are, either starting your graduate program or having landed your
first academic job. As a graduate student or early career professor you might
be expected to teach, either by leading a course for the first time or serving
as a teaching assistant (TA) giving class lectures or facilitating laboratory
activities. You may not have had any prior experience in teaching, which can
result in high anxiety.

   Those holding academic faculty positions within a college or university
are expected to be active in teaching, discovery, and outreach. Doctoral
education programs have historically emphasized preparation for research,
scholarly publications, and outreach. To address this long-standing
challenge for graduate students, one college's administrative leadership and
faculty decided to create a program to better prepare students for their
assistantship responsibilities and future career interests as college faculty.
The primary objective of the Graduate Teaching Scholars Program (GTS) in
the College of Agriculture and Life Sciences at Virginia Tech is to prepare
interested doctoral students for a rewarding academic career. The three-
year, cohort-based program was created through participatory pedagogy.
Students and the faculty director worked collaboratively to establish the
objectives for each of the six associated courses and determine the
significant program elements (Elliott-Engel & Westfall-Rudd, 2018). Each
year the GTS course syllabi are updated based on the program scholars'
needs and the current teaching trends in the academy.

   The program scholars contribute to the college as instructors for courses
in their home departments. Over time three new courses have been
developed by scholars in partnership with faculty mentors. In addition to the
standing activities in the program, scholars also serve as representatives on
the college committee to select the outstanding senior undergraduate, and
teach courses in the university's summer program. In the summer of 2020,
multiple scholars worked with college leaders to assist faculty struggling to
convert their courses to synchronized or asynchronous modalities.

   This book is created based on the needs of students enrolled in the
program. As students and faculty searched for affordable teaching resources
to meet the needs of graduate teaching assistants, they found that it was
not easy to find one resource that met their many needs. Over time program

                                                                                              Introduction | xvii
alumni and current students realized that they could write the book they
sought to find. The group is excited about the opportunity to offer this
textbook as an Open Educational Resource (OER) to allow all graduate
students free access to the materials. It is exciting to see the twenty authors
and two coeditors from the current and alumni of the GTS program sharing
their experience from their graduate teaching and first employment
opportunities. Each of these chapters comes from the experiences and
expertise of these talented individuals who are excited to speak directly to
their peers through their shared experiences and advice.

   Now complete, the book will be used as a foundational resource for the
GTS classes. The experiences of writing an OER item also generated interest
in adding OER as an instructional topic to the program curriculum to assist
scholars in learning about additional forms of scholarship and the use of
OER in their future teaching plans. Other OER topics will include strategies
for cocreating OER with undergraduate and graduate students and the
economic value of using OER as an alternative to traditional course
textbooks. As a new element of the GTS program, there are plans to develop
a second volume of this book in two or three years to allow a new group
of future students and alumni an opportunity to contribute new ideas and
strategies to our collection.

   Since the authors and editors are all new to writing a textbook, they
decided that the first step in the planning process was to create personas of
the anticipated readers. The personas were created by the scholars enrolled
in the GTS courses in the spring of 2020 and provided the authors with clear
reminders of the diversity of potential readers of their work. This exercise
ignited excitement in the group as members realized that the need for this
material existed well beyond the scope of the one GTS program on one
university campus.

xviii | Introduction
Reader Personas

Persona 1: A first-year faculty member with a 100% teaching appointment and no
previous teaching experience beyond serving as a teaching assistant in graduate
school

Basic            Hispanic male who is 32 years old
demographics

Where are they teaching? A small liberal arts college in West Virginia

Who are they     Undergraduate students of impoverished backgrounds
teaching?

Their general    - A combination of lectures and laboratory experiences
teaching         - Incorporates different pedalogical techniques other than
practice         "standard" practices that include more activities and higher
                 student engagement but lacks access to technology beyond
                 PowerPoint

What questions   - How do they get on the "same page" as their students from
would they like  diverse backgrounds?
to have          - How could they tailor their teaching approach from large to
answered?        small classes?
                 - How do they write assessments?
                 - How do they design a complete course from scratch?

Persona 2: A first-year international masters student

Basic            A female who speaks English as a second language, mostly fluent
                 in English, but worried about connecting with students. She is
demographics excited to get teaching experience.

What are         A basic, required course in their department at a land-grant
they             university. Teaching a fairly large class of more than 100 students.
teaching?        Some students are engaged, while some just have to be there. It is
                 possibility the first time the students are exposed to this material.
                 In the past, the class has been taught using lectures. The current
                 teacher is only thought of as average by the students.

Their general    They want to be more engaged but concerned about power
teaching         balance in class. The current teacher has been teaching the same
practice         way for a long time. They are teaching using mostly lectures.

What             - How does she ensure that her language is not a barrier or an
questions        issue with the students?
would they       - Are there stylistic/cultural differences between their
like to have     experiences and those of their students in the US?
answered?        - Is there anything they should know about?
                 - How does she have students respect her as a teaching figure and
                 not as a peer?

                                                                        Introduction | xix
Persona 3: New faculty member with a teaching appointment, who lacks prior
teaching experience

Basic demographics      From an underrepresented population, she is short,
                        and is a bit of an introvert

What are they           A minor class with prerequisites
teaching?

Their general teaching  She tries to look confident and competent. She wants
practice                students to be engaged. She wants to have an interactive
                        classroom.

What questions would    - How does she act to be confident when teaching?
they like to have       - How can she motivate students with low
answered?               self-motivation?
                        - How should she incorporate different activities in the
                        classroom?

Persona 4: Community college instructor with a 100% teaching appointment

Basic          A transgender female, white, young adult (28 - 40

demographics years old)

Who are they   Non-traditional students from diverse cultures and
teaching?      ethnic backgrounds, some international students,
               some students from a local high school. Some students have low
               social economic status and some are working full-time jobs,
               including night shifts. There are also students in the class with
               families.

What are       Some of their courses are offered at night and on
they           weekends. The day classes are offered for those
teaching?      students who work night shifts.

Their general  - They are energetic, use PowerPoint, and are very structured.
teaching       - They also use online course management software.
practice

xx | Introduction
Persona 5: New faculty member who has recently completed their doctoral program

Basic           Female, early 30's, with minimum previous

demographics teaching experience

What is the     She has to teach and do research. She teaches undergraduates
context in      and graduate students. She has no budget for teaching activities
which they are  and she has to come up with a new course. There is resistance
teaching?       from
                other faculty to implement new teaching techniques.

What            - How does she negotiate with peers/old faculty?
questions       - What should she do to get funding for teaching?
would they      - How does she implement in class activities?
like answered?  - How does she find and use new and
                affordable/accessible teaching technologies?
                - How does she build an environment of trust in the
                classroom?

   Soon after embarking on the development of the book, the editors and
authors experienced the challenges of teaching during the COVID-19
pandemic. These challenges included juggling changing expectations of
teaching in different modalities, learning how to offer instruction in online
formats, and completing the work for this book. In an effort to provide
author support and encouragement throughout the writing process, the
editors used multiple engagement strategies. To provide more individualized
support to a large team of contributors, each of the editors were assigned
small groups of authors with whom they were expected to communicate to
encourage progress with the writing work and assist in addressing questions
regarding content and formatting ideas. The lead editor also provided
multiple virtual office hours for contributors in the early months of the
project, to allow individuals space to gather and discuss their ideas with
others involved in the project. Throughout the project the editing team
worked to provide communications recognizing the progress being made
and the goals that needed to be achieved moving forward. The commitment
and passion of the book editors and contributors is evidenced in the
completion of thirteen chapters, in spite of the frequent hurdles that
emerged from the pandemic.

                                                           Introduction | xxi
References

College of Agriculture and Life Sciences. (n.d.). Graduate Teaching Scholars

Program.             https://www.cals.vt.edu/academic-programs/current/

graduate/gts.html

Elliott-Engel, J., & Westfall-Rudd, D. (2018). Preparing Future CALS

Professors for Improved Teaching: A Qualitative Evaluation of a Cohort

Based     Program.   NACTA  Journal,                62(3),  229-236.

https://www.nactateachers.org/index.php/

volume-62-number-3-september-2018/2769-secondary-agriculture-

science-teachers.

Westfall-Rudd, D. (2022). Syllabi for Introduction to Graduate Teaching

Scholars (GTS). http://hdl.handle.net/10919/108843

xxii | Introduction
Reviewing, Adopting, or
Adapting this Book

If you are an instructor reviewing, adopting, or adapting this textbook, please
help us understand a little more about your use by filling out this form
http://bit.ly/teaching-interest. Instructors selecting the text are
encouraged to register their use with Virginia Tech Publishing in order
to stay up to date regarding collaborative development or research
opportunities, errata, new volumes and editions, supplements and
ancillaries, and newly issued print versions. Additional suggestions or
feedback may be submitted via email at: publishing@vt.edu.

Additional Resources

These following resources for Teaching in the University are available at:
VTechWorks handle: http://hdl.handle.net/10919/102307.

   Free and openly licensed downloadable formats of the text in PDF and
      epub.

   A link for the interactive Pressbooks version.
   A link to purchase a print copy (sold at cost).

Instructors and graduate students interested in sharing their original
teaching resources are invited to do so at: https://www.oercommons.org/
groups/teaching-in-the-university-teaching-resources/10533.

What is an Open Textbook?

Open textbooks are complete textbooks that have been funded, published,
and licensed to be freely used, adapted, and distributed. As a particular
type of Open Educational Resource (OER), this open textbook is intended

                                                  Reviewing, Adopting, or Adapting this Book | xxiii
to provide authoritative, accurate, and introductory level subject content at
no cost, to anyone including those who utilize screen reader technology to
read and those who cannot afford traditional textbooks. This book is licensed
with a Creative Commons Non-Commercial 4.0 license (see page iv), which
allows it to be adapted, remixed, and shared with attribution. Professors and
others may be interested in localizing, rearranging, or adapting content, or
in transforming the content into other formats which meet the goal of better
addressing student learning needs, and/or making use of various teaching
methods.

   Open textbooks are available in a variety of disciplines via the Open
Textbook Library: http://open.umn.edu/opentextbooks.

xxiv | Reviewing, Adopting, or Adapting this Book
1. Relational Learning: Creating a
"Working Alliance" in the
Classroom

  JAVIER S. GARCIA

 Introduction

  The day has finally arrived; it's the first day of classes. You make your way
  into the classroom, noticing a couple of students were also early and look as
  nervous as you do. As it gets closer to the start of class, more students mill
  into the classroom. You try to converse with some students as you work to
  get comfortable. Finally, it's time for class to begin. All eyes focus on you as
  you start to speak and introduce yourself as the course instructor. This is
  your first time teaching a course, which can be daunting, especially for new
  faculty/instructors who may not have previous experience teaching.

     Developing social relationships within a classroom can have wide-ranging
  effects on the classroom environment. Rather than establishing the
  classroom as a dynamic based on power, the instructor's role in the
  classroom is redefined as a trusted guide through relational learning.
  Instructors can form meaningful bonds and create a climate conducive to
  learning when they form working alliances with their students (Meyers,
  2008). Relational learning, also known as a "working alliance," relies on strong

How to cite this book chapter:
   Garcia, J.S. 2022. Relational Learning: Creating a "working alliance" in the
   classroom. In: Westfall-Rudd, D., Vengrin, C., and Elliott-Engel, J. (eds.)
   Teaching in the University: Learning from Graduate Students and Early-Career
   Faculty. Blacksburg: Virginia Tech College of Agriculture and Life Sciences.
   https://doi.org/ 10.21061/universityteaching. License: CC BY-NC 4.0.

                                                                                           Relational Learning | 1
relationships between educators and their students as well as on
establishing rapport in the classroom. This classroom harmony is positively
correlated to students' attention, attendance, and satisfaction with the
course professor (Benson et al., 2005). By establishing those relationships,
students will be able to motivate, engage, and actively participate in their
learning. This can be critical in preventing or reducing the likelihood of
academic failure.

     This chapter will discuss...

          Why relationships in the classroom are important.
          What relational learning is.
          Some strategies to implement or reinforce relational

             learning in the classroom.

Relationships in the Classroom

Developing positive instructor-student relationships in the classroom has
many far reaching effects on the classroom environment, such as supporting
students' adjustment to school, promoting academic performance, and
fostering students' resiliency in academic performance. Rather than
establishing a classroom environment based on power and control, the
instructor establishes their role in the classroom as a trusted guide (Rimm-
Kaufman and Sandilos, 2011). The instructor and students accomplish the
learning objectives of the course by working together. As a result of
developing these trusted relationships students become motivated, engaged,

2 | Relational Learning
and will actively participate in their learning. This is crucial in preventing
and/or reducing the likelihood of academic failure and creating a fun, yet
educational, environment.

   A working alliance relies heavily on strong relationships between
instructors and students and establishes a certain rapport or connection in
the classroom (Roger, 2009). The concept of a working alliance is rooted
in psychotherapy research and theory, mainly in the psychologist/patient
aspect. However, this concept can be applied to the college classroom as
well. An individual (student) seeks change and another individual (instructor)
serves as the agent of change (Rogers, 2009). In a survey, undergraduates
were asked to identify characteristics and behaviors inherent in effective
teaching. It was reported that 42% of the student responses were ranked
as follows: work ethic and commitment, positive affect, excellent
communication skills, classroom creativity, concern for students,
intelligence and knowledge, demeanor toward students, humanistic value,
high standards for student work, and popularity among students as the top
qualities of effective teaching. However, when faculty members were given
the same survey, only 7% of the faculty listed the same qualities in their top
10 (Buskist et al., 2002).

   Rapport in the classroom has been positively correlated to students'
attention, attendance, and satisfaction of the professor and course (Benson
et al., 2005; Meyers, 2008). In early childhood education, students in math
classrooms with more positive teacher-student relationships reported an
increased engagement in mathematical learning and were more willing to
help their peers learn new concepts (Rimm-Kaufman et al., 2015). Relational
learning needs to be used in combination with other techniques and
pedagogy. As a result, it keeps students motivated and engaged in purposeful
work.

   Keep in mind that relational learning does not mean that the instructor
should be friends with their students, but rather, the instructor should have
a respectful and supportive relationship with their students. Do not create
a persona that you think your students would find enjoyable or likable.
Be authentic! Your students will respect you more. In the classroom, use
language that is inclusive and respectful. Be mindful of your students and the
experiences they might be going through when you see someone struggling
in your course. Also, you will find that every classroom has its own

                                                                                       Relational Learning | 3
personality. What works for one may not work for another one. Modify your
approach as needed, and don't be discouraged. Relational learning is about
the tone you set for the classroom.

     Diversity

        Relational learning fosters a fun learning environment by creating
     a respectful and supportive relationship between the instructor and
     students. This environment can be further developed to include
     diversity and inclusion, but it is up to the instructor to determine
     how to incorporate this. Using inclusive language is an easy way to
     incorporate inclusion in the classroom. Allowing different
     viewpoints on the topic can help everyone feel like they are being
     heard and have a voice in the classroom. Be sure to remind everyone
     to be respectful, especially when they might not agree with
     someone else's viewpoint.

        The college classroom itself can be diverse. It might be made up
     of students from around the country and sometimes from around
     the world. Many of the students may not know each other and
     normally wouldn't interact with each other, except that they are
     attending the same college.

        With relational learning, the instructor can create situations
     where these diverse groups of students can work together,
     communicate, and learn from each other (Westfall-Rudd et al., 2019).
     Assigning student groups so that the members are diverse can also
     aid in further exposing students to different ideas and viewpoints.

4 | Relational Learning
Teaching Strategies

Applying relational learning in the classroom does not have to feel like
required extra work. This forced application of relational learning appears
unauthentic and has the reverse effect in the classroom. As an instructor,
one should ask themselves: How would I like to use relational learning in
their classroom? What is the outcome expected for using relational learning
in the classroom? How much effort and time will I dedicate to relational
learning? Don't be afraid to challenge yourself, but do not overwhelm
yourself.

   Establishing positive and constructive relationships that foster
relationship learning is challenging in the large classroom. This will require
some creativity and patience on your part (Tanner, 2011). The following are
suggestions to be applied to your classroom to foster relational learning; do
not limit yourself. As the instructor, you will have a better understanding
of your classroom and how you would like your classroom to function. I
challenge you to be creative and step out of your comfort zone to apply
relational learning in your classrooms.

   The first day of classes is essential in establishing a relationship between
the instructor and students. It is their first interaction. Just remember that
each person brings a different personality to the classroom. You must be able
to easily flow between different students' personalities as well as upholding
your own without the use of a persona. This may be difficult, keeping this
in mind should make it easier to keep these interpersonal relationships
between student and instructor. On the first day of class, the instructor
generally gives an overview of the course, goes over the syllabus, and
perhaps goes into some of the course material. This is important as it sets
the course's expectations and gives students an idea of what the course will
be throughout the semester. However, this possibly is not the ideal setup
for relational learning. Something as simple as telling your students a little
bit about yourself on that first day, such as where you came from, your
educational background, hobbies, pets, and so on, helps your students relate
to and feel more comfortable with you.

   An example. One semester, I co-taught at a land-grant university in
Virginia. The class was Introduction to Animal Science 1464. I introduced
myself and made myself relatable with them by explaining that I was once in
their position: I was a student in the same classroom, possibly sitting in the

                                                                                       Relational Learning | 5
same seats. I then transitioned into where I was from; most of the students
were in-state, so the likelihood of meeting a student from the area I was from
was highly probable. I recall that one of the students that I was teaching that
semester happened to be from my hometown and had gone to the same high
school as me. This student would often come to me for questions, help with
assignments, or just friendly conversation. The takeaway here? The more
relatable I was to them, the easier it was for the students to come to me
with questions and concerns with that class. The familiarity often put them
at ease, and they were willing to reach out to the instructor.

   Having students complete a simple survey about themselves before the
first day of classes serves as a fun speaking topic during the course's first
day. Questions such as Are you in-state or out-of-state? Where are you
from? What year are you? Future career goals? Why are you taking this
course? What are you hoping to learn from the course? The survey results
will then give you, the instructor, a better idea of the class characteristics.
In addition, because you asked about the students' perceptions of the class
and their learning objectives, you are better positioned to know the students'
expectations about the course. During the first day of the course, the results
could be presented in a simple graph or table to give students a better idea
about their peers. The instructor may use the results as a prompt for class
discussion or as a question-and-answer segment to answer any questions
about the course. This exercise aims to get a better understanding of the
students in the course and helps develop an open learning environment in
which students will feel a sense of connectedness toward their instructor.

   A syllabus is also an essential tool in establishing a relationship between
the instructor and their students. It provides students with information
about the course they are enrolled in. It provides them with important
dates and deadlines, the instructor's contact information, and comprises
an agreement between the instructor and the students. Nothing sours a
relationship faster than a syllabus that is not followed by either the
instructor or the student(s). Ensure the office hours detailed in your syllabus
are set times when you will be available in your office. Try your best to stay
within your set date and deadlines. Unpredictable circumstances can occur
from time to time, but make sure to communicate with your students if any
changes arise.

6 | Relational Learning
     Syllabus Development

        The syllabus plays a vital role in relational learning as it lays out
     the students' expectations for the course. As an instructor plans
     their syllabus, they should be as clear as possible about their
     intentions for the course. The syllabus establishes the rules of the
     course and should be used as a reference by students. Typically, a
     syllabus contains the instructor's contact information, required
     materials for the course, a tentative schedule for the course, and a
     list of resources available to students. This gives students an idea of
     what to expect from the course and the instructor. The language
     used in the syllabus can set the tone of the course, so in the
     syllabus, use language that is deliberate and gets the point across
     but is not punitive. Students should feel like they can contact the
     instructor if they have questions and not fear being scolded.

Learning your students' names helps develop positive relationships between
the instructor and students (Tanner, 2011). Although it is a simple concept,
learning a student's name makes the students feel a personal connection
with their instructor, which is beneficial in developing your classroom's
learning environment. This is a bit more challenging in larger classrooms
but can be accomplished with some practice. Having students bring in a
large index card with their name or make a name tent (a piece of paper
folded in half with the name written on one side that is perched in front
of the student) is the simplest way to learn your students' names (Tanner,
2013). Whenever a student has a question, they will raise their hand, and
before you call on them to answer the question, look at the name on the
name tent. Another simple way to learn students' names is to ask them to
say their names before asking their questions. In smaller classes, you can
require each student to come to your office during office hours the first

                                                                                        Relational Learning | 7
week of classes for a quick 5- to 10-minute meeting to get to know them.
As the semester progresses, repeating this strategy sporadically as students
complete exams and projects will allow you to engage in discussions focused
on student progress in the course. You will also receive feedback on the
different aspects of the course. Over time, these strategies will help you
learn and remember your students' names as well as build instructor-
student relationships.

   Another simple strategy to foster positive instructor-student relationships
is for the instructor to come to class early. This flexibility in the instructor's
schedule opens classroom availability and classroom visibility. Being present
15-20 minutes before the start of the class gives the instructor some time to
interact and converse with students or answer questions students may have.
These interactions or conversations could focus on the course material, but
generally, the interactions or conversations can focus on topics outside the
classroom, especially as the semester progresses and students become more
comfortable with the instructor. The instructor's facial and body languages
are also crucial in students feeling comfortable approaching the instructor,
so remember to make yourself approachable. Students can read a room. If
your presence is aloof and off-putting, you may turn your students away
because of your demeanor. On the other hand, being easygoing and fluid
with your classroom style will make it feel more relaxed and comfortable to
the students.

   Teaching assistants (undergraduate and graduate), if available to the
instructor, play an important role in relational learning. A former teaching
mentor described graduate and undergraduate teaching assistants (TAs) as
ambassadors to the classroom. Undergraduate TAs are generally within the
same age range as the students in your classroom and are peers to your
students. In some cases, graduate TAs might be the only instructor students
interact with. It is important to have them involved in implementing
relational learning in the classroom. This will further reinforce the
environment you are trying to create in the classroom. Teaching assistants
can be a great resource that may pick up on issues you may not be aware of.

   The strategies described in this chapter can be applied to classrooms of
any size. Relational learning can be modified to fit the instructor's needs and
the resources available. Establishing the foundation for relational learning
at the beginning of the semester is essential to maintaining that learning
environment throughout the semester; once that foundation has been set, it
is easy to keep it going. Do not be discouraged if a strategy for incorporating

8 | Relational Learning
relational learning in the classroom does not work or does not have the
desired outcome. It requires some trial and error, along with patience. When
relational learning is effectively applied in the classroom, the results are
a lot of fun. The learning environment is very enjoyable not only for the
students but also for the instructor. Students invest more in the course,
playing a larger role in their learning and collaborating with the instructor to
achieve their course goals. Relational learning is beneficial for the learning
environment for your classroom and the students, as they become more
active in their own education as they progress through college.

     Reflection Questions

          What worries you about relational learning in the
             classroom?

          How are your current communication skills and how can
             you improve them?

          What are some easy ways you can apply relational learning
             in the classroom?

References

Benson, T. A., Cohen, A. L., & Buskist, W. (2005). Rapport: Its relation to
   student attitudes and behaviors towards teachers and classes. Teaching of
   Psychology, 32(4), 237-239. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15328023top3204_8

Buskist, W., Sikorski, J., Buckley, T., & Saville, B.K. (2002). Elements of master
   teaching. In The Teaching of Psychology: Essays in Honor of Wilbert J.
   McKeachie and Charles L. Brewer (pp. 27-29). Psychology Press.

                                                                                       Relational Learning | 9
Meyers, S. A. (2008). Working Alliances in College Classrooms. Teaching of
   Psychology, 35(1), 29-32. https://doi.org/10.1080/00986280701818490

Rimm-Kaufman, S. E., Baroody, A. E., Larsen, R. A. A., Curby, T. W., & Abry, T.
   (2015). To what extent do teacher-student interaction quality and student
   gender contribute to fifth graders' engagement in mathematics learning?
   Journal of Educational Psychology, 107(1), 170-185. https://doi.org/10.1037/
   a0037252

Rimm-Kaufman, S., & Sandilos, L. (2011). Improving Students' Relationships
   with Teachers to Provide Essential Supports for Learning.
   https://www.apa.org/education/k12/relationships.aspx

Rogers, D. T. (2009). The Working Alliance in Teaching and Learning:
   Theoretical clarity and research implications. International Journal for the
   Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, 3(2), 1-9. https://doi.org/10.20429/
   ijsotl.2009.030228

Tanner, K. D. (2011). Moving Theory into practice: A reflection on teaching
   a large, introductory biology course for majors. CBE--Life Sciences
   Education, 10(2), 113-122. https://doi.org/10.1187/cbe.11-03-0029

Tanner, K. D. (2013). Structure matters: Twenty-One teaching strategies to
   promote student engagement and cultivate classroom equity. CBE--Life
   Sciences Education, 12(3), 322-331. https://doi.org/10.1187/cbe.13-06-0115

Westfall-Rudd, D., Elliott-Engel, J., & Lawrence, C. (2019). Teaching to
   develop allyship: Ensuring youth peer-to-peer inclusion in agricultural
   education. The Agricultural Education Magazine, 91(2), 21-22.
   https://www.naae.org/profdevelopment/magazine/current_issue/
   2019%2009%20-%20Sept%20Oct.pdf#page=21

10 | Relational Learning
VIGNETTE: Supporting
International Graduate Teaching
Assistants

  SIHUI MA

  Graduate teaching assistants (GTA) are the students who are (1) currently
  enrolled in a graduate school program and (2) assisting faculty or instructors
  in colleges, universities, and professional schools on teaching or teaching-
  related tasks. GTAs take on significant responsibilities in undergraduate
  instruction at large research universities (Gardner & Jones, 2011). These
  responsibilities might include teaching introductory undergraduate level
  courses, helping with curriculum development, proctoring exams, assisting
  students in science labs or during office hours, and grading assignments.
  According to the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Employment
  Statistics, there were 131,120 GTAs employed in colleges, universities, and
  professional schools in May 2016.

     International graduate teaching assistants (IGTAs) are GTAs who are
  neither U.S. citizens nor permanent residents. Instead, IGTAs are temporary
  visa holders. With the sharp increase of international students attending
  graduate schools in the United States (Figure 1.1), IGTAs play a considerable
  role in undergraduate education across many disciplines, including
  agricultural fields (Table 1.1). The diversified perspectives that international
  students bring into graduate programs in the United States are essential
  to both maintaining America's leading role in technological innovation and

How to cite this vignette:

  Ma, S. 2022. Supporting International Graduate Teaching Assistants.
  In: Westfall-Rudd, D., Vengrin, C., and Elliott-Engel, J. (eds.) Teaching in
  the University: Learning from Graduate Students and Early-Career
  Faculty. Blacksburg: Virginia Tech College of Agriculture and Life Sciences.
  https://doi.org/10.21061/universityteaching. License: CC BY-NC 4.0.

                                                                             Vignette: International GTAs | 11
preparing the graduates from undergraduate agricultural programs to be
competitive in the international workforce. With the increasing global nature
of the food and agriculture industry, "diversity skills," including the ability
to work in diverse communities, the possession of multicultural awareness,
and the ability to interact with people of different backgrounds, have been
identified by faculty in the agriculture field as valuable skills (Blickenstaff,
Wolf, Falk, & Foltz, 2015). These were also highlighted as Research Priority
Areas by the American Association for Agricultural Education as necessary
for agricultural graduates to prepare "a diverse workforce that includes
scientists and professionals with knowledge and skills beyond today's
standards" (Doerfert, 2011). It is essential to acknowledge and utilize the
global perspectives that international students bring to American
institutions.

Figure 1.1 The number of full-time graduate students in science, engineering, and health
in all institutions in the United States between 2011 and 2016.

12 | Vignette: International GTAs
Table 1.1 Number and percentage of international graduate students in
                               agricultural-related fields.

Field   Number of full-time          Percentage of full-time
       international graduate  international graduate students

                 students

Agricultural sciences 3940 21.5

Agricultural economics 863 49.1

Agricultural engineering 870 53.5

While IGTAs play an essential role in undergraduate education in the United
States (Gorsuch, 2011), IGTAs also face many challenges, including difficulties
with oral English proficiency, especially communicative competence--that
is, understanding students' questions and responses. Although IGTAs obtain
relatively high scores in standardized English proficiency tests, they still
encounter problems interacting with undergraduate students in various
instructional settings. This has been a big challenge, often resulting in
misunderstandings between IGTAs and students (Andrea, 1995). Emotional
factors, such as the anxiety and stress related to public speaking, and their
confidence when communicating with students, influence their pragmatic
competence (the ability to use the language appropriately considering the
social context) (Aslan, 2016). Current support, which often solely focuses
on language proficiency (Fox & Gay, 1994), inadequately prepares IGTAs for
their duties. A shift needs to be made to a more comprehensive training
model, which includes understanding academic culture in the United States,
the application of English in classroom communication, and interaction with
students in various instructional conditions, both in- and outside of the
classroom.

   Besides the difficulties in spoken language, cultural barriers also lead to
the poor performance often exhibited by IGTAs, which is reflected in the
negative evaluations they receive from the undergraduate students in their
classes. IGTAs may face additional stress and anxiety from coping with the
difference between the culture of their home country and the United States
(Ross & Krider, 1992). This anxiety can prompt IGTAs to be less willing
to communicate with their undergraduate students and teaching mentors,
interactions for which English would be the primary language of
communication (Roach & Olaniran, 2001). This break in communication may

                               Vignette: International GTAs | 13
be negatively interpreted as unwillingness to engage, or a distrust/dislike
of students, leading to an inactive and non-engaged learning environment
(Nakane, 2007). Also, failure to acknowledge and follow U.S. cultural norms,
especially in instructional settings, may result in miscommunication and lack
of interaction between IGTAs and undergraduate students.

   Training programs for IGTAs need to be developed and enhanced so that
IGTAs can better cultivate and strengthen the global leadership skills of
undergraduate students with expertise in food and agriculture. Although
there are existing on-campus programs and resources to facilitate GTA
teaching, there is a need for these programs and resources to be tailored to
fit the need for IGTAs. Below are some ideas:

 1. Provide opportunities for IGTAs to understand the academic cultures in
      the United States.Coordinators can recruit current IGTAs,
      undergraduate students, GTAs, and faculty who work with IGTAs to
      build an IGTA Representative Group to identify the differences of
      academic cultures between the IGTAs' home countries and the United
      States. Collaborators for this effort can include the graduate school, the
      center for international student services, the teaching and learning
      center, and the office of student affairs. Findings from the IGTA
      Representative Group should be recorded and shared with future
      IGTAs. Understanding and reflecting upon the similarities and
      differences between academic cultures is vital for IGTAs to set
      appropriate expectations for their undergraduate students.

2. Provide training for IGTAs on communication skills in various
      instructional conditions both in and outside of the classroom.Training
      workshops or courses should be developed to facilitate IGTAs' English
      communication, such as public speaking skills in formal teaching. The
      training sessions offer peer learning practices for IGTAs to improve the
      communication effectiveness among IGTAs, undergraduate students,
      and faculty mentors in academic settings should be formed.
      Participants learn with and from each other, contributing as equally
      valuable members of the cohort (Boud, Cohen, & Sampson, 2014). These
      practices create a safe environment to practice both speaking and
      listening. Real connections are made among the participants, which will
      encourage the participants to communicate with one another.

14 | Vignette: International GTAs
IGTAs will be paired with native GTAs. The pairs will meet before the class
observation to review the lesson plan and discuss specifics on the aspects
of teaching that IGTAs aspire to improve. After the peer observation, the
pairs will discuss teaching techniques and classroom management. Teaching
experience and strategies will be shared, and misunderstandings relating to
U.S. academic culture will be clarified. By continuing this practice, IGTAs will
gain a better understanding of U.S. academic culture. They will be better
able to communicate with undergraduate students, leading to an overall
improvement of instructional quality. Native GTAs will also gain knowledge
of and insight into cross-cultural communication, observation and feedback
processes, and peer-coaching strategies.

   The IGTAs' better understanding of U.S. academic cultures and improved
communication skills will help IGTAs' succeed in teaching; in turn,
undergraduate students will benefit from enhanced instruction. The
improved instruction from IGTA's can encourage undergraduate students
to embody global the proper mindset to work with others from diverse
backgrounds, especially culturally diverse backgrounds (Council, 2009;
Surez-Orozco, 2005; Ziguras & Law, 2006).

References

Adrian-Taylor, S. R., Noels, K. A., & Tischler, K. (2007). Conflict between
   international graduate students and faculty supervisors: Toward effective
   conflict prevention and management strategies. Journal of Studies in
   International Education, 11(1), 90-117.

Andrea, T. (1995). The coconstruction of cross-cultural miscommunication:
   Conflicts in perception, negotiation, and enactment of participant role and
   status. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 17(2), 129-152.

Anfara, V. A., & Mertz, N. T. (2014). Theoretical Frameworks in Qualitative
   Research. Sage.

Aslan, E. (2016). International Teaching Assistants in the U.S. University
   Classroom: A Mixed-Methods Study of Individual Differences and L2
   Pragmatic Competence. [Doctoral dissertation], University of South
   Florida.

                                                                         Vignette: International GTAs | 15
Balschweid, M., Knobloch, N. A., & Hains, B. J. (2014). Teaching introductory
   life science courses in colleges of agriculture: faculty experiences. Journal
   of Agricultural Education, 55(4), 162-175.

Blickenstaff, S. M., Wolf, K. J., Falk, J. M., & Foltz, J. C. (2015). College of
   agriculture faculty perceptions of student skills, faculty competence in
   teaching areas and barriers to improving teaching. NACTA Journal, 59(3),
   219.

Boeije, H. (2002). A purposeful approach to the constant comparative method
   in the analysis of qualitative interviews. Quality and Quantity, 36(4),
   391-409.

Boud, D., Cohen, R., & Sampson, J. (2014). Peer Learning in Higher Education:
   Learning from and with Each Other. Routledge.

Bower, M. (2017). Design of technology-Enhanced Learning: Integrating
   Research and Practice. Emerald Publishing.

Caffarella, R. S. (1999). Planning programs for adults: An interactive process.
   Adult Learning, 10(2), 27-29.

Carlson, R. E., & Smith-Howell, D. (1995). Classroom public speaking
   assessment: Reliability and validity of selected evaluation instruments.
   Communication Education, 44(2), 87-97.

Clynes, M. P. (2009). A novice teacher's reflections on lecturing as a teaching
   strategy: Covering the content or uncovering the meaning. Nurse
   Education in Practice, 9(1), 22-27.

Council, N. R. (2009). Transforming Agricultural Education for a Changing
   World. National Academies Press.

Davis, E. A., Hodgson, Y., & Macaulay, J. O. (2012). Engagement of students
   with lectures in biochemistry and pharmacology. Biochemistry and
   Molecular Biology Education, 40(5), 300-309.

Doerfert, D. L. (2011). National Research Agenda: American Association for
   Agricultural Education's research priority areas for 2011-2015. Texas Tech
   University, Department of Agricultural Education and Communications.

Fleming, M., House, S., Shewakramani, V., Yu, L., Garbutt, J., McGee, R., . . .
   Rubio, D. M. (2013). The mentoring competency assessment: validation of a
   new instrument to evaluate skills of research mentors. Academic Medicine:
   Journal of the Association of American Medical Colleges, 88(7), 1002.

Fox, W. S., & Gay, G. (1994). Functions and effects of international teaching
   assistants. The Review of Higher Education, 18(1), 1-24.

16 | Vignette: International GTAs
Gardner, G. E., & Jones, M. G. (2011). Pedagogical preparation of the science
   graduate teaching assistant: challenges and implications. Science Educator,
   20(2), 31.

Gorsuch, G. J. (2011). Improving speaking fluency for international teaching
   assistants by increasing input. Tesl-Ej, 14(4).

Joyce, B. L., Steenbergh, T., & Scher, E. (2010). Use of the Kalamazoo essential
   elements communication checklist (adapted) in an institutional
   interpersonal and communication skills curriculum. Journal of Graduate
   Medical Education, 2(2), 165-169.

Nakane, I. (2007). Silence in Intercultural Communication: Perceptions and
   Performance (Vol. 166). John Benjamins Publishing.

Patton, M. Q. (2015). Qualitative Research & Evaluation Methods: Integrating
   Theory and Practice: The Definitive Text of Qualitative Inquiry Frameworks
   and Options (4th ed.): SAGE Publications, Inc.

Pretty, J., Sutherland, W. J., Ashby, J., Auburn, J., Baulcombe, D., Bell, M., .
   . . Burke, J. (2010). The top 100 questions of importance to the future of
   global agriculture. International Journal of Agricultural Sustainability, 8(4),
   219-236.

Roach, K. D., & Olaniran, B. A. (2001). Intercultural willingness to
   communicate and communication anxiety in international teaching
   assistants. Communication Research Reports, 18(1), 26-35.

Ross, P. G., & Krider, D. S. (1992). Off the plane and into the classroom:
   A phenomenological explication of international teaching assistants'
   experiences in the American classroom. International Journal of
   Intercultural Relations, 16(3), 277-293.

Schulz Renate, A. (2008). The challenge of assessing cultural understanding
   in the context of foreign language instruction. Foreign Language Annals,
   40(1), 9-26.

Surez-Orozco, M. M. (2005). Rethinking education in the global era. The Phi
   Delta Kappan, 87(3), 209-212.

Urban, J. B., Hargraves, M., & Trochim, W. M. (2014). Evolutionary evaluation:
   Implications for evaluators, researchers, practitioners, funders and the
   evidence-based program mandate. Evaluation and Program Planning, 45,
   127-139.

Von Braun, J., & Daz-Bonilla, E. (2008). Globalization of Food and Agriculture
   and the Poor. Oxford University Press.

Yee, L. W. (2016). Peer coaching for improvement of teaching and learning.
   Journal of Interdisciplinary Research in Education, 6(1), 64-79.

                                                                          Vignette: International GTAs | 17
Ziguras, C., & Law, S. F. (2006). Recruiting international students as skilled
   migrants: the global "skills race" as viewed from Australia and Malaysia.
   Globalisation, Societies and Education, 4(1), 59-76.

Figure and Table Attributions

   Figure 1.1 Data Source: National Science Foundation, National Center
      for Science and Engineering Statistics, Survey of Graduate Students
      and Post-doctorates in Science and Engineering, 2016.
      https://www.nsf.gov/statistics/srvygradpostdoc/. Adapted under fair
      use. Graphic by Kindred Grey.

   Table 1.1 Data Source: National Science Foundation, National Center for
      Science and Engineering Statistics, Survey of Graduate Students and
      Post-doctorates in Science and Engineering, 2016.
      https://www.nsf.gov/statistics/srvygradpostdoc/

18 | Vignette: International GTAs
2. Authenticity

  CHRIS MCCULLOUGH

 Introduction

  It is finally time. You are given your first teaching assignment as a graduate
  student, or it is time to teach as part of your first job. Sure, you sat through
  an institutionally required training that seemed to be more about the
  institution not wanting to get sued than giving you ideas about teaching. You
  may feel unsure about what to do teaching, or even if you want to teach at
  all. What and how you teach might be laid out for you already, but you still
  have the power to decide how to present yourself as an instructor.

     You may have encountered a few different instructor personalities during
  your time as an undergraduate. There is the instructor who struggles to
  make the content relatable because everyone should get it. There is the TA
  who is learning the material one week ahead of you because it was the class
  they were told to teach. You may have had the instructor like the one Robin
  Williams played in Dead Poets Society, who wants to inspire you to greater
  things. Another person you possibly have encountered is the uninspiring
  instructor who clearly doesn't want to be there and whose only goal is to
  get you out the door at the end of class. Finally, you may have had the
  new instructor who is nervously going through their first experience with
  the class; but at least they were very personable. An instructor earns many
  personas. It is important to establish the type of persona you want to adopt
  as an instructor at the outset. Putting some thought into who you want to
  be as an instructor can help guide your lesson plans to better suit who you

How to cite this book chapter:
  McCullough, C.T. 2022. Authenticity. In: Westfall-Rudd, D., Vengrin, C., and Elliott-
  Engel, J. (eds.) Teaching in the University: Learning from Graduate Students and
  Early-Career Faculty. Blacksburg: Virginia Tech College of Agriculture and Life
  Sciences. https://doi.org/10.21061/universityteaching. License: CC BY-NC 4.0.

                                                                                                   Authenticity | 19
are and help you build rapport with the students. Figuring out who you are
as an instructor is an ongoing process that will take time and self-reflection.
By figuring out who you want to be, you can use pedagogies that better align
with who you are.

     This chapter will discuss...

          What cues instructors use to form their teaching identity.
          What it means to teach as your authentic self.
          The benefits and drawbacks of being authentic.

Forming a Teaching Identity

When I taught my first class as the instructor of record, I knew I should
not lean into my personality to the fullest extent possible. I know that being
funny (I am downright hilarious) is an important part of my identity. It is
something I cannot escape, and I choose to embrace. In one of the most
serious moments of my life, I was trying to be funny. I was in a car accident
about ten years ago. After the emergency personnel cut the car door off with
the jaws-of-life, they were about to cut my seat belt. I stopped them and
unbuckled myself, and said, "Don't worry, I got this." Later, it was reported,
the first responders could only laugh. In more personal settings, humor is
a preference. Using humor in a professional setting is a challenge as the
consequences for bad attempts are more severe. However, humor has its
benefits in the classroom, such as reducing anxiety, lightening the mood,
and occasionally being thought-provoking (Chiarell, 2010). I try to use this

20 | Authenticity
core part of my identity to my advantage when possible; however, I know it
cannot run rampant. Using lots of sarcasm with students, for example, can
hurt the instructor's credibility (Banfield et al., 2006).

   Two concepts central to this chapter are teacher identity and authenticity,
each of which can fill up a textbook on their own. Within identity, there
are two aspects of interest, our identity as instructors and the identity
we assume when teaching. That is to say, how do we see ourselves as
instructors, and what role does that play in our jobs? These aspects of
identity are fluid, changing in response to the environment, and changing
over time as we grow (Shelton, 2018).

   Within academia, instructors are commonly split between the professional
identities of researcher and instructor (Kreber, 2010). Do you see yourself
as a researcher forced to teach, gaining little fulfillment from teaching? Or,
do you enjoy teaching but feel like research, and administrative tasks are
viewed as more important? Instructors draw on cues from different levels of
the institution to help form a teaching identity. High-level cues come from
the institution, the broader culture around education, research-teaching
interface, and effort expected (Fanghanel, 2007). Many of these cues are out
of an instructors' control but serve to emphasize the value of teaching at
the institution. Interpreting the signals of the larger institutional forces is
important for understanding what is expected of you as an instructor.

   Instructors can draw cues from three levels, high, mid, and personal, to
get a better sense of what teaching is like at an institution (Fanghanel,
2007). Most high-level cues are out of an instructor's control, and may offer
contradictory signals. The institution may say it values teaching but offer
little support and recognition for teaching effectively. There are mid-level
cues to draw from within your discipline and or department (Fanghanel,
2007). Within this level, instructors can seek community with others in
the department that teach similar discipline topics. New graduate student
instructors at Virginia Tech can join the Academy for Graduate Teaching
Assistant Excellence to learn from other graduate students at the university
about their experiences teaching as a graduate student. In addition to
community, instructors may also experience the strongest administrative
forces that set job expectations (Kreber, 2010). Finally, at the personal-level,
one's beliefs about teaching inform our identity (Fanghanel, 2007). These
would include our previous experiences as an instructor and student, our
assumptions about students, and what we believe is effective. What is the
goal of our teaching? Do we want to convey information or teach skills and

                                                                                                Authenticity | 21
ideas that are beneficial outside of the classroom? While instructors teach
content specific to their discipline, many see it as their duty to teach other
skills like critical thinking or writing (Kreber, 2010). It is also at this level that
the personal identity that we teach is formed.

   The first time I was a TA, I taught an introductory insect identification
lab. This lab had a reputation for being relatively easy, and most students
took the class to meet general education requirements. It was a class many
students knew was taught by a graduate student. This class was also an easy
assignment for the TA, as the course content and schedule were already laid
out. Any changes made were at the TA's discretion, but we could not alter
the course content; for example, we couldn't change which arthropod was
taught. TAs were not allowed to change the insects on quizzes, but a TA on
Thursday could change the order of the questions on quizzes from earlier in
the week to keep students accountable. I liked to spice up lectures with any
fun or interesting media or information that I could find. For example, did
you know the shiny green flies in the family Calliphoridae that bother you
when enjoying a picnic are also the ones that provide the larvae used to clean
wounds with maggot therapy? It felt more like acting than teaching. I enjoyed
the experience, but the lack of ownership always reminded me that I was
a graduate student teaching predetermined content. It felt like the student
reviews were more about who you were rather than what they learned.

Teaching Authentically

A related concept that pairs with identity is authenticity. Instructor
authenticity has emerged as an area of study; the question is, how does
instructor authenticity affect interactions with students? Authenticity is a
nebulous term that is difficult to define in a scholarly sense, and there are
many scholarly definitions of what authenticity is. In a review of the different
definitions used, a common theme was being as open as possible about your
values, beliefs, and biases (Kreber et al., 2007). Other aspects of many of
these definitions relate to showing passion for the course subject, genuinely
expressing yourself, and engaging students with topics that matter (Taylor,
1991). In the context of teaching, authenticity is also associated with being
kind and sincere with students--it is possible to be an authentically evil

22 | Authenticity
person (Chickering et al., 2006). Considering authenticity along more
practical lines means reflecting your values and passion and making an
earnest effort to know your students (Kreber et al., 2007). As an instructor,
there are many ways to reflect your authentic self through the things that
you do in the course.

   One way to reflect on yourself is through the assessments that you use. In
a class I taught about how ecological principles are applied in agriculture, we
frequently discussed what we believed are the best options for agriculture.
The majority of students in the course were not in a field related to ecology
nor agriculture. However, everyone engages with agriculture on some level,
namely choosing what to eat. As part of an assignment on biodiversity,
students chose a diet scenario from a paper that they read, then they had
to explain why it is the best choice. Each diet has an environmental cost
to the production practices that the students had to explain, but they also
had to convince their peers why this was the best choice. For me, it was
fun to hear about the reasons why students chose the diets they did and to
follow-up by asking if their actual diets are reflective of this choice. There
were a few vegans who lived out their proposed diet, but most of them
acknowledged they did not follow their own proposed diet. This was mostly
due to convenience and time. This assessment allowed me to talk to students
about a question with no correct answer and provided an opportunity to
understand better the values and judgments students make around food.

   Lessons that let the students do most of the talking can hide some
potentially difficult aspects of your authentic self as well. I categorize myself
as more of an introvert than an extrovert. That is not to say that I am fearful
of public speaking or being in front of the class. Rather, talking for extended
periods is mentally exhausting for me. One of my least proud moments is
when I lectured for nearly an hour straight about plant diseases. However,
there are times when a lecture is necessary, such as when laying out the
organization and relationships of a new topic.

   By creating lesson plans and assessments that have the students take the
lead, I can reduce the amount of time that I am at the center. However, there
are still classes where I lecture. In these classes, I follow a TV schedule. I talk
for 8-12 minutes, then ask the students a short discussion question. In total,
I try to limit myself to three of these talking periods. That leaves time in the
end for some form of assessment as well. This format allows the students to
interact with material and provides me a break from talking.

                                                                                                Authenticity | 23
     Diversity

        Being authentic with the students can help build trust with them.
     Share your experiences with the students, maybe they have not
     previously encountered a perspective such as yours. And, by
     offering your own experiences you give permission for your
     students to bring their whole self into the learning environment
     (Elliott-Engel, Amaral, Westfall-Rudd, & Rudd, 2020). The authentic
     sharing of experience builds trust. By building trust with students,
     you can help them feel like a part of a classroom community, a place
     that they would feel comfortable sharing their identities and their
     lived experiences.

Benefits of Authenticity

Thinking about who you are can help inform your approach to designing
your course to maximize your strengths--design assessments and lesson
plans that do not require you to be the leader. For one assessment, I had
students make infographics to summarize the unit we just covered. I printed
out everyone's infographic, with their names removed, of course, and taped
them to blackboards in the room. Everyone had an opportunity to write
comments next to the infographics before we discussed all of them. I was
still able to gauge the students' understanding of the material but to do so
in a way that did not require lots of talking from me. Another activity that
I enjoy using is having students lead a discussion on a paper reinforcing an
important concept from the unit. While I still participate, it gives me a break
from being the leader and lets me be an observer.

24 | Authenticity
   What if this is your first-time teaching, or you simply want to get through
your teaching assignment to get on with your research? Are there some
characteristics that you can utilize to get a start and avoid getting negative
student reviews? Student evaluations of instructor quality are often tied to
the different personality traits displayed by instructors (Kim & MacCann,
2018). Students have their own definition of what it means to be authentic
and which traits they associated with being authentic. Students use five
broad traits to evaluate the authenticity of an instructor: approachable,
passionate, attentive, capable, and knowledgeable (Table 1) (De Bruyckere
& Kirschner, 2016; Johnson & LaBelle, 2017). By being organized, providing
timely feedback, and clearly relating course concepts, you can fulfill some
of the indicators used by students to assess authenticity for being attentive,
capable, and knowledgeable (Johnson & LaBelle, 2017). To be thought of as
approachable and passionate, students are looking for excitement, for you
to share personal stories, and to talk to them outside of class (Johnson &
LaBelle, 2017). Having enthusiasm for what you are doing is another common
trait described by students as beneficial for instructor authenticity (Keller et
al., 2018).

   The behaviors that make an instructor seem inauthentic are the opposite
of the aforementioned traits: not sharing personal stories or details, not
getting to know the students, being bored by the content, being slow to
provide feedback, being disorganized, and being unsure of the material being
taught (Johnson & LaBelle, 2017). Sometimes, it may seem difficult to avoid
these negative behaviors; but, by trying to play to your strengths, you can
still be authentic.

                                                                                                Authenticity | 25
              Table 2.1 Behaviors students use to assess teacher's (in)authenticity.

Indicators of authenticity                        Indicators of inauthenticity

              Using personal stories                                                  Not sharing personal stories

Approachable  Telling jokes                       Unapproachable                      Ignores students outside of class
                 Talking with students outside                                           Lack of office hours
                                                                                         Does not attempt to get to
              of class
                 Availability outside of office                                       know students

              hours

                  Excited about content                                   Seems bored
Passionate                                        Lack of passion

                  Enthusiasm for teaching                                 Not excited to be teaching

              Listening to students                                                   Avoids questions

Attentive Providing feedback                      Inattentive Does not know names
                   Knowing names                                       Does not help students
                   Checking in on well-being                           Avoids student feedback

              On-time and prompt                                                      Unprepared and disorganized

Capable Organized                                 Incapable Unclear expectations
                 Detailed assignments, syllabus,                     Reading from presentation or

              and expectations                                    book

                                                  Disrespectful                       Rude and/or dismissive of
                                                                                      students

                                                                                      Authoritarian
I was a TA for two sections of a lab for a class called woody landscape plants.
The lab was essentially walking around campus and teaching students how
to identify the plants they learned about in the lecture portion. This was
one of those class experiences where the TA is only a week ahead of the
students learning the course material. I know insects, not plants. I took a
risk with the students and let them know I was learning the material a week
ahead, rather than hide behind an authoritarian streak and tell them what
everything was with no room for questions. For graduate student TAs, this
can be a strategy when forced to teach a class outside of your expertise.
Being honest rather than authoritarian maintains your credibility with the
students (Pytlak & Houser, 2014). I also used the students as a resource by
having them demonstrate how they remembered the characteristics of the
different plant species.

   The nature of this lab gave me the chance to talk more informally with
the students. We would trek across campus for the lab looking at plants,
providing ample time to talk with students. Getting out of the classroom did
not require me to be a talk show host. I often asked about the lecture portion
of the class. Or, after spring break, we all shared photos of plants that we
recognized from class. Once it warmed up enough for insects to become
active, I could tie some of my passion into the course content that I was
less familiar with. I was always ready to seize the moment and the insect
when the opportunity presented itself to bring insects into the discussion.
There were some natural opportunities to use insects to enhance the class
experience by providing more details about some specific interactions
between plants and insects. I pointed out the little balls of fluff on hemlock
trees that are the invasive hemlock woolly adelgid. There I was, describing
the unique pollination relationship between yucca moths and the yucca
plant. The most engaging opportunity was giving everyone a leaf from a
boxwood plant and having them split it open to see the boxwood leafminer's
larvae on the inside. The students in the class seemed to enjoy these little
asides, as it brought the course content back to an area that I am passionate
about.

                                                                                                Authenticity | 27
Challenges of Authenticity

Not all graduate TAs may feel the pressure of getting good student reviews.
But there may be some who feel pressure to perform for the students to
get a good review. Leaning into some of the attributes that students are
using to gauge your authenticity can help, but be warned that faking those
attributes can have negative consequences--constantly putting up a faade
of enthusiasm when teaching class often results in personal dissatisfaction
with job performance and emotional distress (Taxer & Frenzel, 2018).
Furthermore, if you are bad at acting, people will be able to tell that you
are acting differently than you really feel (Grandey & Gabriel, 2015). It might
be tolerable to push through a semester of acting to benefit a class as a
graduate student with little to no training in teaching. Just know, if you are
acting for positive student reviews, you can get those reviews from students
at the potential expense of what the students will achieve in your class (Kim
& MacCann, 2016). If you are new to teaching and it is a big part of your job,
you may want to take a moment to reflect on who you are as an instructor.

   One other challenge that comes to mind with trying to be authentic when
teaching is what to do with an online course. With more limited means of
interacting face-to-face and providing nonverbal cues, expressing who you
are can be challenging. I have not taught an online course, nor was I one of
the many instructors who had to transition rapidly to an online course due
to COVID-19. However, I have had some experiences with online courses as a
student. These experiences have taught me one lesson for when I inevitably
have to teach online: put yourself on the screen. The courses I have taken
have largely been presentations that were narrated by the instructor. I had
no idea who the instructors were. I think it is necessary to hold virtual
office hours and recitation sessions to allow the students to talk to me to
get to know me. Even if you are not comfortable in front of the camera,
try to express who you are on the syllabus. Be specific about the reasoning
and rationale behind the policies you have. What does it mean to share
personal details about yourself in an online class? Another tactic could be
sharing social media information with the students, but that may blur the
line too much between professional and personal. While you are allowed to
share personal views on topics, it can be difficult to disentangle those views
because you are an instructor at an institution of higher education. There
may also be deeply personal or slightly embarrassing content that students

28 | Authenticity
may not need to know. To choose to share that information with students
is your choice. Just be prepared for anything you post potentially come up
in class. Being able to express yourself through technology is something
that instructors continue to grapple with as more learning occurs online
(Shelton, 2018).

     Syllabus Development

        One of the first places students will encounter who you are is on
     the syllabus. Be explicit in explaining your rationale for course
     policies to let students see more of who you are. Instead of a late
     assignment policy that says you lose a certain amount of points per
     day late, say you understand that life happens. You are willing to
     work with a student about what is appropriate, provided they
     communicate with you. Provide them with a snippet of reasoning
     about why you have the assessments you do. Let them know the
     course is about developing them as people, not just students to fill
     with information. Infographics assignments succinctly summarize
     the important aspects of a unit; debates are important for picking a
     position and defending the topic.

Conclusions

When trying to teach as your authentic self, it is important to take time to
reflect on who you want to be as an instructor. Developing who we are as
instructors is a fluid process that takes time (van Lankveld et al., 2017). Taking
the time to reflect on teaching, especially with the support of institutional
resources, helps instructors solidify their teaching identity and makes them

                                                                                               Authenticity | 29
more likely to adopt student-centered teaching practices (Nevgi & Lfstrm,
2015). I consider myself a bit lucky to have had varied teaching experiences
and be part of programs during my time as a graduate student to allow me
to reflect on who I want to be as an instructor. With every class we teach,
we gain new experiences that we can shape ourselves. For example, I had a
student who was putting in the bare minimum to get by. Then suddenly, he
was gone for a month. He emailed saying a relative had passed away. I was
skeptical of that being the case, because he had not done much to earn my
trust. Shortly after his return to class, I got a note from the student services
office confirming the details of the student's experience. While I never said
anything to the student, I had made some bad remarks to fellow TAs. After
that experience, I realized I had little choice but to trust students. At best,
I get a three-hour window into their lives every week during the semester.
The rest of the time, they are dealing with life.

   You need to think about who you are as an instructor and how you will
express that before, during, and after teaching your course. Before you begin
teaching a course, think about how you are going to approach it. Are you
going to sequester your identity in an air of professionalism and neutrality?
Will you approach a topic from an intersection of your own identities? When
you are teaching, moments may arise when you need to set aside or redefine
your authentic self. If you have students debate a topic, do you try to remain
impartial or show a bit of bias toward the ideas you like? After the course is
over and you have read the student evaluations, ask yourself if the comments
reflect you or the course content? It may feel nice to read positive reviews of
who you are; but, if the class average was a "C," what is that saying about how
well you taught? Was your authenticity being perceived as being nice, or did
you engage the class with it?

   This is the beginning of your teaching journey; do not expect it to fall
perfectly into place right away. This is a process that will take time. Before
you start thinking about what your teaching persona will be and what your
goals are for teaching, talk with other instructors at the institution to learn
from their experiences and about what motivates them to teach. Also, seek
out other resources that the institution may have to help with teaching.
At Virginia Tech, there is the Academy for Graduate Teaching Assistant
Excellence. This is a group of graduate students who are willing to share
their experiences with all aspects of teaching in formal and informal settings.
Finally, take time to reflect on the course and your teaching once it has
passed.

30 | Authenticity
     Reflection Questions

          What are your motivations for teaching this class? Is the
             topic an area of passion for you, or is this simply part of your
             job duties?

          What identities do you possess that could be prominently
             featured while teaching? Are there lessons that could be
             designed that allow you to utilize these?

          Are there resources at the institution such as professional
             development opportunities, teaching groups, or mentors to
             help you develop your teaching practice?

References

Banfield, S. R., Richmond, V. P., & McCroskey, J. C. (2006). The effect of
   teacher misbehaviors on teacher credibility and affect for the teacher.
   Communication Education, 55(1), 63-72. https://doi.org/10.1080/
   03634520500343400

Chiarell, M. A. (2010). Humor as a teaching tool: Use in psychiatric
   undergraduate nursing. Journal of Psychosocial Nursing & Mental Health
   Services, 48(8), 34-43. https://doi.org/10.3928/02793695-20100701-02

Chickering, A., Dalton, J., & Stamm, L. (2006). Encouraging Authenticity and
   Spirituality in Higher Education. Jossey-Bass.

De Bruyckere, P., & Kirschner, P. A. (2016). Authentic teachers: Student
   criteria perceiving authenticity of teachers. Cogent Education, 3(1).
   https://doi.org/10.1080/2331186X.2016.1247609

                                                                                                Authenticity | 31
Elliott-Engel, J., Amaral, J. R., Westfall-Rudd, D. M., & Rudd, R. D. (2020).

Perspectives on LGBTQ+ inclusion and identity development from a

College of Agriculture and Life Sciences. North American College and

Teachers           of  Agriculture  Journal,            64,  102-112.

https://www.nactateachers.org/index.php/volume-64-2020/

2987-perspectives-on-lgbtq-inclusion-and-identity-development-from-

a-college-of-agriculture-and-life-sciences

Fanghanel, D. J. (2007). Investigating University Lecturers' Pedagogical

Constructs in the Working Context. The Higher Education Academy.

https://www.advance-he.ac.uk/knowledge-hub/investigating-

university-lecturers-pedagogical-constructs-working-context

Grandey, A. A., & Gabriel, A. S. (2015). Emotional Labor at a crossroads: Where

do we go from here? Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and

Organizational Behavior, 2(1), 323-349. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-

orgpsych-032414-111400

Johnson, Z. D., & LaBelle, S. (2017). An examination of teacher authenticity

in the college classroom. Communication Education, 66(4), 423-439.

https://doi.org/10.1080/03634523.2017.1324167

Keller, M. M., Becker, E. S., Frenzel, A. C., & Taxer, J. L. (2018). When teacher

enthusiasm is authentic or inauthentic: Lesson profiles of teacher

enthusiasm and relations to students' emotions. AERA Open, 4(2),

233285841878296. https://doi.org/10.1177/2332858418782967

Kim, L. E., & MacCann, C. (2016). What is students' ideal university instructor

personality? An investigation of absolute and relative personality

preferences. Personality and Individual Differences, 102, 190-203.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2016.06.068

Kim, L. E., & MacCann, C. (2018). Instructor personality matters for student

evaluations: Evidence from two subject areas at university. British Journal

of Educational Psychology, 88(4), 584-605. https://doi.org/10.1111/

bjep.12205

Kreber, C. (2010). Academics' teacher identities, authenticity and pedagogy.

Studies in Higher Education, 35(2), 171-194. https://doi.org/10.1080/

03075070902953048

Kreber, C., Klampfleitner, M., McCune, V., Bayne, S., & Knottenbelt, M. (2007).

What do you mean by "authentic"? A comparative review of the literature

on conceptions of authenticity in teaching. Adult Education Quarterly,

58(1), 22-43. https://doi.org/10.1177/0741713607305939

32 | Authenticity
Nevgi, A., & Lfstrm, E. (2015). The development of academics' teacher
   identity: Enhancing reflection and task perception through a university
   teacher development programme. Studies in Educational Evaluation, 46,
   53-60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stueduc.2015.01.003

Pytlak, M. A., & Houser, M. L. (2014). Because i'm the teacher and i said
   so: GTA use of behavior alteration techniques to establish power and
   credibility in the college classroom. Western Journal of Communication,
   78(3), 287-309. https://doi.org/10.1080/10570314.2014.893010

Shelton, C. (2018). "You have to teach to your personality": Caring, sharing
   and teaching with technology. Australasian Journal of Educational
   Technology, 34(4). https://doi.org/10.14742/ajet.3557

Taxer, J. L., & Frenzel, A. C. (2018). Inauthentic expressions of enthusiasm:
   Exploring the cost of emotional dissonance in teachers. Learning and
   Instruction, 53, 74-88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.learninstruc.2017.07.008

Taylor, C. (1991). The Ethics of Authenticity. Harvard University Press.
van Lankveld, T., Schoonenboom, J., Volman, M., Croiset, G., & Beishuizen, J.

   (2017). Developing a teacher identity in the university context: A systematic
   review of the literature. Higher Education Research & Development, 36(2),
   325-342. https://doi.org/10.1080/07294360.2016.1208154

Figure and Table Attributions

   Table 2.1 Data Source: Johnson, Z. D., & LaBelle, S. (2017). An
      examination of teacher authenticity in the college classroom.
      Communication Education, 66(4), 423-439. https://doi.org/10.1080/
      03634523.2017.1324167

                                                                                               Authenticity | 33
VIGNETTE: Structure and
Organization to Facilitate
Learning in My Large Class
During the COVID-19 Pandemic

  DIDIER MENA-AGUILAR

  On December 2019, I finished my first college-level teaching opportunity,
  acting as a co-instructor responsible of leading half of the lessons in in-
  person biochemistry concepts course for more than 270 students. Based
  on the grades and student feedback, I felt satisfied with my performance.
  Student's comments highlighted two main aspects of my teaching: They
  valued my genuine care for students and the highly structured and organized
  way I taught the course. However, I was well aware of the advantages I
  had in having a more experienced faculty member assisting throughout the
  experience; the older professor was the face of the teaching team, and he
  led most of the logistics and overall planning of the course. I knew that I was
  going to be the sole instructor of the same course in the fall, and I needed
  to take my teaching to the next level in a manner that would benefit my
  students' learning.

     It is not uncommon for graduate students to feel overwhelmed at the
  prospect of teaching a whole class on their own. I asked myself questions
  about my preparedness and future performance on the course. Will the

How to cite this vignette:

  Mena-Aguilar, D. 2022. Structure and Organization to Facilitate Learning in
  My Large Class During the COVID-19 Pandemic. In: Westfall-Rudd, D.,
  Vengrin, C., and Elliott-Engel, J. (eds.) Teaching in the University: Learning
  from Graduate Students and Early-Career Faculty. Blacksburg: Virginia Tech
  College of Agriculture and Life Sciences. https://doi.org/10.21061/
  universityteaching. License: CC BY-NC 4.0.

   34 | Vignette: Structure and Organization
undergraduate students trust a graduate student to teach them on his own?
Will I be able to engage the students and facilitate their learning? Could I
successfully implement the pedagogy techniques I have been learning in my
teaching courses? I knew I had time to prepare, and I comforted myself with
my good performance last semester.

   However, in early 2020, the world seemed to stop due to the COVID-19
pandemic. Airports shut down, businesses closed their doors, and quarantine
orders were imposed throughout the world. Universities were not exempt,
and quick actions were taken to transfer in-person courses to fully online.
I felt lucky that I did not have to teach during spring 2020, and I assumed
the pandemic was going to end quickly, so I did not have to worry about it
affecting my future teaching.

   However, summer came, and the pandemic was still going strong. Cases
were increasing in our little town in the middle of rural Virginia, and it was
clear that the fall semester was going to be mainly online. For a course
that was expected to have more than 270 undergraduate students, the only
possibility was to move the course to a fully online modality. Now the
challenge was not only to teach a course on my own for the first time, but
also to teach it online. I knew what I did before was not going to be enough,
and I decided that the best course of action was to meticulously prepare for
it.

   The first thing I did was to identify the potential challenges my students
were going to face during the semester. I was aware that the weight of the
pandemic was not distributed equally throughout the student population.
I knew some of my students had more responsibilities outside my course
and, thanks to the pandemic, many of them had to face challenges that were
unprecedented: Some of them were in different time zones, some of them
did not have a quiet space to participate in class, some of them had to work
full time to ease the financial hardships, some of them had to take care of
their loved ones, some of them were sick themselves.

   Online courses were particularly challenging for students who were
enrolled at a traditionally in-person university. In a normal semester, they
could get away with just showing up to the classroom and catching up
with what was happening at the moment. Online courses require higher
student awareness of how the course is designed and the logistics behind
it. For example, an online course requires the students to properly navigate
the course management system, in our case Canvas, that would contain

                                                             Vignette: Structure and Organization | 35
everything from the materials and the assessments to the link for the
synchronous meetings. However, students are not always well-versed in the
platform and struggle when encountering a lack of structure on the website.

   How could I make my course easy to engage in, uphold the quality
standards required by the university, and accommodate the emerging needs
of my students? Based on my students' feedback from the previous semester
teaching, I knew the highly structured lessons I planned were a strength.
I contemplated how I could transfer my perspective on lesson planning to
other key aspects of the course.

   I carefully planned every step of the course in a way that would intuitively
lead to student success. This plan covered aspects from the general
progression of the course throughout the semester, to the specific structure
of each lesson. For example, I created a template of how the usual lesson
was going to look, specifying the responsibilities of the instructor and the
students before, during, and after the class meeting (Figure 1). At the start
of the semester, I reviewed this template with the students, making sure
we all knew what was expected. The key objective of this figure was to give
the students confidence by allowing them to be informed and empowered
during each lesson.

Figure 2.1 Overall plan presented to the students at the start of the semester.

To address the innate challenges associated with the need for technology
proficiency in an online course, I tried to make the Canvas site as clean
and intuitive as possible. The homepage contained only the key information
36 | Vignette: Structure and Organization
that the students needed, including a description of the course, my contact
information and links to the syllabus, the schedule, and the Zoom address
that we used to meet every week. I made sure the links needed to access the
class recordings and assessments were easy to find and intuitive to follow.

   I also reflected on the best way to organize the materials needed to study.
The course subjects were mainly taught through lectures with incorporated
active learning strategies. Each lesson I designed contained a set of
documents that included the learning goals, the annotated slides, and the
recorded lectures. All of these documents were uploaded to the Canvas site
before or right after the meeting session. The key aspect of the organization
approach that I implemented in all documents that I uploaded was a carefully
designed labeling system.

   I assigned a number to each subject based on the chronological order in
which they were reviewed. Each document label started with the number
assigned to the subject the lesson covered. This way, the learning goals,
slides, and recorded lectures could easily be associated with each other just
by looking at the label. Since the document names started with a number,
they were organized chronologically by default on the website or even in
each student's personal file management system. This approach made it
intuitive for the students to access the documents when needed.

   I implemented these strategies throughout the semester, and I frequently
reflection on both their effectiveness and their impact on the students.
Based on comments from the class survey, the strategies I put in place
helped the students face the challenges derived from the COVID-19
pandemic and concentrate on the goal of the course: learning biochemistry.
Furthermore, by having a detailed structure and plan to follow, it allowed me
as an instructor to have flexibility to adapt to my own challenges. I think the
most valuable component of my teaching experience as a graduate student
is the impact I had on my students. The actions I took to be more inclusive
and facilitate learning in this unexpected online setting were reflected in
the student feedback. I was particularly pleased to receive comments that
specifically addressed how the way I taught the course eased the difficulty
of online learning during a pandemic by students at a traditionally in-person
university:

       "We always knew what was expected of us in that class and I
       appreciate the structure of the class. The structure of the class
       helped with having the discipline for online schooling."

                                                             Vignette: Structure and Organization | 37
          "Professor Didier did a great job having all of his material organized
       on canvas and a great schedule. He made the material easy to
       understand. I struggle in chemistry, but this has been the best
       chemistry course and the one I am doing the best in at Virginia Tech."

          "The style in which this course was conducted was exactly what I
       would want. This was my most organized course and I always knew
       exactly what I had to do in order to succeed. It was very
       straightforward."

Figure and Table Attributions

   Figure 2.1 Kindred Grey. CC BY 4.0.

38 | Vignette: Structure and Organization
3. Indigenizing Your Classroom:
A Practice in Inclusive Pedagogy

  QUALLA KETCHUM

 Introduction

  Expanding diversity is a national imperative in education as universities
  work to better serve populations that are underserved in higher education.
  Education research has shown the importance of students being able to
  see themselves in their chosen field, particularly for women and students
  of color (Rodriguez & Blaney, 2020). Representation matters, affecting our
  students' sense of belonging in our educational areas, departments, and
  programs. It is an important step as educators to disrupt outdated and
  colonized notions or structures, even in small ways, to help improve this
  identity in our students. This change can be done by incorporating inclusive
  pedagogical practices into our classrooms, including raising the voices and
  works of those who have historically not been heard in our fields. Culturally
  Responsive Teaching can help increase student competencies and support
  diverse students to feel more connected in the classroom environment
  (Bazron, Osher & Fleischman, 2005). Culturally responsive educational
  practices are important for a new university educator because the university
  environment often has a variety of students from many different cultural
  backgrounds, and knowledge of these practices will help faculty creatively
  adapt their teaching to that environment.

How to cite this book chapter:
   Qualla, K. 2022. Indigenizing Your Classroom: A Practice in Inclusive Pedagogy. In:
   Westfall-Rudd, D., Vengrin, C., and Elliott-Engel, J. (eds.) Teaching in the University:
   Learning from Graduate Students and Early-Career Faculty. Blacksburg: Virginia Tech
   College of Agriculture and Life Sciences. https://doi.org/10.21061/
   universityteaching. License: CC BY-NC 4.0.
                                                                           Indigenizing Your Classroom | 39
   This chapter will discuss culturally responsive teaching practices, focusing
particularly on including Indigenous knowledge, techniques, and voices in
the classroom and how doing so will benefit all students, not just Indigenous
students. I will highlight examples of experiences of Indigenous people to
illustrate the importance of culturally responsive teaching practices, explain
culturally responsive practices employed in my teaching practice, and
demonstrate how these practices may be included in your classroom in a
culturally responsive and respectful way.

     This chapter will discuss...

          The experiences of Indigenous people in the United States
             and their relationship to education.

          What Culturally Responsive Teaching is and how to
             implement a few culturally responsive teaching practices.

          The value of including Indigenous knowledge and voices
             within the classroom.

Being Indigenous in the Academy--My
Positionality

It is a traditional practice by Indigenous people to introduce ourselves first
by our community and people in our language. This practice mirrors recent
calls for researchers and educators to be transparent in their positionality as
well as their personal history and perspectives, especially when working with
Native communities (Canada & Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples,
1996; Castagno & Brayboy, 2008; Haynes Writer, 2008). Haynes Writer (2008)

40 | Indigenizing Your Classroom
also wrote about the importance of Indigenous perspectives to those outside
of the Indigenous community in creating this culturally responsive work,
stating:

Our stories and our words are, as well, offerings to non-Indigenous
people so they may come to know and move into ally-ship with us for
that needed transformative work. (p. 10)

I am Qualla  (qua-la) Ketchum, and I am a citizen of the Cherokee

Nation. I grew up within the Nation's boundaries in what is also known as

northeastern Oklahoma. My technical background has been in Biological

Systems or Agricultural Engineering. As an Indigenous student, I have had

firsthand experience with the struggle to connect engineering to my culture.

This struggle has been identified as one of the factors impacting why more

Native Americans don't become engineers (Kant et al., 2015). I have had to

work hard to bring together these different sides of myself--the engineer

and the Cherokee and the educator--and it is a continuing process.

I want to acknowledge my white-privilege as a white-passing Native

woman, meaning that others do not immediately recognize my identity as

a minority. Because of my phenotype, I am seen by society as white, and

thus I carry that privilege. I acknowledge that my experience is not the same

as those who are automatically coded as a person of color by the dominant

culture. I can only speak for myself and my experience. There are more

than 573 different Indigenous Nations within the United States which means

more than 573 different cultures, languages, histories, and sets of issues. I

cannot speak for other Indigenous nations or even for everyone within my

Indigenous Nation. The experiences and thoughts expressed here are my

perspective as both an Indigenous student and an instructor. It should not

be assumed that all Indigenous people experience the academy or hold the

same truths as I do.

As a whole, Indigenous people have had a long, storied history with the

US education system. Teaching and learning have always been important

values in our cultures, mostly in informal ways through our family systems.

As an example, the Cherokee Nation built the first institutions of higher

education west of Mississippi for both Cherokee men and women as a way of

reclaiming our ways of being after our forced removal to Indian Territory in

the mid-1800s (Foreman, 1982). However, education was then turned into a

weapon used against Indigenous Nations by the US government. The Curtis

                      Indigenizing Your Classroom | 41
Act of 1898 was used to dissolve tribal institutions of the Five Civilized Tribes,
including the Cherokee seminaries (Conley, 2007). This action paved the way
for residential boarding schools and the deeply rooted scars that still exist
today from this era in Indigenous communities. For many of our Indigenous
nations, these schools, where native children were forced away from their
families to become "civilized," were our first real experience with a formal
education system. The horrors in these schools haunt many today (NPR,
2008), but these schools are not as far in the past as one might wish to
think. In 1969, one-third of Native students were still enrolled in schools
operated by the Bureau of Indian Education (BIE). Now, nearly 50 years later,
the bureau still educates 40,000 Native students in over 180 schools (NPR,
2008). These schools' effects on Indigenous families are still felt every day,
especially when it comes to feelings toward education. On reservations in
Montana, educators and Indigenous leaders have discussed that families do
not seem to value or believe in formal education (Field, 2016).

   It is with an understanding of these histories and beliefs that the statistics
for Native Americans in education become more clear. Native Americans
have the lowest graduation rate in comparison to other minority
populations. We are the least likely demographic to enroll in college and are
the second least likely to graduate on time (Field, 2016). Only seven out of
every 100 Native American kindergarteners earn a bachelor's degree (Begay-
Campbell, 2016). Nearly fifty percent of Native American K-12 students attend
a public school where the full range of math and science courses are not
being offered (Begay-Campbell, 2016). I, personally, went to a public school
that fell within this category. This performance gap can also be attributed
to a lack of funding, qualified teachers, technology, and internet access (May
& Chubin, 2003). From 2005 to 2015, the percentage of 25- to 29-year olds
holding at least bachelor's degrees increased for all racial and ethnic groups
except Native Americans (Field, 2016).

   I share all of this as a framework for understanding why culturally
responsive teaching and inclusive pedagogical practices are important to
include in our classrooms. Because of the highly colonized nature of the
United States education system and society as a whole, many educators
are not aware of this history and experience of Native Americans. We must
understand where we have been and where others are coming from when
we wish to create and hold welcoming spaces within our classrooms.

42 | Indigenizing Your Classroom
Culturally Responsive Teaching: What Is It?

Many new educators have great enthusiasm and commitment to teaching
their students well but do not always have the skills necessary for success
in the environment in which they teach (McHenry, 2018). Educators also
sometimes feel unprepared to teach students of different cultures (McHenry,
2018). This section will explain the purpose and implementation of culturally
responsive teaching practices in your classroom.

   Culturally responsive teaching builds a cognizance of the value of cultural
differences into the classroom and avoids seeing cultural differences as
negatives (Morgan, 2009). Culturally responsive education can include the
use of culturally relevant examples and assessments and respectful
classroom-management approaches (Bazron et al., 2005). Employing
culturally responsive educational practices can help students feel a greater
sense of belonging in the classroom (Bazron et al., 2005), potentially leading
to increased motivation for learning.

   Culturally responsive teaching is instructing in a way that embraces the
idea that culture plays a role in learning (Harmon, 2012). Students come to
the classroom with their unique perspectives, including their histories and
respective cultures, such as Indigenous cultures. Students who are a part
of a different culture may feel that they do not "belong" in the classroom if
references used in the lesson reflect only one group. Using examples that
include a variety of groups can help enrich the class and student learning.

   It is useful to note that the word "culture" in culturally responsive teaching
is used broadly, as cultures can vary within a particular group or system.
For example, cultures of Indigenous peoples can be different from one
Indigenous nation to another, and while each individual does not necessarily
feel qualified or able to speak for everyone in their own nation, much less
that of all Indigenous cultures, they may feel prepared to offer their personal
perspective on their place within it. Culture can even refer to the culture of
a particular geographic area or "culture of place." For example, the culture
in rural Appalachia is different from the culture in an East Coast inner city.
Teaching using culturally responsive practices in each of these places would
look different (McHenry, 2018). McHenry (2018) notes that moving to rural
Appalachia and teaching the children of coal miners was challenging for
her, as the students were food insecure and parents were stressed. Having
no training in the practice of cultural humility, she states that she decided

                                                                         Indigenizing Your Classroom | 43
that her students simply needed more schooling and didn't understand until
much later that while she could drill her students on math facts, she couldn't
fill their stomachs or truly understand the "values, behaviors, language, and
culture that defined them and their families." Knowing details such as the
strengths, values, and challenges of different cultures helps you to tailor your
lessons specifically to the students you are teaching.

   Cognizance of a historical lens is important when engaging in culturally
responsive educational practices (Harmon, 2012). Cultural traditions may be
linked to that culture's unique history, which can manifest in your class
through differences in the ways students respond to questions, differences
in their viewpoints, and differences in their perspectives. For example,
Indigenous students sometimes, but not always, express a mistrust of the
US government and educational system based on historical knowledge of
relations between Native people and the US government, as discussed in
the previous section. This mistrust perpetuates both community attitudes
toward education and student fears of going away for higher education.
This historical context for the US education system can provide greater
insight into how different activities and resources will affect other students
in the classroom. For example, students from various backgrounds will have
different responses to an assigned reading of the "Students' Right to Their
Own Language" statement from the Conference on College Composition and
Communication. In particular, Indigenous students have described strong
reactions to the quotes in the statement about how learning a new dialect
of language in the academy is "to some extent a rejection of one's culture."
Intergenerational trauma from boarding schools stealing language and
ancestral knowledge from Indigenous communities can result in strong
feelings arising that would not affect students from other cultural
backgrounds. Recognizing and holding space for these students and
backgrounds helps students feel more included in the academic
environment. It even allows them to gain a sense of empowerment and
ownership of their stories (Harmon, 2012).

   Interestingly, culturally responsive education does more than empower
the students. It empowers educators! Educators who use culturally
responsive teaching in the classroom can feel empowered by the exciting
sense of being a facilitator in the school, discussions are richer, and true
connections are made between people and information (Harmon, 2012).
Engaging in culturally responsive teaching practices is fun for the educator

44 | Indigenizing Your Classroom
as well! And who would not want to make the class more enjoyable to
teach? As an added plus, when an educator is exuding more enthusiasm, that
excitement is likely to be contagious for students.

Implementation

There are many different ways to implement culturally responsive
educational practices in the classroom. One is to incorporate cultural
references into the lessons in the examples used to explain concepts. The
use of cultural references can best be achieved by weaving them into the
class in a meaningful and intentional way (Ladson-Billings, 1994). For
example, one Indigenous colleague often uses traditional storytelling in her
teaching while I explicitly use my Cherokee Community Values to guide my
classroom interactions. Many majority identity educators express interest in
wanting to share these different references with their students but worry
about having something to share or sharing incorrect information. As
previously discussed, one's ethnic/racial identity is only one piece of culture.
One educator could use their family motto as a way to center different
cultural examples holistically. By honestly sharing of themselves and their
cultures first, the other examples utilized in class can be received with more
power and purpose than those just seemingly tacked on and unconnected to
the class.

   Another way to incorporate other voices in class is to ensure that other
perspectives and accomplishments are included when discussing a
particular field's history. For example, the history of STEM (science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics) fields is often documented as
very Eurocentric, leaving out many other perspectives. Engineering feats
such as the Inca Road System or the complex water-drainage systems of the
southwestern US nations are frequently left unmentioned while the histories
of people in Europe take center stage. Many of the courses taught do not
have a discussion of history included in the lesson plans. If such a discussion
seems overwhelming or difficult to include, a good first step is starting each
class with a quote or person of the week that represents diverse perspectives
and accomplishments particular to the field of study. This is another way to
use culturally responsive teaching practices to highlight voices that are often

                                                                         Indigenizing Your Classroom | 45
left out of these conversations. A word of caution, however: This step is often
best used in conjunction with the previous step of incorporating cultural
references. The use of these quotes and references needs to be sincere and
thoughtful. Instructors should be prepared to educate themselves during the
planning and implementation of this process. Make cultural references part
of the lesson structure, or invite students to present examples of their own
so that the cultures present in the class may come out in the discussion.

   Incorporating culturally responsive teaching into a specific class can feel a
little daunting for a new educator at first. The easiest place to start is with
getting to know the students and what communities they represent. Having
students introduce themselves is a great way to begin to get to know them
and better understand their perspectives. In my classes, however, before
they speak I first introduce myself in my native language. This shares a
piece of myself and my culture with my students--an important step if I
want to ask the same of my students. It also helps put any students from
underrepresented perspectives, particularly from other Indigenous cultures,
more at ease in academia and in my classroom. It is helpful to give space
for every voice to be heard in the classroom while also avoiding pushing
students to speak up if they are uncomfortable doing so.

   Another effective way to incorporate culturally responsive teaching
practices in the classroom is to diversify the syllabus. It is important to
examine the readings being used in your curriculum. By assigning particular
readings, you are inadvertently telling your students which perspectives are
important. In culturally responsive teaching, you want to make sure that the
value culture has in the classroom is accurately depicted in your syllabus.
Including a land acknowledgment statement in the syllabus is another easy
way to create a welcoming space for all students in the classroom. For non-
Indigenous educators, this simple step works similarly as my introduction
in my native language. It is an easy way to put Indigenous students in
particular at ease and other students who value inclusion and different
cultural perspectives.

   An exciting feature of culturally responsive teaching is its focus on the
strengths that culture can bring to the learning, and the classroom
community (McHenry, 2018). Culturally responsive educational
environments may incorporate culturally related music, food, language, or
clothing (Eglash, Gilbert, & Foster, 2013). An individual may proudly express
these cultural features from a particular culture as aspects of their personal
style (Eglash et al., 2013). Incorporating items such as music or food can help

46 | Indigenizing Your Classroom
add enthusiasm to your lesson and the classroom, making them a great way
to get students more engaged in learning. There are a number of strategies
that support culturally responsive teaching.

     Syllabus Development

        Be intentional with what you put in your syllabus and how it's
     communicated. Your syllabus sets the tone for the semester and is
     often your first introduction to your students. What inclusion
     statements are suggested or required by your institution? Ensure
     that your use of these statements is intentional and meaningful
     rather than tacked on at the end of the document out of obligation.
     Do they connect and align with the rest of your syllabus and how
     you manage your classroom? In culturally responsive teaching, you
     want to make sure that the syllabus accurately depicts the value
     culture has in the classroom. Diversify readings and ensure multiple
     perspectives are included and valued. Include a land
     acknowledgment statement at the beginning of your syllabus.
     Resources for developing this statement can be found at
     https://nativegov.org/a-guide-to-indigenous-land-
     acknowledgment/

                                                                         Indigenizing Your Classroom | 47
Tips for Culturally Responsive Teaching

   Start class with a land acknowledgment statement and include one in
      your syllabus.

   Teach to people, not your topic, using student-centered strategies.
   Educate yourself on the historical context in which you are teaching.

      Ask questions!
   Do a self-assessment of your own vocabulary, responses, and privilege.
   Use culturally related examples to explain concepts or invite students

      to offer up their models.
   Avoid assuming you know a student's culture. That student may

      surprise you!
   Make space/time in your lessons for students of different cultures,

      such as Indigenous students, to speak up if they wish to share.
   Act as a facilitator, rather than a lecturer, for your students

Conclusion

Your teaching, and your students' learning, can benefit from culturally
responsive practices. Culturally responsive teaching helps increase students'
sense of belonging and creates a welcoming space within our classroom. An
awareness of historical context is also important when engaging in culturally
responsive educational practices. It helps to understand where both we as
educators and our students are coming from before entering the classroom.
Indigenous practices, knowledge, and voices can be incorporated into the
school through culturally responsive teaching practices, improving learning
for all students. Culturally responsive teaching practices can make your class
a more dynamic, engaging atmosphere where references to various cultures
are used to help illustrate concepts and enrich the lesson.

48 | Indigenizing Your Classroom
Reflection Questions

  What did you learn about Indigenous cultures through this
     chapter? Why do you think you didn't know this before?

  How do you think you can include culturally responsive
     teaching practices in your own teaching?

  How can culturally responsive education improve your
     students' learning?

  How can Indigenous culture in particular be incorporated
     into your teaching to enrich your lessons for all your
     students?

References

Bazron, B., Osher, D., & Fleischman, S. (2005). Creating culturally responsive

schools.           https://www.researchgate.net/profile/David_Osher/

publication/265066182_Creating_Culturally_Responsive_Schools/

links/54c521db0cf2911c7a540861.pdf

Brown, D. B. (2004). Urban teachers' professed classroom management

strategies: Reflections on culturally responsive teaching.

http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/

download?doi=10.1.1.941.997&rep=rep1&type=pdf

Conley, Robert J. (2007). A Cherokee Encyclopedia. Albuquerque: University of

New Mexico Press.

                                       Indigenizing Your Classroom | 49
Forbes. (2017). Stop using PowerPoint, Harvard University says it's damaging

your brand and your company. https://www.forbes.com/sites/

paularmstrongtech/2017/07/05/stop-using-powerpoint-harvard-

university-says-its-damaging-your-brand-and-your-company/

Englash, R., Gilbert, J.E., & Foster, E. (2013). Broadening participation towards

culturally responsive computing education. https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/

10.1145/2483852.2483864

Fenwick, T. J. (2003). Learning through Experience: Troubling Orthodoxies and

Intersecting Questions. Malabar, FL: Krieger.

Foreman, Grant. (1982). The Five Civilized Tribes: Cherokee, Chickasaw,

Choctaw, Creek Seminole. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.

Gay, G. (2018). Culturally Responsive Teaching: Theory, Research, and Practice.

New York: Teachers College Press.

Green,    M.  C.         (2004).   Storytelling             in  teaching.

https://www.psychologicalscience.org/observer/storytelling-in-

teaching

Harmon, D. A. (2012). Culturally responsive teaching though a historical lens:

Will history repeat itself?. Interdisciplinary Journal of Teaching and

Learning, 2(1), 12-22. https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ1056428.pdf

Krystian, M. (2017). Harvard researchers find PowerPoint could be bad for

business. https://infogram.com/blog/prezi-vs-powerpoint-harvard-

study-presentation/

Ladson-Billings, G. (1994). What We Can Learn from Multicultural

Education Research. Educational Leadership, v51 n8 p22-26.

McHenry, N. (2018). Teaching across a cultural chasm.

https://www.chronicle.com/article/Teaching-Across-a-Cultural/242287

Morgan, H. (2009). What every teacher needs to know to teach Native

American students. Multicultural Education, 16(4), 10-12.

https://eric.ed.gov/?id=EJ858583

Moulton, S.T., Turkay, S., and Kosslyn, S.M. (2017). Does a presentation's

medium affect its message? PowerPoint, Prezi, and oral presentations.

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/

journal.pone.0178774#sec036

Native Governance Center. (2019). A guide to Indigenous land

acknowledgment. https://nativegov.org/news/a-guide-to-indigenous-

land-acknowledgment/

Richardson, V. (2003). Constructivist pedagogy. Teachers College Record,

105(9), 1623-1640. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1467-9620.2003.00303.x

50 | Indigenizing Your Classroom
Schunk, D. (2012) Learning theories: An Educational Perspective (6th ed.),
   228-277. Boston: Pearson

Wilson, D. & Conyers, M. (2014). Brain moves: When readers can picture
   it, they understand it. https://www.edutopia.org/blog/brain-movies-
   visualize-reading-comprehension-donna-wilson

                                                                         Indigenizing Your Classroom | 51
4. Teaching Practices for
Student-Centered Learning
Online

  RACHEL MACK

 Introduction

  Welcome to the online teaching chapter! Teaching online is not only fun, but
  it also has advantages for both you and your students. In my online teaching,
  I have enjoyed the flexibility (Bates, 2012) of the online teaching process.
  While online education can initially seem intimidating to new graduate
  teaching assistants (TAs) and faculty, if you are feeling overwhelmed by it,
  you are not alone. Seasoned faculty sometimes have difficulty with online
  teaching, especially if they are not used to the format. When COVID-19
  forced face-to-face classes to become online classes, some faculty and
  teaching assistants in academia were left scrambling to both meet the needs
  of students and present their material well (Kamenetz, 2020). Moving a class
  online can be especially challenging for those who are not well-versed in
  online teaching tools, or who are accustomed to using lecture-only teaching
  formats. However, an online course doesn't need to be a challenge to create
  and implement.

How to cite this book chapter:
  Mack, R. 2022. Teaching Practices for Student-Centered Learning Online. In:
  Westfall-Rudd, D., Vengrin, C., and Elliott-Engel, J. (eds.) Teaching in the
  University: Learning from Graduate Students and Early-Career Faculty. Blacksburg:
  Virginia Tech College of Agriculture and Life Sciences. https://doi.org/10.21061/
  universityteaching. License: CC BY-NC 4.0.

  52 | Student-Centered Learning Online
   If you find yourself overwhelmed at the prospect of teaching an online
course, you may be overthinking it. There are ways to make your online
course simple and useful at the same time. In this chapter, I will walk through
the components necessary for a basic, easy-to-implement online course, so
that you may quickly set yourself up for the delivery of effective teaching for
your students.

   In my teaching, I have seen critical thinking elevated by highlighting
student questions and interests, which in online classes can make space for
student ideas to influence the direction of the lessons. Student-centered
practices that achieve this include, but are not limited to, being a facilitator
rather than a lecturer, focusing on what students want to know, and
encouraging students to brainstorm their own ideas on the topic. Read on
for more detail about using student-centered practices to enhance online
teaching.

     This chapter will discuss...

          How to make an online course more student-centered.
          How to quickly convert from a face-to-face course to an

             online course.
          Preventing yourself from throwing all of your efforts into

             creating your online course.
          Creating online experiences that students will enjoy.

Online learning environments can be challenging for teachers who wish to
promote student-centered teaching practices. Teachers of online courses
cannot always observe students to gauge whether their students are
responding well to the lesson. Online courses can be tricky for those
teachers who wish to encourage student-teacher and peer-peer
interactions. They can pose challenges for teachers who want to promote

                                                                Student-Centered Learning Online | 53
motivation to learn through activities, course content, and assessment
(Briggs, 2015). Teachers wish to see students engaged, but the inherent
physical separation of students and instructors that exists in online
coursework can pose unique challenges for the use of student-centered
teaching (Briggs, 2015). However, there are many ways that student-centered
teaching practices can enhance the online classroom. With the employment
of student-centered teaching practices, online courses can seem less
mechanical for learners. Student-centered learning practices create a class
atmosphere of interaction, focusing on learner needs, interests, and
inquiries (ED, 2010). Using student-centered learning practices in online
teaching helps students to become active participants in their learning
through activities such as partnering in the development of course content,
interacting with peers electronically, and making decisions on how learning
will occur. Student-centered learning also avoids the use of rote
memorization in teaching concepts and favors the encouragement of critical
thinking in students (Schunk, 2012).

Beginning to Go Online: Planning Your Online
Course

It is beneficial to plan the syllabus, the objectives, and the assignments to
have a solid map to follow. Learning objectives are statements of what your
students should be able to do after receiving your instruction (University
of Colorado, 2007). The material you present should relate to your lesson's
objectives. This helps to focus the lesson and guide the students' efforts as
they work through the material. Therefore, identifying the objectives you will
have for the class and for each lesson allows you to organize your lessons for
teaching online more rapidly. Remember that lessons, and their objectives,
do not need to be intricately written to be effective, and bullet points can
help you to outline your lessons quickly.

54 | Student-Centered Learning Online
     Syllabus Development

          Use the syllabus to clearly state the platform(s) you plan to
             use, and inform students of any additional technology or
             materials they should have.

          Consider providing a how-to guide for students not familiar
             with the technology you use for the course.

          If you use a synchronous web-based platform that requires
             clicking on a common link, consider including that link in the
             syllabus.

          When posting the syllabus online, clearly title the file so
             students can identify it.

          Use the syllabus to include information about activities in
             which students will interact in the online setting.

          Include information about campus resources on information
             technology services, and accessibility services.

          Use the syllabus to encourage students to contact you
             immediately if they encounter, or expect to encounter,
             challenges with access to course.

When planning your course, you should also be aware that each class is
different in practice, and you may not end up sticking to your plans precisely.
In my teaching, I have found that while it is not typical for a class to stick
precisely to my lesson plan, I can get them to work toward learning goals
each week. Within the planned objectives, being flexible provides space for
students to voice interest in a different direction than the lesson plan may
lead. Keeping the class centered on the students helps them feel that they
have a stake in the lesson, allowing them to bring their ideas to the table, and

                                                                Student-Centered Learning Online | 55
ultimately increases their engagement (McCarthy, 2015). Therefore, planning
for flexibility in the course's flow, within your objectives, is a good start
towards setting up your online class to be firmly focused on your students.

How to Speedily Convert a Face-to-Face Course
to an Online Format

Before we launch into student-centered online learning, we first need to
discuss how to set up an effective online course. So you want to convert a
class to an online format quickly, but you are not sure where to start? First,
think about whether you would like your class's sessions to be synchronous
or asynchronous.

   In a synchronous course, you and your students will meet at the same
time (Cohn & Seltzer, 2020). An example is using a synchronous web-based
platform to communicate with students at regular intervals. For an
asynchronous course, you prepare your lessons in advance for the students
to access at a later time (Cohn & Seltzer, 2020). An example of asynchronous
course design is posting lessons and course materials for students to access
via a course management system.

   There are advantages and disadvantages to each approach. Synchronous
teaching can facilitate responsive communication and allows immediate
personal engagement with students (Cohn & Seltzer, 2020). However, it may
be challenging to schedule with everyone, and it has the potential for access
or technical difficulties that impede its use for you or your students (Cohn
& Seltzer, 2020; Flaherty, 2020). Asynchronous instruction is more flexible,
self-paced, and allows you to retain your posted past lessons, but could
reduce student engagement or understanding of your instruction (Cohn &
Seltzer, 2020; Flaherty, 2020). I discuss options for handling the negatives
associated with these approaches later in the chapter. For now, let's continue
brainstorming how to quickly and effectively set up your online class.

56 | Student-Centered Learning Online
Increasing Accessibility

Sometimes students have challenges accessing course materials. Some ways
that you can make your class more accessible for your students include
creating transcripts of any videos you use in your teaching (Flaherty, 2020),
including descriptions of any videos you use, and using captioning software
to assist with student comprehension of your videos. You may also consider
having assignments open long enough to capture all time zones, so all
students may participate at a reasonable time. Additionally, crowdsourcing
the class notes can help increase accessibility. Encourage student volunteers
to post their class notes to a common location so everyone in the class can
view them. Alternatively, create an assignment for a group of students to
post the notes each week.

   The next consideration is how you prefer to present your material.
Potential options include pre-recording your lessons, maintaining a live class
via a web-based platform, or using a format with no video of your teaching,
but including resources plus an online discussion (Cohn & Seltzer, 2020). You
could also customize your course's presentation by combining the aspects
you prefer from each of these options. Each option has its advantages and
disadvantages.

   If you are used to lecturing, pre-recorded lectures have the advantage
of allowing you to teach as you usually would. However, students may find
watching a pre-recorded video of you dull, so be sure to let your personality
come through as you teach and avoid coming across as scripted. Keep your
videos short (Myers, 2014)! A 5- to 7-minute video is sufficient, and if you
have a longer lecture, it is good to break it into smaller pieces. Smaller videos
are easier for you to upload and easier for students to watch (Myers, 2014).
Search your lessons for where they naturally break into smaller units suitable
for presentation in short videos (Myers, 2014). When you are recording
yourself, speak like students are listening! If students are taking notes from
your lectures, speak slowly enough that students can write without pausing
the video. While students have the option of backing up the video, if they
missed something, they will not be happy about having to do that, so it is
best to speak at a pace at which students can easily follow.

   To quickly use a pre-recorded lecture format for teaching online, try an
approach that uses a lecture video, a quiz, and a live discussion (Johnson,
2020). First, create your module in your course management system. Then,

                                                                Student-Centered Learning Online | 57
create a video of your lecture (Johnson, 2020). You can create a video of
your slides, where you provide narration (Johnson, 2020); or a video where
students see you, or that feature some props or materials you are using
to teach that day. A low-point-value online quiz posted on your course
management system can serve as a way to check student understanding
(Johnson, 2020). Finally, if you wish, you can engage students in a virtual class
discussion using a course management system, where you and your students
are all online at once (Johnson, 2020). Alternatively, you can have several
such meetings to accommodate small group discussions.

   To quickly create an online course using a live discussion format, you can
use a read, journal, discussion approach (Johnson, 2020). First, create your
module in a course management system, making its title easy for students to
identify (Johnson, 2020). Then, upload any reading material, videos, or links
you wish to include in your module (Johnson, 2020). Let students reflect on
the content through a reflection assignment (Johnson, 2020) or a discussion
online in the course management system. Finally, send students a link for
your virtual class meeting via a synchronous web-based platform, and have
students discuss the material they read (Johnson, 2020).

   Keeping the live-class feel to your course by regularly meeting using a
web-based synchronous platform offers the ability to change gears and
immediately address a student's question. The lesson's interactivity benefits
the participants as the lesson flows in the direction of student interest,
making space for student-centered learning to occur (McCarthy, 2015).
However, connectivity issues can be problematic for you or the students,
so you should have a secondary plan to use the chat feature or different
software if connectivity is a little spotty. To preserve student privacy,
consider giving your students the option of not turning on their video
cameras and only participating through audio or chat.

   A way to teach without posting a video of your teaching is to post links,
annotated slides (Cohn & Seltzer, 2020), articles, or publicly available videos
(Myers, 2014) for students to review and discuss. The flexibility inherent
in using a diversity of posted materials is especially helpful when teaching
students with varying interests. If you use a discussion, it is useful to guide
students on length, content, and classroom standards for interaction with
others. You can support standards rules for discussions by addressing them
on the syllabus, sending a class announcement, participating in the debate
yourself, or posting your guidelines for conversations along with the
assignment. You may find it beneficial to share a discussion rubric along with

58 | Student-Centered Learning Online
your discussion assignment so that expectations are clear. You can adapt the
read, journal, discussion format (Johnson, 2020) to teaching without posting
any videos of yourself by making the class discussion online-only, such as in
a discussion board of your course management system.

Student-Centered Practices for Engaging
Students from the Start

At the beginning of your online class, your students may not know each
other. Some may be friends taking the course together, but others may
not know who else is in the class. An excellent way to begin the semester
is to have students introduce themselves, even if it is through an online
discussion board. For a large class, it may be helpful to break students into
smaller groups, such as online discussion board groups or breakout rooms,
and have introductions within the group. The introductions show who is in
the class, and many students will share details about why they are in the
class. From a teaching perspective, this information is absolute gold because
it helps in understanding how learning can be adapted to meet the students'
needs in the class. The student's active role in the construction of knowledge
within the classroom's social environment is a characteristic of student-
centered learning (Peters, 2009).

   Another exercise that I find very useful was taught to me by the head of
Virginia Tech's Graduate Teaching Scholars Program. This exercise involves
participatory planning (Sullivan, 1996), with students sharing what they
would most like to learn in the class. Similar to the introductions, student
comments give insight into their reasons for taking the course, while
providing the educator with direct statements about the students' top
interests. Participatory planning is excellent for helping me adapt my lessons
to teach to the specific content that most interests the class, enabling
learner input to drive the direction of the course (Peters, 2009). At the
beginning of the semester, I ask students to provide this information, and I
make a note of those interests so I am aware of what they want to know.

                                                                Student-Centered Learning Online | 59
Tips for Student-Centered Beginnings

   Ask your students what THEY want to know--let them help decide
      course content (Schunk, 2012).

   Give students choices about how they would prefer class to be
      administered (Peters, 2009).

   Use think-pair-share activities. Yes, you can do this online! Encourage
      interaction among students in small online groups and share them with
      the rest of the class.

   Be a facilitator, not a lecturer. Facilitate open-ended, inquiry-based
      discussions (Peters, 2009).

   Encourage students to offer up their ideas and new ways of
      approaching a topic (Brown, 2008).

   Encourage critical thinking over memorization.

Adapting Your Teaching to Work Well Online

Perhaps you feel uneasy about adapting your teaching to the online
environment. This feeling may be especially true if you are used to face-to-
face lecturing and observing the understanding on the faces of your students
as you speak. You may have to make some changes to the way you typically
teach, but these changes do not have to be significant. Interaction between
teachers and students can occur through online discussions, email, teacher-
student messages/chats (Bennett & Lockyer, 2004), and synchronous web-
based platform meetings. Use the information presented above to guide you
in choosing the best options for your online teaching. Even if you make
a mistake, keeping a positive attitude will help you be a successful online
teacher. Confidence, adaptability, and positivity are characteristics
identified in online facilitators conducive to supporting student
understanding and meaning-making (Salmon, 2000, as cited in Bennett &
Lockyer, 2004). So stay positive about your online teaching!

   A great way of connecting with students in an online class is by being you.
That means that you should not aim for perfectionism, as nobody is perfect,
and you will only end up disappointing yourself and your students. Many of

60 | Student-Centered Learning Online
your students are looking up to you and are rooting for you to teach the class
well. If it is your first time teaching an online course, you may make some
mistakes, but remember that students are surprisingly forgiving when they
know you are trying. You do not have to try to get a teaching award on your
first try in online teaching. Your attitude will shape the students' experiences
in the course. If you have a good, positive attitude, students will notice and
they will appreciate that you are yourself even if everything does not go
perfectly the first time. When you stay positive, it also helps your students
to focus less on content transmission and more on learning (Salmon, 2000,
as cited in Bennett & Lockyer, 2004). This positive behavior helps students
connect better with you and reduce the psychological distance between
students and teachers. It also helps mitigate the potential for the online
course to become impersonal. Even online students want to learn from a
person, not a robot.

Who Takes Online Courses?

The differences between online teaching and face-to-face teaching also
affect who you teach. The average student you see in an online class can be
different than those who may enroll in your traditional courses. One study
shows that compared to other majors, business majors are more likely to
take online classes (Mann, 2012). Those in the bench sciences are the least
likely to take online courses (Mann, 2012). Students residing out-of-state
are more likely to take online classes than in-state students, and freshman
are more likely to take online coursework than seniors (Mann, 2012). Such
differences in the types of students you see in online classes can affect how
you teach the class. In my own experience teaching online, I have noted a
higher number of students who are unconventional and have busy schedules,
such as people who work full- or part-time. More of my students in my
online teaching practice have been student-athletes. Other students took
heavy course loads and needed the convenience of not showing up to a
regularly scheduled class.

                                                                Student-Centered Learning Online | 61
   What does a different type of student mean for your instruction? Teaching
a mixture of nontraditional students and traditional students means you will
need to be flexible. Here are some tips from my online teaching practice:

   Have regular days when assignments are due, so students always
      expect to turn in something those days.

   Contact any stragglers as soon as you notice that they are falling
      behind. You are often the only teacher who reaches out to them.

   Message the class at least once a week to keep them on track,
      reminding them of what is due that week. Students appreciate this
      reminder.

   Issues with module access, course requirements, or personal
      challenges the students face are often emailed to me by students within
      24 hours of my weekly message to my class. From my experience
      teaching online, I can say that, but for my reminder message, some
      students in my online courses would not have remembered to begin
      their online assignments until it was too late.

Teaching Labs Online

When teaching your lab face-to-face, students have direct access to the
lab equipment, so how do you teach a lab online? Advantages to teaching
labs online include the obvious: Students cannot easily hurt their peers
or you if they are taking the lab virtually. If they get bored, they will not
likely start fiddling with the Bunsen burners, or playing with the chemicals,
as students in a face-to-face lab might. Disadvantages include the lack of
direct access to laboratory equipment (Taft, 2020), so students may not
feel that they are getting the first-hand experience of watching laboratory
procedures. When possible, and especially if students emulate you as you
lead an experiment, build your virtual lab around items that they can find
in their homes (Taft, 2020). Avoid using a cookbook approach to your lab,
which removes student decision making from the process and is teacher-
centered rather than student-centered (Peters, 2010). Be mindful of what
is missing in a virtual lab and fill in your teaching gap. Items with scents,
such as certain chemicals, molds, and even farm animals, cannot be smelled

62 | Student-Centered Learning Online
virtually. Position your camera so that students can see small items you want
them to notice, such as a glass slide. Provide a detailed description of any
missing elements, or those less accessible to their senses, due to the virtual
format of the lab. It won't just make the lab more real for the students; it will
make it more fun.

Student-Centered Learning Online: Building
Community

Building community is important to any classroom. However, in an online
class, it is especially important to build community. Students taking online
classes can feel that the human element of learning is lessened in the online
class format. Sometimes, students just crave the experience of talking with
others when learning. There are several ways in which you can make the
online classroom feel less mechanical and impersonal, and in which you can
build classroom community.

Encourage Interaction

There are various ways that you can encourage interaction in your
classroom. You can build classroom community, increase student decision
making, use group work, and harness online platforms to mimic the back-
and-forth dynamic of a face-to-face classroom. Below, I discuss each of
these items in more detail.

   One way that you can build community is by encouraging students to
increase their interactions with each other. Engagement activities can help
students connect with one another and feel that the class matters to them
(VT TLOS, n.d.). Some ways you might increase student engagement through
student-centered activities include using roleplay, simulation, service
learning, drama, a simulation, and problem-based learning (Freiberg
&Driscoll, 1999). Examples of applying a few of these suggestions include
giving students an exercise where they each take on a character surrounding
an issue related to your material or having students work to solve a real-

                                                                Student-Centered Learning Online | 63
world problem (Freiberg & Driscoll, 1999). In online discussions, you may
consider assigning your students different titles for roles. For example, roles
you may give include those of a responder, a summarizer, or someone who
introduces additional resources (Cohn & Seltzer, 2020). Each student takes
on their role while participating in the discussion. A responder responds
to others in the discussion, and the summarizer breaks larger selections or
comments down into more easily digestible statements. The person who
introduces additional resources finds material that helps support the debate,
such as an article about the topic. Having roles helps structure the
discussion while providing each student a good opportunity to contribute to
its depth.

   Give your online students choices and provide room for them to assist
with class decision-making to help make your class more student centered
(Brown, 2008). The opportunity to make decisions translates into making
the course feel less electronic and more people centered. Many instructors
use online discussions as assignments. When I use online discussions to get
my students engaged, I provide several prompts for students and allow each
student to choose which prompt(s) they wish to discuss. Letting the student
choose their prompt will translate into each one engaging in the discussion
they are the most interested in, leading to a richer conversation. Permitting
students to choose their prompt adds enthusiasm to the class, and seeing
who chooses which prompt makes the course more interesting for everyone.

   Using group work in your online teaching can help increase student
interaction (VT TLOS, 2020). It is important when considering the use of
group work to keep in mind those aspects of group work that drive students
crazy. Many students can relate to the experience of being the only one
in the group willing to do the work for the group project. Others may
have had the anxiety-laden experience working with a group that does not
begin the assignment until the night before it needs to be submitted. Other
times, students in the group simply do not get along. Online classes have
the potential to magnify these issues. Communication is not always optimal
among students in an online course, and students may conduct all group
project communications via email. Because students may not ever see each
other's faces in an online class, it can be easier for them to depersonalize
communications with their fellow group members. Having students interact
will promote connectivity among students and raise student perceptions of

64 | Student-Centered Learning Online
the course as a whole (VT TLOS, 2020). You can do this by placing students in
small discussion groups online, which helps them connect as a small group
while not feeling overwhelmed by comments of the whole class.

   Dividing students into small groups helps them have and enjoy deeper
discussions than if the whole class engages in a debate. Research
demonstrates that students perceive such groups as better for developing
their critical thinking than a larger class discussion (Hamann, Pollock, &
Wilson, 2012). Although small groups are beneficial, even whole-class
discussions can be helpful to students, because they assist students in more
clearly understanding concepts (Hamann et al., 2012). An issue with teaching
online while using discussions is that they can lack the back-and-forth of an
in-person conversation (Hamann et al., 2012). Therefore, it is important to be
creative in getting students to interact. A way that I, and other colleagues, do
this is to ask students to post their initial response to the discussion prompt
early in the week's lesson. Reactions to others are due later in the week, and
students are encouraged to discuss more than what is "required." Setting
up online discussions in this way helps students to present their ideas, and
then answer the points of others, using the online discussion board, while
mimicking the back-and-forth dynamic of a face-to-face conversation.

   Other ways that you can help your class to develop that same back-
and-forth seen in a live discussion include having students participate in
a small group chat or discussion using a synchronous web-based platform.
I have also seen good results in a class when students record videos of
themselves using the course management system's video feature to present
their responses to discussion prompts. Give students helpful feedback on
those discussions and on any other assignments you give them online.
Students are more motivated to learn when they receive personalized
outreach (Boretz, 2012).

Tips for Student-Centered Teaching Online

   Ask students questions! (Brown, 2008).
   Make the course personal by creating options for students to apply the

      coursework to themselves, their goals, or what is going on in their own
      lives.
   Do not give direct answers. Lead students to solutions (Brown, 2008).

                                                                Student-Centered Learning Online | 65
   Use activities like case studies, scenarios, and roleplaying that allow
      students to explore options, create solutions, and solve problems.

   Think carefully about your online assignments, walking yourself
      through each task and what it entails. If you feel it might be online
      busywork, the students probably will too!

   Give students personalized feedback, considering their own interests,
      goals, or aspirations. Sandwich a bad feedback sentence between two
      good feedback sentences, so it ends on a positive.

Preventing Cheating

Cheating can be a serious problem in online classes. Watson & Sottile (2010)
found that while cheating did not occur at a higher rate in online courses
than in face-to-face courses, the online students were more likely to get
answers for online exams or quizzes from others. If you post a quiz or exam
online, a student can share screenshots with other students or call their
friends and tell them the questions. It can be challenging to know if a student
is looking up the answers to an online quiz or exam. Some instructors handle
this by putting a time limit on the exam, so students do not have spare
time, but I do not personally advocate for this option, as it makes students
feel that they do not have the time to show you what you know. And why
do the assessment if the results cannot help you find out something about
what the students have learned? Some educators try to find a "sweet spot"
where the exam is tightly timed, but not too tightly. In my experience with
timed assessments online, the educator is a poor judge of the appropriate
exam length, and most underestimate how long their exams take. If you
are considering tinkering with an assessment's timing, you are probably
going down the wrong online assessment road. Read below for some better
approaches to avoiding cheating.

66 | Student-Centered Learning Online
Tips for Avoiding Cheating in Your Online Class

   Make clear what constitutes cheating (Feeney, 2017). Define cheating on
      your syllabus.

   If you have a quiz or exam, ask questions that are reasonable, not
      obscure. Obscure questions invite cheating.

   Designate all exams as open-book (Barret-Fox, 2020).
   Avoid assessing a speed-reading test. Remember, some students have

      English as a second language, while some students may have disabilities
      (which are not always diagnosed before they attend college!).
   Use questions that require students to analyze, explain, evaluate,
      create, and otherwise demonstrate their mastery of the material
      (Budhai, 2020). These strategies make their answers personalized.
   Offer low-stakes quizzes, so the likelihood of cheating is decreased
      (Feeney, 2017).
   Don't have quizzes or exams at all. Have subjective assignments
      (Watson & Sottile 2010). Have students turn in all assignments as
      discussion posts and papers, where they are required to apply the
      material they learned.

General Tips for Online Teaching

   Keep the focus on the student, not the technology.
   Remember that not every student will have taken an online course

      before. Check understanding of platforms or software you will be using.
   Be gentle with students who have internet accessibility issues. Some

      students are accessing the class on their phones.
   Resist the temptation to post too many resources. It can cause sensory

      overload when students have to view many links, articles, or videos.
   Be clear in your expectations regarding assignments, due dates, and

      policies from the start, but be flexible. Online students may be working,
      be parents, or have other responsibilities.
   Group projects can take longer to put together for online students.
      Allow more time if needed.

                                                                Student-Centered Learning Online | 67
   Communication with students can be more challenging online. Be as
      clear as you can be.

   Make yourself accessible via online office hours and regular
      communication.

   Let your personality come through in your communications with
      students.

   When you provide students written feedback, always send an
      announcement. Leaving students feedback online is only effective if
      they visit the page to read it!

   Technology does not always work the way we want it to. Ask students
      to let you know if they have issues!

   Think about whether your students have proficiency and access to
      technology, like cameras, and whether privacy issues could affect
      participation.

Conclusion and Summary

Online teaching does not have to be a challenge for new graduate teaching
assistants or professors. This chapter has outlined simple ways to make
moving a class online easier and discussed the disadvantages and advantages
of the most popular methods in which online courses are presented. It
also highlighted important points to consider when setting up an online
system to support student-centered teaching. I hope that with the student-
centered tips in this chapter, you can confidently create an online course
quickly and help keep the class's focus on your students, not the technology.

68 | Student-Centered Learning Online
     Reflection Questions

          What methods can you use to make your online class more
             engaging?

          How can you make your online class less mechanical and
             more personable?

          How can you improve communications with and among
             your online students without making the technology the
             focus?

References

Barret-Fox, R. (2020). Please do a bad job of putting your classes online.
   https://anygoodthing.com/2020/03/12/please-do-a-bad-job-of-
   putting-your-courses-online/

Bates, T. (2012). Nine steps to quality online learning: Step 1: Decide how
   you want to teach online. https://www.tonybates.ca/2012/05/06/nine-
   steps-to-quality-online-learning-step-1-decide-how-you-want-to-
   teach-online/

Bennett, S., & Lockyer, L. (2004). Becoming an online teacher: Adapting to
   a changed environment for teaching and learning in higher education.
   Educational Media International, 41(3), 231-248.

Boretz, S. (2012). Mid-semester academic interventions in a student-
   centered research university. Journal of College Reading and Learning,
   42(2), pp. 90-108. doi: 10.1080/10790195.2012.10850356

                                                                Student-Centered Learning Online | 69
Briggs, A. (2015, February 11). Ten ways to overcome barriers to student

engagement online (Academic technology: At the College of William and

Mary). https://onlinelearningconsortium.org/news_item/ten-ways-

overcome-barriers-student-engagement-online/

Brown, J. K. (2008). Student-centered instruction: Involving students in their

own education. Music Educators Journal, 94(5): 30-35.

http://www.jstor.org/stable/20685476

Budhai, S. S. (2020). Fourteen simple strategies to reduce cheating on online

examinations.  https://www.facultyfocus.com/articles/educational-

assessment/fourteen-simple-strategies-to-reduce-cheating-on-online-

examinations/

Cohn, J., & Seltzer, B. Teaching effectively during times of disruption, for SIS

and PWR. https://bit.ly/stanfordteachingdisruption

ED (2010). TEAL Center fact sheet No. 6: Student-centered learning.

https://lincs.ed.gov/sites/default/files/6%20_TEAL_Student-

Centered.pdf

Feeney, J. (2017). How to prevent cheating during online tests.

https://www.schoology.com/blog/how-prevent-cheating-during-

online-tests

Freiberg, H. J., & Driscoll, A. (1999). Universal teaching strategies (4th ed).

Pearson.

Hamann, K., Pollock, P. H., & Wilson, B. M. (2012). Assessing student

perceptions of discussions in small group, large group, and online learning

contexts. https://www.jstor.org/stable/23240342

Johnson, S. (2020). Putting your course online in a hurry.

https://www.vanderbilt.edu/brightspace/2020/03/06/putting-some-

of-your-course-content-online-in-a-hurry-we-have-resources-for-you/

Kamenetz, A. (2020). "Panic-gogy": Teaching online classes during the

coronavirus pandemic. https://www.npr.org/2020/03/19/817885991/

panic-gogy-teaching-online-classes-during-the-coronavirus-pandemic

Mann, J. T., & Henneberry, S. R. (2012). What characteristics of college

students influence their decisions to select online courses? Online Journal

of  Distance   Learning                Administration,  15(4),  1-14.

https://www.westga.edu/~distance/ojdla/winter154/

mann_henneberry154.html

McCarthy, J. (2015). Student-centered learning: It starts with the teacher.

https://www.edutopia.org/blog/student-centered-learning-starts-with-

teacher-john-mccarthy

70 | Student-Centered Learning Online
Myers, S. (2014). 6 tips for creating engaging video lectures that students will

actually watch. https://teaching.temple.edu/edvice-exchange/2016/03/

6-tips-creating-engaging-video-lectures-students-will-actually-watch

Peters, E.E. (2010). Shifting to a student-centered science classroom: An

exploration of teacher and student changes in perceptions and practices.

Journal of Science Teacher Education, 21(1), 329-349. doi: 10.1007/

s10972-009-9178-z

Schunk, D. (2012) Learning Theories: An Educational Perspective (6th ed.).

Pearson.

Sullivan, K. (1996). Middle school program and participatory planning drive

school design. Middle School Journal, 27(4), 3-7. https://doi.org/10.1080/

00940771.1996.11495901

Taft, H. R. (2020). How to quickly (and safely) move a course online.

https://www.chronicle.com/article/how-to-quickly-and-safely-move-a-

lab-course-online/

University of Colorado (2007). Assessment and instructional alignment.

http://www.ucdenver.edu/faculty_staff/faculty/center-for-faculty-

development/Documents/tutorials/Assessment/module3/index.htm

VT TLOS (n.d.) Building and maintaining a classroom community in an online

environment. https://teaching.vt.edu/content/dam/teaching_vt_edu/

Converting%20F2F%20activities%20to%20online_edited.pdf

VT TLOS (2020). Setting student groups and group work. https://tlos.vt.edu/

continuity.html

Watson, G.R., & Sottile, J. (2010). Cheating in the digital age: Do students

cheat more in online courses? Online Journal of Distance Learning

Administration,         13(1).  https://mds.marshall.edu/cgi/

viewcontent.cgi?article=1000&context=eft_faculty

                                Student-Centered Learning Online | 71
5. Technology Makes It Easier

  NASIM EBADI AND GHADIR ASADI

 Introduction

  Imagine that you have a large class full of students whom you might not
  have a chance to talk with during the semester. You want all of them to be
  engaged in the class and participate in the class activities. You might also
  find undergraduate students to be very shy about participating during class
  time. Students may be especially hesitant to answer your question while
  you are teaching new material. Or, you wish to grade the assignments faster
  and give quizzes every other session without spending so much time with
  paper collection, grading, and grade entry. You might find it a tedious task
  to reply to students' emails about this week's reading list, midterm date, due
  dates, and their standing so far in the semester. A well-designed technology-
  integrated course might be the solution to your problems. Technology
  integration is a dynamic process of design, implementation, and evaluation.

How to cite this book chapter:
  Ebadi, N. and Asadi, G. 2022. Technology Makes It Easier. In: Westfall-Rudd, D.,
  Vengrin, C., and Elliott-Engel, J. (eds.) Teaching in the University: Learning from
  Graduate Students and Early-Career Faculty. Blacksburg: Virginia Tech College of
  Agriculture and Life Sciences. https://doi.org/ 10.21061/universityteaching. License:
  CC BY-NC 4.0.
  72 | Technology Makes It Easier
     This chapter will discuss...

          The opportunities and challenges related to technology
             integration.

          How to design, implement, and maintain a successful
             technology-integrated course.

          Common types of technologies that can be purposefully
             integrated.

The Motive behind Technology Integration

Technology is the knowledge or science that helps us to solve problems
(Webster, 2006). In this regard, technology can be defined in two ways: as
any change in the ways of doing things or as the tools we use to do things
more quickly and/or efficiently. For instance, some websites facilitate the
grading process for instructors. Devices, such as smartphones and laptops,
can be used for taking attendance and pop-up quizzes. Thus, in both
definitions, technology can be used in the educational environment to
facilitate the process, improve productivity, and enhance various measured
outcomes.

   Most of our students are from generation Z (born between 1996 and 2010);
they are "digital natives" and were born in a globally connected world. They
are fast decision makers who tend to record instead of taking notes, are
more interested in online examinations, and expect a lecture to "come and
entertain me" (Cilliers, 2017). Today's students prefer integrative games,
collaborative projects, and challenges over lectures and discussions
(Rothman, 2016). Additionally, quality of education has been proved to be

                                                                           Technology Makes It Easier | 73
more important than years of education and/or degree (Asadi, 2020). Thus,
students need to acquire the essential skill sets required for modern
workplaces, such as critical thinking, problem-solving, ability to keep
learning, collaboration, and digital skills (Wabisabi Learning, 2020).
Integrating technology into the course provides a learning environment for
students to develop their skill sets.

   Technology integration can be done on various scales, from playing a
video in the class to shifting the course structure so that every activity
in the class is blended with technology. Blended learning is defined as the
instructional approach that combines traditional face-to-face instruction
with technology-based instruction (Herold, 2016). In a blended learning
environment, students have control over the time, place, and method of
work (Maxwell, 2016). One might consider integrating technology into the
course only to the extent that it improves the learning environment and
matches our content and style. By incorporating technology into the class,
one can employ students' experience in the continuous use of technology to
save time and build a more suitable framework for the materials and teaching
style.

   Another important aspect of technology is that one can tailor it to fit the
needs. For instance, each Learning Management System (LMS) offers a range
of features. The instructor can integrate as many features they want into the
course, and in some cases, by combining these features, they can develop
new applications. In particular, using LMS, you can deliver the material
in different forms, such as sharing videos, audio, documents, and links to
further educational sources.In addition, by gathering immediate feedback
from students using discussion panels or direct messages through LMS, the
instructor can take customized action regarding the subject matter.

   Free multiplace multitime accessibility is another advantage of a
technology-based learning environment. In many cases, technologies are
free, or they have a free version with limited features, and contents are
accessible in all places via the internet, at all times, and on multiple devices.
For instance, online tutorial videos create opportunities for students to be
self-educators and acquire new skills. Moreover, technologies can assist in
structuring and managing large classes in many ways, such as monitoring
attendance, administering quizzes, grading exams, assessing, summarizing
students' opinions, playing games, and last but not least, sharing content.
Integrating technology is useful for instructors in several other ways,

74 | Technology Makes It Easier
including improving communication, collaboration, time management, and
in the availability of instructional resources such as Open Educational
Resources (OER) and applications.

   There are two important benefits of using technology that need to be
highlighted: using technology to improve diversity and inclusion, and to
design a syllabus that extensively uses technology.

                                                                           Technology Makes It Easier | 75
     Diversity

        One important feature of technology is the ability to introduce
     different delivery methods specifically designed to address the
     needs of different audiences--a powerful instrument to enhance
     diversity and inclusion. In that regard, technology can be of great
     help in increasing accessibility and providing equal opportunity for
     all students. For instance, one can caption both the lecture and
     other multimedia for access by deaf or hard of hearing people.
     Alternatively, facilitating online submission using voice recognition
     tools helps blind or partially sighted students more easily submit
     assignments. Students with anxiety have a hard time taking notes
     and following the flow of the class. Using online materials, slides,
     recording the sessions, providing audio files, and encouraging note
     sharing between students helps students with anxiety stay calm in
     the class and focus on learning. These strategies can ensure the
     student has both all the materials and the opportunity to review
     them later on.

        Another benefit of technology is helping students to pass cross-
     cultural barriers. For instance, students with different cultural
     backgrounds (e.g., international students) might have difficulty
     participating in the class activities for various reasons, such as fear
     of not being understood because of speaking with an accent or a
     lack of confidence. Using technology in class helps these students
     by providing an engagement opportunity without pushing their
     comfort boundaries. Moreover, technology allows you to present
     the same materials in different formats such as text, pictures and
     graphs, audio, and video. This enables students with diverse
     learning styles and attitudes to connect themselves with the
     teaching materials through a channel that better suits them.

76 | Technology Makes It Easier
 Syllabus Development

   A syllabus is an important first opportunity for technology to jump
in and benefit both the instructor and the students. A
technologically integrated syllabus has many advantages. First, it is
easily available to students during the semester, as opposed to the
traditional paper distribution format which most students will lose
in the second week. Second, it is a source file for all other
technology that you are using. For example, if you are using an
application for taking quizzes in your classroom, or, if you require
students to purchase an integrated account with their textbook to
do the assignments, the syllabus is the place to provide instruction
and hyperlinks for students to refer to. Third, with most LMS
available on the market, you have an option for an online syllabus.
Using that option enables you to connect all of your contents with
the syllabus and students will be able to walk through the syllabus
during the semester. You can link all of your slides, extra readings,
external links, assignments, and due dates in one place. You can
divide your syllabus into weeks, parts, or chapters, and you can set
reminders for students regarding your class progress, such as a
notification for assignments' due dates. Finally, a technologically
integrated syllabus makes your course transition much easier. You
can easily migrate from one semester to another by a few clicks and
by making some minor changes in due dates and links.

                                                                     Technology Makes It Easier | 77
Technology Integration and Challenges

Integrating technology is a broad concept that can cover many techniques
and tools. Having technology as an integral part of the classroom is not
a one-time effort to facilitate teaching and engagement. Technology
integration is a dynamic process of design, implementation, and evaluation.
However, integrating technology into the classroom is a challenging task.
Instructors complain that using laptops or smartphones during the lecture
increases the possibility of distraction. Moreover, technology does not
always work correctly; we have all had this experience at least once in our
life. Therefore, being solely dependent on technology is not a good strategy.

   Lack of technical support is another critical challenge regarding
technology integration. Having proper technical support in terms of both
training and maintenance is vital for technology integration. Finally,
technology advances quickly, and keeping yourself and students updated is a
continuous investment. Some of the technologies introduced in this chapter
will likely change or even become obsolete over time. It is the responsibility
of instructors to keep themselves current with technological advancements.
In this section, each step and its associated challenges has been introduced.

Design

Engagement theory suggests that creating a meaningful learning
environment requires three principles: collaborative effort, project-based
assignments, and non-academic focus, that is, having an outside-of-the-
classroom focus (Kearsley & Shneiderman, 1998). Technology facilitates all
of these principles. In particular, technologies such as Google Drive and
communication-based applications enable collaboration by easing content
sharing and group meetings outside of the classroom. As discussed below
under types of technology, most of the technologies support both individual
and group communications. These technologies enable instructors to easily
track, assess, and improve teamwork among students. Instructors can also
help students practice solving real-world problems by using online
resources such as free data sets or student-based industry projects.

78 | Technology Makes It Easier
   Depending on the objectives of the instructor, she can use technology at
different levels. Sometimes technology only helps to facilitate an old activity
like taking a quiz or grading the exams. Instead, the instructor can design
a new (in or outside of the class) activity or assignment by focusing on
higher critical thinking levels. In particular, as Bloom's technology taxonomy
(Sneed, 2016) suggests, asking students to create new content such as by
blogging or making a podcast is more valuable for students than merely
playing a video during the lecture. This is mainly because creating new
content requires high levels of critical thinking that include connecting the
ideas and developing new ideas. The instructor can also engage students in
the design procedure by asking their opinions on what they want to learn,
how they want to learn, and inviting them to share any successful experience
with a particular technology.

Implementation

Successful implementation of technology requires addressing several key
aspects. The instructor needs to ensure the availability of the technology
in use. For instance, in using a new application to facilitate students'
collaboration, the first step is to make sure the application is readily available
for all students. Moreover, students might need to receive training and
technical support from either the instructor or someone else. In particular,
if the instructor uses a Windows (Mac) device, it is essential to make sure
she knows how to implement the same process on a Mac (Windows) device.
Additionally, financial constraint is one of the crucial challenges of successful
technology adoption. To overcome financial constraints, it is better to use
more OER and free technology.

   In addition, it is better to always have a backup strategy in case the
technology was not available to use for any reason. For instance, having
a pen-and-paper option or downloading online materials beforehand can
reduce the instructor's stress. In this regard, another consideration with
the use of technology is that anyone can easily be caught up in using
technologies up to the point where they forget why they started using
it in the first place. For instance, excessive use of virtual communication

                                                                           Technology Makes It Easier | 79
applications may cause students to lose real-world communication skills (Al-
Bataineh & Brooks, 2003). Thus, the best approach is to treat technology as a
tool, not as an end in itself.

Evaluation

Evaluation of technology integration takes two different yet interrelated
approaches. First, in a broader sense, one can measure how technology
integration affects the achievement of learning objectives. Second, one can
evaluate every step of the integration, including design and implementation.
Gathering feedback from students and peers regularly is an important part
of a successful technology-integration process. Instructors can use multiple
sources for feedback, such as direct feedback from students, peer
observation, and self-reflection. Feedback can be both visual or verbal. For
instance, by using polls, discussion panels, or watching student-created
videos, instructors can gather useful feedback from their students.

Types of Technology

One feature of new technologies is their flexibility and the interchangeability
between different structures and configurations. Thus, categorizing
technologies in the education industry is useful but not accurate. For
instance, LMS integrate data from many different platforms with different
capabilities, options, and uses. Here, categorization is based on the main
instrument intended in the design of the introduced technology. In each
case, you will receive a description of the other available types and options
as well. Additionally, only the technologies that one might use in a class
environment to communicate with students inside or outside of the class
or provide materials has been discussed. We deliberately do not discuss
other resources available for instructors that have been provided by new
technologies like educational multimedia on YouTube and elsewhere, free
courses with free textbooks, and other learning materials on OpenStax,
Oasis, and Lumen.

80 | Technology Makes It Easier
   Technology has generally been divided into three groups. Web-based
technologies are those technologies that require you to have access to a
personal computer, laptop, or tablet to best use the technology. Although
these types of technologies are accessible using a smartphone, to develop
and manage the content and communicate with the technology to use it to
its full potential, you need to use a personal computer. The second type of
technology is application-based technology. Although technically web-based
technologies include application-based technologies, we define the latter
as a technology in which instructors and students only need a smartphone
to use the technology to its full potential. Again, in general one can use a
personal computer to access these technologies as well, but a smartphone
does the job best. Finally, instrument-based technology requires instructors
and students to use an external device to use the technology. The main
difference here is that, despite the first two types of technology, usually
there is no need for the internet, and the device is enough for the
communication between the instructor and students.

   Technologies can be categorized based on other characterizations as well.
For example, in an era where higher education is very expensive, it would
be advantageous for technology to be free or very cheap for students. Then,
the pricing options can differentiate the technologies from each other. One
common strategy between the developers of new technologies is to provide
pricing options or second-degree price discrimination. By providing a range
of services within a predefined bundle, one has a choice to choose the
price-service correspondence. Since the pricing options are changing based
on the competition in the market and the emergence of new rivals in the
ever-innovative and competitive environment of technology, pricing has not
been a source of comparison here. The existence of a free version has been
mentioned and interested readers can follow the provided links in the list of
references and find the current pricing options for each technology at any
time.

   Another way of categorizing technology is to group them based on their
use in the class environment. As it will be explained later, some technologies
are designed to develop and manage content, some to collect students'
ideas and comments, some for quiz or test administration, and some for
communication and collaboration, etc. Although it is a useful categorization,
there are a vast number of technologies that do two or more of these
functions simultaneously. For instance, most Learning Management Systems
potentially can provide all the mentioned services, one way or another. In

                                                                           Technology Makes It Easier | 81
other words, a grouping based on the usage cannot partition technologies at
all. Here, the different services each technology provides has been discussed,
and one can connect the dots for categorizing based on the services each
technology offers. Table 1 summarizes the introduced technologies in this
chapter.

82 | Technology Makes It Easier
                                 Table 5.1 Features of technologies described in this chapter.

Technology  Free     Paid        Multimedia  Other    MultipleChoice Verbal                     OneonOne  Group
            Version  Version(s)  Sharing     Content
                                             Sharing  Assessment  Assessment Communication Communication

                                             Web-Based

Canvas                                                                                                           

Blackboard                                                                                                       

Moodle                                                                                                           

Google                                                                                                           
Classroom

Google Components                                                                                                

Polls Everywhere                                                  

Mentimeter                                                        

Padlet                                       

ExamSoft                                                          

Zoom                                                                                                             

Skype                                                                                                            

Slack                                                                                                            

Join Me                                                                                                          
Pear Deck                             

Loom                                      

                 Application-Based

Kahoot                                

Top Hat                                   

Quizlet    

GroupMe                                   

Band                                      

Flipgrid                                  

Discord                                   

Whatsapp                                  

Telegram                                  

                 Instrument-Based

Iclicker                                  
Web-Based Technology

Web-based technology is one of the most flexible technologies and it
currently dominates the learning industry. The main advantage of this type
of technology is its adaptability and potential to offer new services.
Moreover, most web-based technology can host its own application-based
technology, making it more user-friendly and accessible. Here, we introduce
a few prominent web-based technologies to build a ground for the reader to
choose among the list here or find one on the web.

Learning Management System

A Learning Management System (LMS) is an online platform in which firms
and/or instructors can manage and organize learning materials for their
audiences. LMS consists typically of a predefined setup that enables
instructors to create and manage content; create and manage different types
of assessments; and monitor, grade, and provide feedback on students'
progress. Moreover, an LMS provides an opportunity for collaboration and
integration with other learning portals. All universities now have an online
LMS for course management. From the authors' experiences, the best
practice in using the LMS system is three-fold.

 1. Keep your class page neat and straightforward so students can easily
      find anything they need. You can do this by creating folders, sections,
      and cross-references.

2. Put all contents online. Students should have access to slides,
      assignments, extra readings, useful links, data sets, etc., on the LMS.

3. Do not push it too hard. It is tempting to use all the LMS system
      capabilities, but technology integration has an optimum level. It can
      quickly get overwhelming for students to learn about different aspects
      of the technologies. Only use the part of your LMS system that makes
      you and your students' life more manageable.

                                                                          Technology Makes It Easier | 85
In choosing a good LMS, institutions look at the pricing, scalability of the
platform with the size of the institution, availability of an intuitive
customizable user interface, compatibility with plug-ins offered by external
third-party developers, existence of a supportive community, and availability
of a high-quality smartphone application. Here are some well-known LMS
currently on the market.

   Canvas has a very intuitive and flexible environment with all the desirable
features of a standard LMS system that have been mentioned. Moreover, it
allows instructors and students to communicate instantly, lets the students
peer review each others' assignments, and has a discussion forum for each
class. Although it is continuously improving, one can catch up with the
new changes through the official website or ask questions on the Canvas
Community. The Canvas smartphone applications, which help instructors,
students, and even parents to have easy access to the provided materials in
the original platform, increase the accessibility of Canvas.

   Blackboard allows you to share files with your students, contact them, and
monitor their progress. It has many other features that are expanding over
time. Similar to Canvas, one can get introduced to the platform, catch up
with new features, and/or resolve issues by using the website to connect
with the Blackboard Community. Blackboard also has smartphone
applications.

   Moodle is also getting instructors' attention. It is easily adapted to
different teaching styles, contents, and fields. It has quite a few applications
for easy access on smartphones, and more importantly, its free version
provides a lot of options. Moodle is open-source and has a viable community
as well.

   Google has developed its own LMS called Google Classroom. Although
Google Classroom is in its early years, it has great potential considering its
integration with Gmail, Google Drive, Form, Sheet, Docs, Slides, Meet, and
Groups. It is only free for schools already using Google Apps, but due to the
cost, it is not hard for an individual instructor to buy.

86 | Technology Makes It Easier
Google Components

Using Google Classroom is not free, but other Google products and
applications can be beneficial, and they are free of charge. Here are a few
tips on how to use Google products in a classroom setup. Use Google Drive
to share a folder or a file with your class. Use Forms to create a simple
public or anonymous response or polls from your student and run a quiz in
your class or collect your students' comments and suggestions. Use Google
Sheets, Docs, and Slides to share content with your students. Finally, you can
use Google Groups to create a group for your class and use it as a tool to
quickly access your students through email, for example.

Tools for Assessment and Engagement

Many students are shy about expressing their ideas in the classroom,
especially for new content. Students are often hesitant to suggest what
seems an "off the wall" idea or are afraid they might choose the wrong
answer, both of which could end up embarrassing them in front of their
classmates. Technology can help students engage with the material without
forcing them to move away from their comfort zone. Using the assessment
and engagement tools, students can make comments, evaluate their learning
progress, and participate in quizzes without feeling judged or embarrassed.

   One handy technology in this category is the Poll Everywhere platform.
With this platform, which like the other one, has a smartphone application,
you can run polls in the class with a variety of choice types. Moreover, you
can instantly get results and analyze them using graphs, charts, and other
available options. It is only free for very small classes (currently the limit is 25
students), but there is a continuum of pricing options. Other websites help
you to create content as well as administer quizzes. Mentimeter and Padlet
have predesigned tests and content that make the instructors' life easier.
ExamSoft provides a platform that enables the instructor to administer tests
easily. More importantly, it provides a detailed assessment tool instructors
can use to evaluate learning progress, quality of the exam questions (it can

                                                                           Technology Makes It Easier | 87
even evaluate the quality of the curriculum). The same services exist for
students to follow their progress and find the concepts that need more
attention.

Video Conferencing Tools

We are writing this book in a time when COVID-19 forced us to stay at home.
Halfway through the spring 2020 semester, almost all universities canceled
all physical in-person classrooms and moved online. One technology that
enabled them to do so was video conferencing. With these technologies,
you can experience a virtual classroom, present from your slides, use a
blackboard, and talk with your students. Most of these technologies require
personal computers, with smartphone applications that can support the
essential functions. Zoom, Skype, Slack, and Join Me are among the most
used applications for these purposes.

Add-on

There are plenty of add-ons that can be combined with Google and
Microsoft products to help you conduct quizzes or collect students'
responses to quizzes. For example, Pear Deck can be added to Google Slides
or Microsoft PowerPoint and by creating quizzes, adding videos and
multimedia, and sharing notes with the students, engage the student within
the class, or students in remote or online sessions with the materials. Other
add-ons (e.g., Loom) are available for your browser or as a separate software
that enables you to send videos to your students and colleagues.

88 | Technology Makes It Easier
Application-Based Technology

Application-based technologies are those technologies that are best or most
delivered by smartphone applications. Students tend to be easily distracted
in the classroom environment, and instructors can keep them engaged with
a variety of both content and its presentation. Improvement in
communication technology has motivated many people to buy a
smartphone, and no matter how much you oppose the use of smartphones
in the class environment, you cannot deny they have made a wide variety
of learning content and procedures available for free or nearly free. As we
mentioned before, you can almost always use personal computers or tablets
to access the same services as well.

Assessment and Engagement

Some application-based technologies can be used for assessment, playing
games, and sharing learning content--for example, if you need to play a
game with students, to conduct a short quiz every session, or to assign
a challenging in-class assignment that keeps students engaged in the
classroom. Ask your students to download Kahoot! on their phone and you
can create multiple types of quizzes for class or assign a project for home.
You have the option to use the predesigned games, a question bank,
duplicate your existing course, add media contents to your course, and
many other cool features. Kahoot!'s reporting on and analysis of students'
performance, as well as a student's ability to collaborate with other Kahoot!
users, combined with a very good content management system, give Kahoot!
an advantage over other application-based technology.

   Top Hat is another application that instructors can use to design and
assign exams and quiz and create homework for the class. It could also
be integrated with the LMS systems to provide assessment feedback on
students' performance for the instructors which help the teacher to make
the necessary actions based on that. Acadly, Turning Technologies, Echo360,
Qwizdom, Ombea, Class Question, Socrative, and Arsnova provide
alternatives to Top Hat for use in taking online attendance and administering
quizzes.

                                                                          Technology Makes It Easier | 89
   Quizlet helps students and instructors to summarize the course for
improving the learning process and easier review. Moreover, students can
contribute to creating class content. Although this method's effectiveness
depends on the contents and student-specific learning characteristics, more
and more content is being developed for these types of technology.
Brainscape, Course Hero, StudyStack, and Flashcard Machine are among
Quizlet's rivals on the market.

Communication

Other applications are designed to facilitate communication, group activity,
and sharing of content. For example, you can create a GroupMe for your
class, and students can share notes with each other or ask simple questions
regarding class materials or due dates. GroupMe only needs a phone number
from each member, and like any other applications, you are instantly in
touch with all of your students. As the system works like a group chat, not
necessarily relying on the internet, it is a very easy and efficient method
for your students to find peers and create a study group. Moreover, some
of its features do not require continuous access to the internet either. For
texting, you do not even need a smartphone. Thus, with a bare minimum of
a phone, you have access to all of your students, and they have a continuous
connection with each other. As a caution to readers, we encourage you
to review your campus' policies regarding software access to student
information. Your campus may have restrictions on the use of this type of
technology.

   The Band application is another useful application for connecting a group
of people for collaboration and content sharing. Band has the feature of
highlighting important messages by showing them at the top of the board,
notifying members of important messages or a specific date, monitoring the
readers (or as they phrase it, "keeping members accountable,") and many
other features.

   Some applications are designed to create content in multimedia format
in the educational environment. Flipgrid, for example, was designed by
Microsoft to create videos. There are quite a few other applications that
can be used for communication in text, voice, and video, sharing content

90 | Technology Makes It Easier
in different formats, and direct calls between members, including Discord,
Whatsapp, and Telegram, and one can find a dozen more on the internet as
well.

Instrument-Based Technology

With all these smartphone applications, it seems an old idea to ask students
to buy an extra device for class communication. However, instrument-based
technologies are still in use, and universities support instructors in using
these devices. One advantage of these instruments is your confidence in
their accuracy when using them as a tool to monitor class participation.

Iclicker

Instructors usually use Iclicker to monitor class participation or conduct
multiple-choice quizzes in the class. The new version of Iclicker has a
keypad, and students can submit verbal answers as well. Moreover,
instructors can give students the option to use smartphone applications,
which makes the technology cheaper.

Summary

This chapter explains the opportunities and challenges related to technology
integration in the classroom. Modern classrooms where the instructor and
the students utilize new technologies are crucial. The most important
benefits of integrating technology into the classroom include developing
digital skills; improving learning content; incorporating various educational
sources; increasing engagement, accessibility, and inclusion; and
overcoming cultural barriers. However, there are many challenges, such as
creating opportunities for distraction, lack of technical support, and drastic
technological advancement. Successful technology integration requires a

                                                                           Technology Makes It Easier | 91
dynamic process that mainly focuses on instruction objectives. We have
introduced and described many technologies that can help instructors adapt
to the new technology-integrated teaching environment; these are
summarized in Table 5.1. In the end, each instructor needs to answer a few
questions to determine how to use the knowledge she gathered from this
chapter.

     Reflection Questions

          How can technology help you to achieve your goals?
          What kinds of technology do you want to use?
          What is the appropriate level of technology integration for

             your class?
          How you want to assess your technology integration at the

             end of the semester to fine tune your strategies in the future?
          Answering these questions and others that can be added

             depending on the specific context, enable the instructor to
             use the technology to its fullest capability.

References

Acetone Designs. (2021). Acadly. https://www.acadly.com/ .
Al-Bataineh, A., & Brooks, L. (2003). Challenges, advantages, and

   disadvantages of instructional technology in the community college
   classroom. Community College Journal of Research & Practice, 27(6),
   473-484. https://doi.org/10.1080/713838180.

92 | Technology Makes It Easier
Asadi, G. (2020). Parents' investments in the quality of education: the case
   of Ghana. Education Economics, 28(6), 621-646. https://doi.org/10.1080/
   09645292.2020.1822788

BAND. (2021). BAND. https://band.us/en.
Blackboard. (n.d.). Blackboard. https://www.blackboard.com/try.
Bold Learning Solutions. (2021). Brainscape. https://www.brainscape.com/.
Canvas Network. (n.d.). Canvas. https://www.canvas.net/.
Cilliers, E. J. (2017). The challenge of teaching generation Z. PEOPLE:

   International Journal of Social Sciences, 3(1), 188-198.
   https://grdspublishing.org/index.php/people/article/view/322.
ClassQuestion. (2019). ClassQuestion. https://classquestion.com/.
Course Hero, Inc. (2021). Course Hero. https://www.coursehero.com/.
Culatta, R. (2020). Addie Model. Instructional Design.org.
   https://www.instructionaldesign.org/models/addie/.
Discord. (2021). Discord. https://discord.com/.
Echo360. (2021). Echo360. https://echo360.com/.
ExamSoft Worldwide, LLC. (2021). ExamSoft. https://examsoft.com/.
Flash Card Machine, LLC. (2021). Flashcard Machine.
   https://www.flashcardmachine.com/.
Google. (n.d.). Google for Education. https://edu.google.com/products/
   classroom/.
GroupMe Inc. (2021). GroupMe. https://groupme.com/en-US/.
Herold, B. (2016). Technology in education: An overview. Education Week, 20,
   129-141. https://tedna.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/technology-
   in-education_-an-overview-education-week.pdf.
Kahoot! (2021). Kahoot! https://kahoot.com/.
Kearsley, G., & Shneiderman, B. (1998). Engagement theory: A framework
   for technology-based teaching and learning. Educational technology, 38(5),
   20-23. https://www.jstor.org/stable/44428478.
LogMeIn, Inc. (2021). Join Me. https://www.join.me/ .
Loom. (2021). Loom. https://www.loom.com/
Lumen Learning. (n.d.). Lumen. https://lumenlearning.com/.
Macmillan Learning. (2021). iClicker. https://www.iclicker.com/.
Maxwell, C. (2016, March 4). What blended learning is - and isn't. Blended
   Learning Universe. https://www.blendedlearning.org/what-blended-
   learning-is-and-isnt/.

                                                                          Technology Makes It Easier | 93
Mentimeter. (n.d.). Mentimeter. https://www.mentimeter.com/
   login?continue=/app.

Microsoft. (2021). Skype. https://www.skype.com/en/.
Microsoft. (2021). Flipgrd. https://info.flipgrid.com/.
Moodle. (n.d.). Learn Moodle. https://learn.moodle.org/.
OMBEA AB. (2021). Ombea. https://www.ombea.com/#.
Particify. (2021). Arsnova. https://arsnova.eu/.
Padlet. (n.d.). Padlet: You are beautiful. https://padlet.com/.
Pear Deck, Inc. (2021). Pear Deck. https://www.peardeck.com/.
Poll Everywhere. (n.d.). Poll Everywhere. https://edu.google.com/products/

   classroom/.
Rice University. (n.d.). OpenStax. https://openstax.org/about.
Quizlet Inc. (2021). Quizlet. https://quizlet.com/.
QWIZDOM. (2021). Qwizdom. https://qwizdom.com/.
Rothman, D. (2016). A Tsunami of learners called Generation Z.

   http://www.mdle.net/
   JoumaFA_Tsunami_of_Learners_Called_Generation_Z.pdf.
Showbie Inc. (2021). Socrative. https://www.socrative.com/.
Slack Technologies, LLC. (2021). Slack. https://slack.com/.
Sneed, O. (2016). Integrating technology with Bloom's taxonomy. Arizona
   State University. https://teachonline.asu.edu/2016/05/integrating-
   technology-blooms-taxonomy/.
StudyStack LLC. (2021). StudyStack. https://www.studystack.com/.
SUNY Geneseo's Milne Library. (n.d.). Openly Available Sources Integrated
   Search (OASIS). https://oasis.geneseo.edu/index.php.
Telegram. (2021). Telegram Messenger. https://telegram.org/.
Tophatmonocle Corp. (2021). Top Hat. https://tophat.com/.
Turning Technologies, LLC. (2021). Turning. https://www.turning.com/.
Wabisabi Learning. (2020). Ten workplace skills that will help our learners
   succeed beyond school. https://wabisabilearning.com/blogs/critical-
   thinking/10-modern-workplace-skills-students-need
Webster. Merriam-Webster online dictionary. Retrieved June, 20:2013, 2006.
WhatsApp LLC. (2021). WhatsApp. https://www.whatsapp.com/.
Zoom Video Communications, Inc. (2021). Zoom. https://zoom.us/.

94 | Technology Makes It Easier
VIGNETTE: No really, I don't
have internet

  BETHANY WOLTERS

  In 2007 and 2008, Bethany was a high school senior trying to take an online
  dual enrollment course from a local college. While most people were getting
  high speed DSL internet, in the part of the county where Bethany's family
  lived the only option was slow dialup internet even though they lived only
  an hour away from a major southeastern U.S. city. To watch the 3-4 hours of
  recorded lecture videos per week, Bethany drove to either the local library
  or a friend's house--or waited at least 30 minutes for the video to buffer on
  her family's slow internet. She had to wait until everyone else had gone to
  bed to try and watch the video lectures at home because at that time no one
  else was trying to use the phone or internet (and you cannot receive or make
  phone calls when using dial-up internet). On Tuesday nights, Bethany drove
  to a friend's house across town for an hour to participate in the synchronous
  instant messenger chat discussions. Even though it was completely text-
  based, the internet at her house was not fast enough for her to keep up the
  conversation. If it was not for the generosity of her friends, she would have
  needed to drop the course.

     It wasn't until Bethany moved to college in the fall of 2008 that she realized
  how much access to fast, reliable internet made college easier. She created
  her first social media account because now it wouldn't take 30 minutes for a
  picture to upload or 10 minutes for a page filled with pictures to load. Thanks
  to an initiative in her home county, her parents got high speed internet later

How to cite this vignette:

  Wolters, B. 2022. No really, I don't have internet. In: Westfall-Rudd,
  D., Vengrin, C., and Elliott-Engel, J. (eds.) Teaching in the University: Learning
  from Graduate Students and Early-Career Faculty. Blacksburg: Virginia Tech
  College of Agriculture and Life Sciences. https://doi.org/10.21061/
  universityteaching. License: CC BY-NC 4.0.

                                                                                      Vignette: No Internet | 95
that year. She was so thankful because it meant she didn't have to decide
between visiting family for the weekend or getting her homework finished
for class.

   Bethany assumed that she wouldn't have to worry about internet access
in the future. But ten years later she moved to the Eastern Shore of Virginia
to do field work for her PhD at Virginia Tech. The Eastern Shore is an hour
by car from Norfolk and Virginia Beach (closer by boat) and just a few hours
away from Washington, D.C., but it is located on a peninsula between the
Chesapeake Bay and the Atlantic Ocean. Being rural and somewhat isolated,
neither high- speed or dial-up internet was not available where she lived on
the Eastern Shore. Her only access, as for most of the people in the area,
was on a smartphone. Even smartphone access was still limited, because
she couldn't afford an unlimited data plan on a graduate student salary.
Other people used mobile hotspots for their internet access but paid several
hundred dollars per month and sometimes had trouble connecting during
bad weather.

   Fortunately, Bethany had internet access at work and other people in
the community usually had internet access at school, work, or McDonalds.
Bethany and other graduate students on the Eastern Shore had to stay at
work late to get their online courses finished or download and print off
any work they wanted to do at home. Bethany continued to take some
online courses, despite the challenges, because it allowed her to participate
in spring and fall research while still completing her classes. One of her
classmates worked full time on the Eastern Shore and was working toward
a graduate degree from the same university, seven hours away. But Bethany
wished that her professors and the students she worked with on group
projects understood what it was like to not have internet access after work
hours. Some people didn't believe her that internet access was still a problem
in 2016.

   Bethany got a job in fall 2019 as an agriculture professor in western
Tennessee and didn't think much more about the problem of internet access
until March 2020, when all of her students went home and the entire
university pivoted to completely online learning. The day before students left
campus, she asked them about their internet access at home. Out of sixty
students, 6 students could not stream live videos, 16 students said it took a
long time to upload or download large files (any lecture videos) and 11 said
they had to leave home to access the internet. All students knew of a place
they could go to access the internet, like a local library or school, but it might

96 | Vignette: No Internet
be a 30- to 60-minute drive from home and soon these locations closed
due to pandemic lockdowns. For some students, cell phones were their best
access to the internet but not all the Learning Management System (LMS)
functions, like quizzes or exams, worked on mobile devices. There were a few
students who requested to stay on campus during the lockdowns because
they wouldn't be able to finish their online classes from home.

   Bethany considered going to her parents' house during parts of the
pandemic, but she knew that internet access would be inadequate to teach
online. Upgraded high-speed broadband internet had not reached the rural
portion of the county where Bethany's parents lived. They had the same
internet speeds they got in 2008 but the rest of the internet had moved on
and was moving faster. A lecture video that would take 1-2 minutes to upload
at work wouldn't even upload from her parents' house.

   This was really frustrating to Bethany. The experience her students were
having was exactly the same one that she had with her first online classes
more than a decade ago. Why were the same problems happening? The fact
is that rural and certain urban areas have been left behind in their ability to
access the internet.

   Fortunately, Bethany had learned a thing or two about how to navigate
online classes with limited internet access. She encouraged students to
use the mobile versions of the LMS and other online content that worked
well in apps. For example, YouTube videos are much easier to watch on a
phone than videos uploaded to an LMS. However, she let her students know
that they needed to plan ahead because it was going to be very hard to
take quizzes using the mobile LMS app. She made all of her lecture videos
downloadable and provided a downloadable, printable Word document with
all of the text from pages within her LMS. Bethany intentionally set the
assignment deadlines during the day on a weekday, when locations that
provided free internet would be open. She let students know that she was
willing to adjust the due dates on assignments or online exams if they knew
they wouldn't have internet access on certain days and several students
used this accommodation. Bethany was really excited about using Flipgrid, a
video-based discussion app, with one of her classes but soon discovered that
some students didn't have enough internet bandwidth to use the app. So,
she had to create an asynchronous discussion board assignment for students
who couldn't use the app.

                                                                                   Vignette: No Internet | 97
   Online classes continued in fall 2020 and spring 2021. Most students were
adjusting well to online classes but she still came across a few unexpected
situations. Bethany was talking with Henry, a student in one of her classes,
and learned that Henry's grandfather had a heart attack at the start of the
semester and while he was recovering, could not take care of the family
farm. Henry and his high school aged sister were splitting the farm work
their grandfather used to do. Henry took care of the farm Wednesday night
through Sunday morning and then returned to campus Sunday night
through Wednesday morning. At first, he was not able to access the internet
at home but then was able to get a free hotspot from the university for
the semester. At the end of the semester Henry told Bethany he would
not have been able to finish the semester without that free hotspot. Other
issues occurred when a major snow and ice storm hit the southeast and the
university stayed open because most people were teaching online anyway.
But students who lost power, internet, or water during the storm had a really
hard time keeping up with their course work. In some cases, students could
not even let their professors know they were without internet or power
until almost a week later. Even in an area with high-speed broadband access,
some students might not have internet access because they could not afford
to pay for it.

   So, what can you do to support students who might have limited internet
access?

 1. Ask students at the beginning of the semester about their internet
      access at home, around campus, during the week, on weekends, and
      over breaks.

2. Think about how you can make most or all of your course material
      available in an offline format.

3. Upload or share lower resolution versions of files for faster upload and
      download times.

4. Test out the functions available in app versions of your LMS and other
      teaching technologies.

5. Test or ask students to test apps or programs in a slow or limited
      internet area.

6. Be intentional about assignment due dates and times and let students
      know if due dates can be adjusted.

 7. Advocate for greater internet access for your students and the
      communities where they live.

98 | Vignette: No Internet
6. Fun Fridays: Incorporating
Hands-on Learning into Lecture
Courses

  BETHANY WOLTERS

 Introduction

   If you observe a traditional lecture class, it will be the teacher who is most
   physically and mentally active and engaged, not the students. In a class
  with hands-on learning, you will see students being involved in their own
  education by debating a case study in small groups or using a reference
  manual to solve a problem. Hands-on learning happens when the action that
  takes place in the classroom is done by the students rather than the teacher.
  Hands-on learning does not require physical movement, but it requires an
  active mind, similar to how a chess player will plan the next few moves
  in their head before reaching out to move their piece (Barkley, 2020).
  Laboratory, field, and studio classes use hands-on learning to teach concepts
  and develop skills, but hands-on learning can also be used in lecture courses.

     Hands-on learning in lecture classes can reinforce student learning and
  enhance the understanding of course content, and is often more interesting
  than lectures. The benefits of h ands-on learning activities i n c lass are
  greater student motivation to learn, a sense of community in the classroom,
  (often) higher grades, more student confidence w hile learning new things,

How to cite this book chapter:
  Wolters, B. 2022. Fun Fridays: Incorporating Hands-on Learning into Lecture
  Courses. In: Westfall-Rudd, D., Vengrin, C., and Elliott-Engel, J. (eds.) Teaching in the
  University: Learning from Graduate Students and Early-Career Faculty. Blacksburg:
  Virginia Tech College of Agriculture and Life Sciences. https://doi.org/10.21061/
  universityteaching. License: CC BY-NC 4.0.

                                                                                                    Fun Fridays | 99
and development of teamwork and soft skills that they would not practice
in a lecture (Deslauriers et al., 2019; Svincki & Mckeachie, 2014). Having
students perform a task, practice a skill, or solve a problem prevents the
"illusion of understanding" that can happen when listening passively to
lectures and taking notes (Svincki & Mckeachie, 2014). As more universities
choose to remove lab sections from applied science courses due to a lack of
funding, space, and personnel, hands-on learning can provide the essential
skills to help students prepare for future careers.

   This chapter about hands-on learning was written with knowledge gained
through the first-hand experience teaching with hands-on learning. Hands-
on learning was used in an upper-level Soil Fertility class every Friday, during
"Fun Fridays." The only rule for Fun Fridays was no lecture. Instead, the class
members explored soil fertility concepts and skills through workshops, case
studies, discussions, and other activities in a traditional college classroom
with rows of desks, blackboards, and a projector. The stories and lessons
from the Fun Friday classes in Soil Fertility course will help you prepare for
hands-on learning before the semester starts, facilitate effective hands-on
lessons and highlight potential challenges with hands-on learning.

     This chapter will discuss...

          The benefits of using hands-on learning in traditionally
             lecture-based courses.

          How to prepare, develop, facilitate and assess hands-on
             learning.

          The potential challenges of using hands-on learning in the
             classroom and how to meet those challenges.

100 | Fun Fridays
Preparing for Hands-On Teaching

Preparation is even more critical for hands-on learning than it is for lecture-
based learning because once you give it to students, you're mostly out of
the picture. A little thought and preparation will go a long way toward
making both the hands-on activities and your overall class successful and
help students learn. You can prepare by identifying elements to teach
through hands-on learning, creating lesson plans and considering
incorporating active-learning overall course structure.

Finding hands-on learning topics

Students learn skills best through hands-on practice. Hands-on learning can
also teach students about concepts and theories by showing rather than
telling. It is all right if you are not sure exactly how you will use hands-on
learning to teach these topics because as you start developing lesson plans
and preparing for class, ideas and inspiration are likely to come to you.

   Lecture-based classes tend to focus on "knowing" content. To guide your
development of hands-on learning, instead of asking yourself, "What do my
students need to know?," ask these questions about your course content:

   What do I want my students to be able to do?
   What information or tools do I think my students need to be able to

      find or use?
   What products or performances do students need to be able to create

      and present?
   What decisions do my students need to be able to make?
   Are there any scenarios, simulations, or experiments that demonstrate

      the principles students need to know?
   What are the issues or discussions in this field that my students need to

      be aware of?
   What lessons from the history of my field can my students and I learn

      from this story?

                                                                                                Fun Fridays | 101
The answer to the first four questions will be specific tasks or activities
that will likely be both the learning objective and that lesson's activity. The
last three questions can help you develop hands-on learning for topics that
do not have immediate applications. The hands-on element comes when
students must form their arguments, opinions or reach their own decisions
about simulated or real situations. Story-telling elements of case studies or
historical events can also make learning more engaging. For example, in Soil
Fertility, students learned about urban soil contamination sources and how
organic matter can be used to remediate soils through a case study about an
urban community garden in a food desert (Harms et al., 2014). Combining the
answers to these questions with learning objectives will give you the overall
plan for your hands-on learning lesson.

Placing hands-on learning within your course

The second most important decision is how and when hands-on learning
will happen in your course. This decision needs to be made early in the
course design process because it impacts scheduling, assignments, grading,
and course policies. You should carefully consider details like how much time
there is for activities in each class period, the arrangement of chairs and
tables in the room, and the number and size of student groups.

   Hands-on activity lesson planning needs to happen with the overall course
lesson plan in mind. Will you use hands-on learning in every class period or
once or twice a week? Will there be in-class lectures or a flipped classroom,
with lectures or readings outside of class? In Soil Fertility, hands-on learning
happened once a week, on Fridays. When you consider the placement of
the activity within the semester, ensure sufficient scaffolding around hands-
on learning activities. Hands-on learning activities can reintroduce and
reinforce content from lectures and assigned readings earlier in the week or
can be used to introduce a concept in preparation for readings and lectures.
In some situations, the hands-on learning activity may stand alone without
any additional instruction, but this is rare and is not appropriate for the most
crucial course concepts.

   How much time things will take and how much content to cover is hard to
answer if you have never taught the material in a hands-on learning lesson.
A general rule you can use is to assume an activity will take twice as long

102 | Fun Fridays
as you expect it to take. After you have taught an exercise once, you will be
better able to gauge how much time it will take in the future. Until then,
have a general plan for how you might shorten the activity or lesson by
a few minutes if it is running long. You could plan an alternative ending
activity, reduce the closing debrief section, or allow students to finish the
remaining work at home and submit it in an alternative manner. Another
option is to complete the activity in the next class period or provide a video,
hand-out, or reading that allows students to learn the remaining content at
home. You should also plan to have extra activities or content if the activity
goes faster than expected or for students who finish more quickly than their
classmates. Prepare about 25% additional content or activities that you don't
think you will realistically finish. The supplementary material is useful for
extra practice problems or future assessments if you don't use it in class.
Individual self-paced activities, as opposed to group assignments, are more
time flexible. Students who finish quickly can leave, but students who take
more time or need more help can continue working without pressure to keep
up.

   The way hands-on learning will be graded and how it contributes to the
final course grade will influence how well it works. It might seem that
grading hands-on learning will detract from the value of learning in hands-
on lessons, but it helps students buy into the experience. Emphasize the
importance you place on hands-on learning in a context that the students
will understand: grades. Imagine that your students are your employees,
and you pay them in points toward their final grades in exchange for class
activities and assignments. They will prioritize what you value, and grades
communicate to students what you view as valuable. When calculating the
total grade proportion from hands-on learning, consider the amount of
in-person class time you will spend on hands-on learning, both in-class
and out of class, and the amount of time needed for other class activities.
Making hands-on learning worth as much or more than more traditional
assessments communicates to students that you want this to be important in
this class. Hands-on learning activities can be graded based on participation
or correctness, or some combination. When hands-on learning is graded
based on attendance and participation in hands-on activities, there are no
grades attached to the quality or accuracy of students' products or work.
Grading for participation and engagement, rather than correctness, lowers
the stakes for students uncertain about hands-on learning, allows you to give
them more challenging activities, and often does not require as much effort

                                                                                               Fun Fridays | 103
to grade. It also lowers the stakes and provides more flexibility to you, as
the teacher, if new hands-on lessons do not go as intended or expected. But
you will need to use other assessments to assess their knowledge and skills.
The other option is to grade the accuracy and quality of products created
by students during hands-on learning. If you do this, you need to provide
sufficient time, resources, and instruction for students to feel like they can
be successful. Either follow the same grading criteria every week or clearly
communicate your expectations at the start of each activity.

   Finally, think about the logistics of how hands-on learning will work in
your specific classroom. Evaluate and decide how to use group work; use
the chairs, table, and space within the physical classroom; and what other
resources you will need. Hands-on learning can be done individually, in
small groups, or in some situations as an entire class. Groups can be self-
selected or assigned, permanent or flexible, and each has pros and cons. It is
easy to switch between individual and group work throughout the semester,
but it is easier to form groups, in the same way, all semester long. The
physical arrangement of your room has a significant impact on the amount
of active learning that can happen. But don't let traditional lecture room
set-ups stop you from using active learning in your class. If possible, move
the furniture or allow students to spread out throughout the entire space
(sitting on the floor or auditorium stage, or in the aisles). You can also utilize
virtual spaces to collaborate when a physical setting does not easily allow
it. What technology and tools will you use in hands-on learning? Students
can work on physical paper hand-outs and refer to reference books, or they
could be collaboratively working on a class document and referring to web
resources. Students need to know at the beginning of the semester and
before each hands-on learning class, what technology they will need to bring
to participate.

104 | Fun Fridays
     Diversity

        Hands-on learning can be more inclusive of diverse student
     learning modes and levels of experience. However, it is not inclusive
     of students that need to be absent from classes for excused
     (student-athletes, student contents, and competitions, field trips, or
     conferences) or unexcused (illness, emergency, or choice) reasons.
     Instead of trying to replicate the in-class experience, design
     alternative activities that can be completed individually but
     incorporate some of the same hands-on elements. Examples of
     alternative hands-on assignments I used were attending guest
     lectures and seminars, designing an infographic, or writing a
     reflection of how the course connects to the conference or job
     interview. Alternative assignments can also help students who are
     not comfortable sharing their reasons for being absent.

Writing lesson plans

The last step in preparing to teach hands-on learning lessons is to create a
lesson plan and design the activity. There are many ways to develop lesson
plans, so find a template or system that works for you. Sections useful to
include in your lesson plan are lesson learning objectives, pre-class activities
(if applicable), list of materials needed, digital or physical resources used by
teacher or students, activity logistics (group size and set-up, timing), activity
introduction and closing.

   Now create hands-on learning activities. Instead of preparing a lecture
and selecting readings, you will be making the problem or task students
will complete and gathering or creating resources and tools for them to

                                                                                               Fun Fridays | 105
use. For a case study or topic discussion lesson, clearly define the problem,
and collect resources that provide background and information. In a
mathematical workshop lesson, write out the example and practice problems
with solutions. For simulations or role-playing lessons, create realistic
scenarios, stories, and artifacts for students to engage with as they try to
solve the problem. To create an experiment or simulation, you need to gather
or create the materials or data that students will manipulate during the
activity. For both realism and to save time and effort, try to use real data or
information and adapt it to your lesson. If actual data is not available, you can
create it. Researchers and practitioners in the field are an invaluable source
for scenarios, data, or examples. After you create the activity's content, you
need to make the hand-outs, questions, or assignments that students use
during the activity.

Before Getting to the Classroom

Students are often excited about hands-on learning but apprehensive
because they don't know what to expect. You can help ease students' fears
by being clear on what they can expect to happen and your expectations
for them during the hands-on learning classes. Try to have the first hands-
on learning lesson as soon in the semester as possible. The first hands-on
learning lesson can be related to the class or it can be a creative problem-
solving or group project.

   For some or all hands-on learning lessons, pre-class instruction in or out
of class might be necessary to allow enough class time to complete the
activity. Anything that takes more than 5 minutes in a 50-minute class or 10
minutes in a more extended class to teach to students should be completed
before class to allow enough time for the hands-on activity. However, you
then need to have a way to hold students accountable for completing the
pre-class instruction.

106 | Fun Fridays
     Syllabus Development

        Use your syllabus to communicate to students the value you place
     on hands-on learning through the course grading. If hands-on
     learning is used regularly in the course, it would not be
     inappropriate to weigh it equal to or higher than a midterm or final
     exam.

In the Classroom

Hands-on learning will look different in every classroom because of the
people involved, size of the class, size and arrangement of the room, and
length of each class period. In Soil Fertility, hands-on learning took place in
a traditional lecture classroom on one of the three 50 minute class periods
per week. The class time was spent with a 5- to 10-minute opening, a 20- to
30-minute activity and a 5- to 15-minute closing. This setup might be very
similar to what most of your classes and classrooms look like too, but you
can extrapolate this discussion to fit your specific class format. While each
hands-on learning lesson will look different, it helps follow a similar format
so students know what to expect. A 50-minute class period is almost too
little time to do a hands-on learning lesson well, and a 75-min class session
would likely work better.

                                                                                                Fun Fridays | 107
At the beginning of class

At the beginning of each class, you will introduce the activity and provide
instructions. This part of the hands-on learning is the most crucial for the
activity's success, so ensure appropriate time. Give a short (~5 minutes)
introduction to the subject or skills being covered in the activity and show
how the activity connects to other course topics. Give all instructions
verbally while also showing written instructions on the screen or in a
handout for students. Explain all the instructions or background that are
essential for completing the activity. For example, when doing a case study,
provide students the text of the case and give a verbal summary of important
points.

   Next, explain the logistics of the activity in terms as clear and precise as
possible. Give instructions on student collaboration, group size, and group
assignments if this has not already been established in your course. Show
students where to find and how to use all of the resources or tools you
provide. Explain what the goal of the activity is and how to use any
worksheets or handouts. Let students know how much time they will have
to complete all or parts of the activity. Last, explain to students what their
end product should be, how it will be turned in, and how it will be graded.
If your grading method or criteria varies from week to week, be clear about
your expectations before they begin. It is advantageous to make sure that
students have a copy of these instructions to refer to throughout the entire
activity, either on the screen, or as a digital copy or a handout. Then, you
turn them loose to do hands-on learning for themselves!

During the hands-on activity

The first five minutes of hands-on learning activity is the most difficult
for the teacher because, at this point, you've relinquished the control. Give
students some time and space at the beginning of the activity and while they
are working.

108 | Fun Fridays
   If you feel like you should be doing something, here are some things you
can do instead of hovering over the students:

 1. Drink your coffee, tea, or water (hydration is important but so hard
      while you are talking!).

2. Organize papers students turned in, or that you have to return to
      students.

3. Answer that urgent email/text from your advisor/student/boss/
      spouse/roommate.

4. Enjoy a few minutes to yourself.
5. Watch the students work (without too much awkward staring), and you

      can learn a lot about how they are working together, group logistics,
      what parts of the project need work.
6. Make sure you have the answer or solution to the hands-on activity
      worked out and written down (if you haven't already).
 7. Take attendance.

While giving students space to work, be aware of students who have
questions, and be accessible. After giving students some time to get started
on the activity, you can begin circulating through the classroom and quickly
check in. Stop by groups or individuals and ask, "How are things going?",
"Have you found X yet?" or even personal questions like "How has your week
been?" if it won't interfere with the flow of their work too much. Sometimes
asking if students have questions can limit the discussion between you and
students and steer it toward problems rather than exploring interesting
ideas. Try to learn students' names and address them by name while
checking in with students. Sometimes, a student or group needs a minute to
formulate or remember a question they have to ask you, so it can help to plan
to spend a minute or two with the group before moving to the next group.

   While checking-in with students, you will be able to identify groups who
are struggling. Groups may be struggling with group dynamics and
teamwork or understanding the concept or a step in the activity. One thing
you can do is ask if they would like you to join their group for a few minutes.
For group dynamic problems, you may propose a new division of labor or try
to mediate any issues. Unless teamwork is one of your learning objectives, it
is ok to allow dysfunctional groups to work individually or join other groups.
Even if you know what the problem is and how to fix it, try to ask questions
that will guide them to what might be causing the problem. Let the student

                                                                                               Fun Fridays | 109
run student-centered learning, so try not to get in the way. This is one of the
hardest things to do and requires developing a comfort level with mistakes
and inefficiencies that happen during the learning process. The goal is to get
the group or individual to a place where they can continue working on their
own, and you can check back in after a few minutes to make sure they're
making progress.

Closing out the class

As much as possible, stay on schedule so that you have time to debrief the
activity and close the class. To conclude the activity, you can choose to
review answers, collect student work, or hear reports from some or all of
the small groups. Other options include a whole-class discussion, soliciting
questions or feedback from students, or offering your concluding thoughts.
Be clear about what students should have learned from the activity and what
they will need to know for assignments and exams. If you run out of time,
you can transfer some or all of the closing activities online or finish them in
the next class period.

How to rescue a disaster

First, don't beat yourself up about hands-on learning activities that fall apart.
An essential part of the hands-on learning process you are encouraging
students to be a part of involves failures or mistakes, reevaluating, and trying
again. You probably don't expect your students to get everything right the
first time, so don't be surprised when you don't either. Students will be more
willing to try and possibly fail if they see their teacher model learning from
failure. Use your mistakes as a way for you to learn and grow your teaching.

   Second, don't lie. Just tell your students the activity did not work out as
you expected. They probably already know it didn't work. Instead, talk with
your students about what you hoped they would get out of the activity and
why you made the decisions (logistical or content-related) that you did. You
may choose to invite the students' feedback on why something didn't work,
their knowledge or impressions, or their suggestions. And if possible, you can

110 | Fun Fridays
try to connect or tie in the results of the less than perfect hands-on learning
activity to your topic, your class, or being a responsible citizen in the world
and your field.

Hands-on Lessons about Hands-on Learning

New things are uncomfortable for everyone

When you first start using hands-on learning, it will be awkward and
uncomfortable for everyone. As a teacher, the first few classes and the first
semester will be challenging for you and the students. But it will get easier.
Here are some things you can do to ease the transition:

 1. Be positive and authentically enthusiastic about the activities. Your
      tone and attitude set the stage for the class.

2. Start active learning early in the course and do it regularly and often.
3. Do not accept anything less than the expectations you outlined for

      students in terms of participating and engagement. You do not have to
      be mean, but you may have to be stern for the first few weeks. If
      students sense that they can get away with not participating, their
      behaviors may continue.

Also, remember that hands-on learning might be very different from the
previous educational experiences of your students. While most of us
naturally prefer to learn in a more hands-on way, a traditional education
experience of 12+ years has conditioned students to expect to learn in less-
active ways. They may not enjoy passive learning through lectures,
textbooks, essays, and exams, but at least they understand what to do and
how to be successful. Students say they do not enjoy hands-on learning as
much as lectures and incorrectly think they do not learn as much because
hands-on learning creates feelings of frustration and discomfort as students
are mentally challenged by the act of learning (Deslauriers et al., 2019).
As teachers, we need to help students recognize struggle, failures, and
challenges as an essential part of the learning process--but students, who

                                                                                                 Fun Fridays | 111
are always evaluated and ranked by their grades, may be anxious about
failure. You can ease their anxiety and help them appreciate failure as a
part of their learning process by deemphasizing correctness in hands-on
learning. Grading for completeness and effort or allowing time and space
for revision are two ways to help students move through the failure stage of
learning to the correct answers. Be very clear about how hands-on learning
will be graded and how it contributes to the overall course grade from the
beginning of the course.

Let the content be the star, not the activity

One of the easiest ways to ruin a hands-on learning activity is for the
logistics of the activity or experiment to be more complicated than the
concepts students are learning. This problem is best illustrated by an
example from a Fun Friday class in Soil Fertility. To teach students how to
solve common fertilizer calculations and develop critical thinking skills, we
used the Send-A-Problem engagement technique from Elizabeth Barkley's
Student Engagement Techniques (Barkley, 2020). Calculation problems were
printed on the outside of envelopes. The first and then the second group
of students wrote their solution to the problem on a piece of paper and
put it in the envelope. Then, the third group of students critically reviewed
the two answers to the question and shared their reasoning. The Send-A-
Problem activity did not work well in the Soil Fertility class. There was not
enough time in the 50-minute class period to demonstrate how to solve the
math problems, explain the logistics of the activity, and complete the activity
and concluding debrief, so students left the class feeling frustrated and
confused. The next week, we repeated the Send-A-Problem exercise with
a new set of questions. However, the students still struggled with learning
how to do the calculations and the mechanics of the envelopes and pieces
of paper. There was simply not enough time to effectively use the Send-
A-Problem activity the way it was used in Soil Fertility. The following year,
we revised this lesson by simplifying the activity's logistics, spending extra
time demonstrating how to solve the calculations problems, and providing
multiple practice problems. In the second year, students said the hands-on
calculation activities were some of the most useful that semester.

112 | Fun Fridays
   This principle also applies to technology. When Google sheets were used
for the first time in a hands-on activity, students needed to spend extra
time figuring out how to access the document and how to use it in the
lesson before starting the exercise. It will take time for students to become
comfortable enough with technology to use it to learn the course content
you are trying to teach.

Don't give busywork. Assign work that is challenging.

There is a perfect middle spot between assignments that are too busy, and
students see as busywork and activities that are too difficult for students
to attempt, let alone be confident in finishing. Hands-on learning activities
need to be challenging, engaging, and relevant. You can give students more
challenging activities if you are grading their work based on participation
and completeness and discussing the answers or solutions in the debrief
portion of the class. Activities that are engaging and relevant will not feel
like busywork to students. Case studies and discussions on issues that do
not have nice, neat, right answers are more challenging than worksheets.
The difficulty level is based on the background knowledge and skills students
bring to your class and the time, resources, and grading that you give to
hands-on learning activities.

Common Objections to Hands-on Learning (And What
to Say to Them)

Sadly, hands-on learning challenges the status quo of higher education
teaching, even in applied science fields. So, you will likely encounter
objections or concerns about the adoption of hands-on learning. Here are
some of the common objections to hands-on learning and how you might
respond.

   "We won't be able to cover as much content." No, you won't. But in today's
digitally connected world, delivering content is not as important as teaching
students about context, critical thinking, and application, which hands-on

                                                                                                Fun Fridays | 113
learning does very well. Hands-on learning can do a better job helping
students understand how to use and apply information in settings similar to
what they might face outside of the classroom.

   "It takes too long to create practical hands-on activities. I could prepare
and lecture on twice as much content in the same amount of time." Maybe.
Both hands-on learning activities and good lectures take hours to develop
the first time but are reused every year with small revisions or modifications.
And the amount of time that goes into creating and teaching an excellent
lecture class that engages and challenges students and helps them retain
information is probably similar to the amount of time it takes to develop
a good hands-on learning lesson. The difference in the amount of time it
takes to develop hands-on learning activities likely comes from the teacher's
skill and comfort level with hands-on learning, compared to lecture-based
teaching. With time and experience, it gets easier to create hands-on
learning activities.

   "How do I know they're learning what I want them to be learning in
a hands-on activity?" The sarcastic answer to this is, "how do you know
they're learning what you want them to learn from a lecture?" Exams and
homework often show that students do not learn what we want them to from
lectures, readings, and other class activities. But with hands-on learning, you
have direct evidence of what students are learning at the moment. The real
concern behind this question likely is, "How do I design hands-on activities
to guide students to learning what I want them to know?" and hopefully,
resources like this book will help answer those questions.

   "Students don't like it and won't do it." Students will also say they don't
like hands-on learning. When students in an introductory physics class were
taught using both lecture and hands-on learning techniques, students
overwhelmingly said they enjoyed and learned more from lectures than
hands-on learning, despite their grades showing the opposite (Deslauriers
et al., 2019). In the beginning, you can expect some degree of resistance
or lack of engagement from students for hands-on learning. When facing
resistance from students be understanding that hands-on learning might
be uncomfortable for some students but be clear on your expectations and
use an intervention like Deslauries et al. (2019) at the beginning of the
semester. After a few weeks of hands-on learning, most students will be
more comfortable with hands-on learning.

114 | Fun Fridays
   "I don't have the resources to do hands-on-learning." Hands-on learning
is a frame of mind about teaching, not a physical requirement. With a little
bit of creativity, you can do a lot with the most limited resources. Utilize
chairs, tables, whiteboards, computer projectors, and any basic office
supplies you have access to. You can ask students to bring their own devices
and use free or inexpensive digital resources. Ask colleagues or friends if you
can borrow equipment or supplies. If you cannot demonstrate an experiment
or activity, there are likely online videos you can show instead and then have
students practice interpreting the results of the experiment. Inexpensive
poster board and colored markers were all students needed for a hands-on
activity where they learned about nutrient cycles in Soil Fertility (figure 6.1).

Figure 6.1 Diagram of manganese nutrient cycle drawn on a poster board by two
students during hands-on learning activity in Soil Fertility.

"If students can learn on their own, then what is my purpose?" This is
a question no one feels comfortable saying but some of us might relate
to. Subject novices can get lost in the weeds, miss the context, have
misconceptions or make mistakes, and the guidance of a teacher can
prevent, smooth, or reduce these bumps in the learning process. More
experienced teachers will have years of stories and experiences in their

                                                                                                Fun Fridays | 115
field to incorporate into realistic hands-on learning activities. And newer
teachers will be able to relate to the struggles of mastering the course
content and be able to learn along with the students. But, for teachers who
view their value to their students only as their accumulation of knowledge
on a subject, student-guided hands-on learning threatens their self-worth.
Experienced teachers can create practical, challenging, and engaging hands-
on activities from their ideas, knowledge, and more expansive teaching
practice.

Conclusion and Next Steps

Hands-on learning is an excellent way to engage students in the action of
learning within a lecture classroom. When students are active participants in
their learning, they will retain more of the information, make higher grades,
and develop real-world skills. To use hands-on learning in your teaching,
you need to spend time preparing before the semester and throughout the
semester. All of your preparation, planning, and hard work will pay off when
you can allow your students to learn and practice their course content
in the classroom. There will be some challenges that you will face when
you teach using hands-on learning. Still, with practice, adjustments, and
some compassion toward yourself for failures, you can develop an effective
teaching practice using hands-on learning.

   Here are some small steps you can take toward using hands-on learning in
your classroom:

 1. As you teach (or learn), think about how the content you are learning
      could be taught in a more active, hands-on way. Similarly, collect ideas
      from others on how to make teaching more engaging and dynamic.

2. Do a hands-on learning experiment in your teaching. Maybe you have
      the time and space to redesign a course to focus on hands-on learning,
      or perhaps you redesign one module or section of a course to include
      some hands-on learning activities.

3. Remember that in hands-on learning, we expect students to make some
      mistakes or take a less efficient path to the answer, and your hands-on
      teaching experience will be the same.

116 | Fun Fridays
      Reflection Questions

       Think about a class in which you wish you had been more
         engaged. What prevented you from being a more active
         participant in your learning?

       What is the biggest barrier for you to use hands-on learning
         in your teaching? Are there suggestions, resources, or ideas
         presented here that could help you overcome that?

       Have you experienced, seen, or heard about other teachers
         using hands-on learning in their classes? How are they doing
         it?

Resources and Tools

Active learning while physically distant. Google Doc shared by Louisiana

State  University            https://docs.google.com/document/d/

15ZtTu2pmQRU_eC3gMccVhVwDR57PDs4uxlMB7Bs1os8/

edit?usp=sharing.

John   Spencer's   blog      for       problem-based  learning

https://spencerauthor.com/.

National Center for Case Study Teaching in Science

https://sciencecases.lib.buffalo.edu.

                                               Fun Fridays | 117
References

Barkley, E. F., & Major, C. H. (2020). Student Engagement Techniques: A
   Handbook for College Faculty (2nd ed.). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Barkley, E. F., & Major, C. H. (2020b). "Problem Solving." In Student
   Engagement Techniques: A Handbook for College Faculty (2nd ed.). San
   Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 253-79.

Deslauriers, L., McCarty, L. S., Miller, K., Callaghan, K., & Kestin, G. (2019).
   Measuring actual learning versus feeling of learning in response to being
   actively engaged in the classroom. Proceedings of the National Academy of
   Sciences, 116(39), 19251-57.

McKeachie, W., & Svinicki, M. (2013). McKeachie's teaching tips. Cengage
   Learning.

Raes Harms, A. M., Presley, D. R., Hettiarachchi, G. M., Attanayake, C., Martin,
   S., & Thien, S. J. (2014). Harmony Park: A decision case on gardening on a
   brownfield site. Natural Sciences Education, 43(1), 33-41. https://doi.org/
   10.4195/nse2013.02.0003

118 | Fun Fridays
7. Using Grade Appeals as a
Learning Tool

  EMILY T. OTT

 Introduction

  Evaluation is a critical component of teaching as it allows both instructors
  and students to determine progress, proficiencies, and areas that need
  improvement. Grades are an important form of instructor feedback that
  can spark discussion between student and instructor. Instructors use grades
  in different ways and for different purposes (e.g., solely to mark student
  performance, or to encourage student reflection). Student attitudes on
  grades range from a consumeristic/transactional view (put in a certain
  amount of effort to receive a grade) to a self-improvement view (learn from
  errors). The first part of this chapter will address using grades as a form of
  feedback on student performance. The second part will focus on providing
  good feedback while grading, including clear expectations, explanations,
  offering help, accessibility, and fairness.

     Sometimes a student may appeal to their teacher to receive a higher/
  better grade. A survey sent out in the fall of 2017 at Virginia Tech
  demonstrates that many students who ask for a higher grade want to
  improve their knowledge and understanding. Students surveyed also
  preferred to discuss their performance with an instructor rather than
  receive a grade change with no discussion. For this reason, instructors may
  utilize informal grade appeals as a learning opportunity in a curriculum

How to cite this book chapter:
  Ott, E.T. 2022. Using Grade Appeals as a Learning Tool. In: Westfall-Rudd, D.,
  Vengrin, C., and Elliott-Engel, J. (eds.) Teaching in the University: Learning from
  Graduate Students and Early-Career Faculty. Blacksburg: Virginia Tech College of
  Agriculture and Life Sciences. https://doi.org/ 10.21061/universityteaching. License:
  CC BY-NC 4.0.
                                                                                               Grade Appeals | 119
that allows flexibility and growth. Student misunderstandings of expectation
may cause some grade appeals, and the frequency of these appeals may be
minimized by clearly communicating objectives and offering comprehensive
assessment tools such as rubrics.

     This chapter will discuss...

          The historical and legal background for formal grade
             appeals.

          Using and encouraging informal grade appeals as learning
             tool for students to reevaluate their work.

          Preventing grade appeals caused by confusion and unclear
             instructions.

          Providing useful feedback through use of clear expectations,
             explanations of point deduction/accumulation, offers of help,
             and consistent feedback among all students.

Grade Appeal Background

Sometimes students perceive an evaluation as unfair, not representative of
their effort, assigned with prejudice, or calculated incorrectly, and wish to
pursue a change in the grade by appealing it to the instructor. A grade
appeal is generally any instance where a student asks a teacher for a higher
score on an assignment, exam, or final course grade. These appeals can be
informal, where the student discusses the grade with the teaching assistant
or instructor, or formal, where the requests are made at an administrative
level.

120 | Grade Appeals
   The formal grade appeal process varies by university. At Virginia Tech for
example, if an undergraduate student's discussion with the instructor does
not resolve a grade dispute, the student can then appeal to the department
or division head (Office of the University Registrar, Virginia Tech, 2020).
If the dispute is not resolved at the department/division level it can be
appealed to the college dean. Students seeking a formal grade appeal are
encouraged to make their request as soon as possible, but no later than the
end of the following term after the grade was assigned. University policy
at Virginia Tech states that a professor has sole prerogative over grades
assigned in his or her course, and that professors must assign grades based
on established criteria rather than on students' personal conduct. There
is also an appeal procedure for graduate students to follow. This process
is similar, except if the dispute is not resolved at the department level,
then the graduate student can appeal to the Dean of the Graduate school
with a formal statement explaining his or her reasoning (Graduate School,
Virginia Tech, 2020). The dispute is then reviewed by a Graduate Appeals
Committee which consists of three faculty members, one graduate student,
and an additional faculty member who is knowledgeable in the subject area
of the appeal. The Grade Appeals Committee may hold a formal hearing, and
ultimately gives a recommendation to the Dean of the Graduate School to
act on with consultation from the provost.

   In 1984, the American Association of University Professors (AAUP)
identified teachers' "academic freedom" as: "the freedom to research and
publish the results; freedom in discussing the teachers' subject matters in
the classroom; freedom from institutional censorship when teachers speak
as citizens." In 1998, the AAUP stated that assessing student performance is a
faculty responsibility (as opposed to administrative responsibility) and that it
is part of a professor's classroom freedom. However, the AAUP's statements
do not have any legal standing, so there have been court cases regarding
whether college or university administrators may change a student's grade
without instructor approval. There have been several court cases that
acknowledge a professor's right to assign grades to students, including
Regents of the University of Michigan v. Ewing, 474 U.S. 214 (1985), which ruled
that dismissing a student from a medical program for failing an exam did
not infringe on a student's property rights; and Parate v. Isibor, 868 F.2d 821
(6th Cir. 1989) which ruled that university professors have a First Amendment
right to assign grades based on their professional judgment. The United
States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit ruled in 2001 that a grade

                                                                                            Grade Appeals | 121
change by an administrator does not violate a professor's First Amendment
right to free speech (Brown v. Armenti, 247 F.3d 69, 3rd Cir. 2001)). The
6th Circuit Appeals Court stated a year later that it is a First Amendment
violation if the administration pressures or coerces a professor to change a
student's grade (Yohn v. Board of Regents of the University of Michigan et al.,
2002).

   Formal grade appeals are a preventable drain on resources. Instead of
filing appeal paperwork and hearing cases on panels, professors could be
spending time on items in their job description (e.g. writing research grants,
publishing research papers, developing class lesson plans, grading student
assignments, extension work, etc.). Oslo University in Norway spent an
estimated $300 per appeals case between 2003 and 2006, which totaled $1.2
million (Gynnild, 2011). Therefore, it is in the best interest of both professors
and administrators to avoid formal grade disputes when possible.

   There are resources available that help instructors avoid grading disputes.
These resources are often tools that help students understand their grades,
so they do not feel they received a different mark than they deserved. The
AAUP has on its website a list of "practical suggestions" regarding student
grades, including developing clear policies on grading standards and appeal
procedures; applying appeal policies uniformly across students; making
appeal policies available to students, faculty, and administrators; and
including faculty in the same department or closely related fields on an
appeals committee when a grade is disputed (Euben, 2001). There is a lack of
higher education literature on grade appeals, and therefore we do not know
how many professors consciously use tools to help prevent students from
appealing grades.

   Not all professors view grade appeals as negative (i.e., as "disputes"). Some
professors welcome students who evaluate their grades and present
arguments for a higher score. Corrada (2013) explains why grade appeals
should be encouraged in graduate-level (law school) courses and defends
against some concerns that faculty may have about supporting student
appeals. The author describes the method that he uses in his law school
classes, involving a midterm exam that encourages appeals of the exam
(instead of only offering a final exam). A midterm exam was added to the
courses to promote student review (where a student may learn more about a
subject from mistakes made on an exam) and ensure the grade for a student
or class wouldn't rely on a single grade (final exam). The author also notes
that anecdotally, his students' final exam grades were higher after he started

122 | Grade Appeals
administering a midterm exam than they were before. Corrada believes that
students sometimes have good arguments to receive credit, and students
sometimes deserve a better grade than they initially received. They should
also be held accountable for any of his grading mistakes/lack of clarity.

   As noted above, Corrada (2013) addresses concerns often voiced over
encouraging grade appeals, including (1) making extra work (teaching is less
rewarded than publishing); (2) Flexibility of grades/challenged authority as
a teacher; (3) a high percentage of grade changes might reflect that the
grades are not credible. Corrada explains that grade appeals do not need to
take up a significant amount of time. He promotes the efficiency of a grade
appeal/formative assessment procedure by only allowing students to submit
requests that are maximum of one page long, and are turned in within one
week of receiving the midterm exam grades and exam key. Furthermore,
Corrada believes that students' benefit is more valuable than the marginal
extra work of an appeals process. Regarding the flexibility of grades, Corrada
explains that some grading is objective and that a professor may assign
letter grades (A vs. D). Still, finer distinctions (A vs. A-) may sometimes be
subjective and imprecise. Corrada does not believe that a high rate of appeals
for his midterm exam (historically around 70%) lowers his grades' credibility
or challenges his authority. Many students already believe that grades are
subjective and not perfect. Hence, an appeals process allows students to
think critically about their answers, what they got wrong, better defend their
answers, and question their previous assumptions (Corrada, 2013). For these
reasons, grade appeals may translate well to undergraduate college courses
and especially advanced courses that build upon the basic knowledge of
subjects.

   Dealing with formal grade appeals takes time and effort away from other
tasks on both the professor/departmental and administrative scales. It is in
instructors' best interests to reduce the number of formal grade appeals.
Instructors can use informal grade appeals (the type discussed in this
chapter) to deliver student feedback and allow for growth. Using grading as
an intentional form of instructor feedback while maintaining transparency
expectations and consistency among students may help in student learning
(Corrada, 2013).

                                                                                            Grade Appeals | 123
Fall 2017 Survey

The purpose of this study, carried out in the fall of 2017, was to understand
student attitudes on grade appeals and identify ways to minimize the
occurrence of grade appeals (where desired by the instructor). The
anonymous student survey was composed of 20 questions, including both
multiple choice and short answer. The author (Emily Ott) sent the survey
to the undergraduate listserv for the Crop and Soil Environmental Sciences
Department (CSES), which has since been renamed the School of Plant and
Environmental Sciences. There were 26 respondents out of approximately
60 undergraduate students in the CSES department at the time. There was a
potential for a response bias for "overachievers" taking the survey; however
the responses were ambivalent that this was the case. Also, since the survey
was anonymous and was sent out by a graduate student with both name
recognition and good rapport with students as the instructor of a required
course (Soils Lab), it is reasonable to assume that some students filled out the
survey to be helpful. Overall, the survey responses--from undergraduates
who were majoring or minoring in the department--depict student
perceptions of grade appeals in a Crop and Soil Sciences department. Results
are both displayed in tables and discussed below.

Table 7.1 Student self-reported frequency (N) of appeals by assignment type.

Response       Assignment/    Quiz/Exam  Essay  Course Grade
               In-class work

Never                13       15         17     20

Rarely (~once per semester) 10 9 8 5

Somewhat

often (>once         2        2          1      1

per semester)

Very often

(once per            1        0          0      0

semester)

Half of the students surveyed have never requested a higher grade on an
assignment, quiz, essay, or the overall course grade. The requests that were
made were made more often on homework and in-class work. A higher
frequency of requests on homework and in-class work makes intuitive sense

124 | Grade Appeals
since courses often have more graded work in the form of assignments than
as exams or essays (i.e., there may be only a few exams and one course
grade, versus weekly assignments). On the other hand, one might expect
that students would be more likely to appeal more significant grades such
as exams and the overall course grade because these grades hold more
weight, with the assumption being that students are more concerned about
their grades and not their understanding of the material. The results shown
in Table 7.2 indicate that this assumption may not be accurate: Of the
respondents, most (20/26) felt that their grades are rarely unfair, and 0
students felt that their grades were very often unfair.

Table 7.2 Student responses to the question "How often do you feel/believe that
             your grade on an assignment, quiz, exam, or essay is unfair?"

Response                        Frequency

Never                           1

Rarely (~once per semester)     20

Somewhat often (>once per semester) 5

Very often (once per semester)  0

Tables 7.3-7.5 below display the responses for three questions related to
instructor feedback. The majority of students felt that their instructors only
provided them with detailed feedback somewhat often (17/26), and
responded that detailed feedback causes them to appeal grades less often
(15/26). The timing of feedback (whether students receive grades or
feedback quickly after turning in an assignment) did not influence
respondents' decision to appeal a grade (15/26). These results suggest that if
an instructor takes the time to provide detailed feedback, students may be
more accepting of their grades.

Table 7.3 Student responses to the question "How often do your instructors
               provide you with detailed feedback on assignments?"

Response                        Frequency

Never                           0

Rarely (~once per semester)     7

Somewhat often (detailed feedback for some classes/assignments) 17

Very often (every class or nearly every assignment) 2

                                                                    Grade Appeals | 125
Table 7.4 Student responses to the question "Does the feedback you receive
                 influence your decision to ask for a higher grade?"

Response                               Frequency

Yes - I (want to) ask for a change in

grade less when receiving detailed     15

feedback

Yes - I (want to) ask for a change in

grade more when receiving detailed     1

feedback

No - The feedback I receive does not
influence whether I want to appeal a 6
grade

Not sure                               4

Table 7.5 Student responses to the question "Does the timing of grading/feedback
              have an influence on your decision to ask for a higher grade?"

Response                               Frequency

Yes - I (want to) ask for a change in

grade less when grades are posted      5

quickly

Yes - I (want to) ask for a change in

grade more when grades are posted      3

quickly

No - Timing does not influence my decision to ask for a higher grade 15

Not sure                               3

Table 7.6 shows the results of questions about the instructor's response to
grade appeals. When a student asks for a higher grade or clarification on an
assignment or exam, the instructor may respond with either an automatic
decision or a discussion. For most students surveyed, their experience with
appealing a grade "usually" resulted in a discussion rather than an automatic
decision (15/26). The response to this question shows that professors already
have discussions with students about their grades, as opposed to
automatically deciding whether to change a grade, which is the first step
towards incorporating grade appeals as a learning tool.

126 | Grade Appeals
Table 7.6 Student responses to the question "When you ask your professor for a
higher grade on an assignment or exam, how often does it result in an automatic

                     decision (change or no change) vs. a conversation?"

Response                        Frequency

Very often/always an automatic decision 1

Usually an automatic decision   0

Results are 50% automatic decision, 50% discussion 6

Usually a discussion            15

Very often/always a discussion  1

(no response)                   3

When asked about which outcome they preferred (discussion or automatic
decision), most students said they liked to discuss the grade with the
instructor to better understand why they were wrong. Only one student
responded saying that they preferred a discussion because the instructor
would not view it as a `handout' or free grade change (i.e., receiving a better
grade automatically without the student having to redo their work). Some
example responses to the question "Do you prefer one of the results from the
previous question--the instructor making a decision directly following your
appeal, or a discussion about the assignment/exam and grade? Why?" are:

 I prefer a discussion to occur. When I ask for a higher grade, it is
   because I believe I followed a rubric or answered a question correctly
   despite losing points Sometimes, it is a simple error (such as counting
   up points incorrectly). Other times, I learn that I did not understand the
   question properly and then I accept that I do not deserve those points
   OR I explain my thought process and the teacher realizes the question
   was a poor question. On the rare occasion, a teacher does not care and
   refuses to even discuss the test/paper.

 I don't have a preference. It depends on the circumstance. If it's an
   obvious, difficult to refute mistake, I don't want to discuss it (I just want
   the points). If it's subjective, I prefer to discuss it.

 I would prefer to have a conversation than an automatic decision. I'm at
   the point in my academic career where I want to understand exactly
   why something I did was incorrect and how to not make that mistake
   again rather than be awarded points just for asking for them.

                                                      Grade Appeals | 127
   Discussion because it's normally not just me with the issue.
   Discussion. Even a quick talk can help clear up a lot. If no feedback is

      provided, I often don't understand what I did wrong. If feedback is
      provided, it still may be unclear to me. A quick follow-up with the TA/
      professor usually clears this up immediately or with a little more work
      on my part (i.e., hear their opinions and then look at my notes).
   I like to discuss so that I don't seem as if I'm looking for a handout.
   I prefer a discussion over any sort of direct results because if a grade
      gets changed that quickly, it just reiterates grade inflation and
      encourages students to learn simply for the grade rather than the
      knowledge.
   I would prefer a discussion because then I know how the teacher feels
      and what I can work on specifically.
   Discussion. Better clarify what I and my professor can do better in the
      future.
   A discussion makes it easier to understand the perspective of the
      professor on how/why they graded the way they did and it gives you
      the chance to better support your case as to why asking for appeal.
      Especially if a rubric is vague or if neither a rubric or comments are
      provided.

Tables 7.7-7.9 present the results of three questions related to rubrics and
other assessment tools. Half of the students responded that they are less
likely to appeal a grade when they receive tools such as rubrics. However,
rubrics and other assessment tools were only provided "very often" for 23%
of students (6/26), and these tools were "always" or "very often" helpful for
only 8% (2/26). Overall, students felt that detailed rubrics and assessment
tools resulted in them requesting a grade change less often. Based on these
results, there seems to be room for improvement in the frequency with
which rubrics are used in these students' classes, and the helpfulness of the
rubrics, in order to decrease the amount of grade appeals due to confusion.

128 | Grade Appeals
    Table 7.7 Student responses to the question "How often does your professor
provide you with an assignment tool (e.g., rubric) to help clarify/justify points on

                                         an assignment/essay?"

Response                Frequency

Very often- rubrics (or other tools) for every class 6

Somewhat often- rubrics (or other tools) for some classes 17

Rarely                  3

Never                   0

Table 7.8 Student responses to the question "Are the rubrics (or other assessment
   tools) you have been given helpful? (In other words, do they contain sufficient

information about expectations, or just vague qualifications like `poor, good, great,
                                               and excellent'?)"

Response                Frequency

Always/very often helpful - clear and detailed rubrics 2

Helpful somewhat often - rubrics with some detail 18

Rarely - vague rubrics  6

Never - Rubrics are not at all helpful 0

(Never given a rubric)  0

Table 7.9 Student responses to the question "Do the tools your professors provide
  from the previous question influence your decision to ask for a higher grade?"

Response                Frequency

Yes - I (want to) ask for a change in
grade less when receiving tools such as 13
rubrics

Yes - I (want to) ask for a change in
grade more when receiving tools such 2
as rubrics

No - Assessment tools do not influence whether I want to appeal a grade 8

Not sure                3

The survey also asked students to give descriptions of their own grade
appeal experiences. Several students responded that they felt that the
instructor did not clearly write the assignment or that there was a mistake
with the grade. However, many students responded that they requested a

                                                                           Grade Appeals | 129
grade change because they wanted to understand the correct answer and
that the instructor was very often receptive to the discussion. Selected
responses to the question "If you've asked an instructor to change a grade(s)
while at Virginia Tech, please explain your perspective of the process.
(Thoughts upon receiving the initial grade, how the instructor responded
when asked, thoughts about instructor response)" are:

   Most professors are open to the process. However, the professors
      response varies. Some professors are open to acknowledging a mistake
      and change the grade (or explaining the correct answer if I legitimately
      got it wrong). Some teachers are open to discussing the situation, but
      refuse to change the grade no matter what. Rarely, professors refuse to
      look at it at all (this only happened once to me).

   I only ask a professor to change a grade when I honestly believe what
      I've done is correct and that it will clearly affect my overall grade.
      Usually, I'm confused at first with why I was wrong. Sometimes written
      feedback clears this up, othertimes it does not. If I can't understand
      why I was wrong, I feel fine approaching the professor, explaining what
      I did, and then listening to the correction. I will often push until I can
      fully understand their reasoning, though I won't really argue for points.
      I care significantly more about understanding the problem than I do
      about the grade.

   I've never asked a professor for a higher grade.
   I felt that a couple questions on an assignment weren't worded fairly

      and thought he should not count those ones.
   There is a mistake when grading The adding number of each section is

      not correct. I asked the professor after class with my exam paper, and
      he checked it's just a calculation mistake while grading.
   They have always been respectful to my views.
   no for grade but for an exam one of my teacher encourage us to go to
      him and explain our rational for answering problems to get more points
      back which I really liked.
   I want to understand why my viewpoint or understanding isn't the
      correct response.
   I got a 89.67 I believe as a final grade and asked if he could round up so
      I'd get the A. He rounded up to a 89.7.

130 | Grade Appeals
These responses show that students are receptive to using evaluations (i.e.,
grades) and feedback to enhance their understanding of their mistakes.

Implications of the Survey for Teaching

When appealing a grade, the results of the 2017 survey show that students
prefer discussions over automatic grade changes. Because the students also
expressed interest in learning from their errors, grade appeals can increase
student learning. Professors may use appeals to increase student learning
as it gives a chance for students to reevaluate their work and their thought
processes. Grade appeals sometimes involve grading an assignment twice
and almost always include a discussion with the student, so instructors
should factor this into their schedule to anticipate appeals and "extra"
grading. Providing accessible office hours to students, especially after
returning graded work, is especially important in giving students the chance
to appeal or discuss a grade.

Using a Grade Appeal Procedure

When using grade appeals as a learning tool, the instructor should have
clear guidelines or procedures detailing the process. Policies may outline
how students should make the request (e.g., in-person during office hours,
through email), page length of appeal reasoning if applicable, and a deadline.
Allowing students to write down their rationale for their original answer
or work is a good practice in cases where they may need to defend their
reasoning but is not always applicable. Grading is often subjective, and
students may have good arguments or insights that the instructor did not
consider. Implementing a clear process for requesting a grade change
encourages the student to think critically about their work. If an instructor
does not set a deadline, some students may attempt to appeal grades at the
end of the semester to achieve a higher overall grade. The instructor should
also apply the grade appeal guidelines equally and fairly among all students.
Below is a list of items that a grade appeals policy may include.

                                                                                            Grade Appeals | 131
     Syllabus Development

          Procedure for a student to appeal grade (in-person
             discussion during office hours, written explanation/defense
             of answers by a student, etc.).

          Date(s) on syllabus for class discussion about graded
             assignment(s) where students may ask (individually or as a
             class) for help understanding their errors. Dedicating class
             time to an informal appeal, rather than requiring the process
             to take place entirely outside of class, keeps it equitable for all
             students.

          Format of the appeal. For example, will you require a new
             submission to completely replace the previously graded
             submission, or merely a written explanation/justification of
             answers marked incorrect?

          Method of re-grading. There are several options. For
             example, the number of points that a student may receive
             with a submission (e.g., half of all of the points deducted
             initially), and how the process may impact the overall course
             grade; the grade of the second submission of work (e.g.,
             second essay draft) may replace the grade of the first
             submission; and an incorrect exam short-answer question
             may receive half of the missed points back, etc.

          Deadline for student appeal submissions (time after student
             receives feedback/grade)

132 | Grade Appeals
Minimizing Appeals

Reviewing grade appeals and having discussions with students may take
extra time, but it is likely well worth the benefit to student learning. If
a professor wishes to minimize grade appeals, likely because too many
requests arise from confusion, then practices such as using rubrics and clear
feedback may help. It is important for professors to be clear about both their
grading process and their expectations for student work before assigning
grades. Providing detailed rubrics, answer keys, and examples of excellent
work (such as a past student's essay or report) can help communicate
expectations. Multiple examples of past student work can give students a
better understanding of the professor's expectations.

   Students may sometimes appeal a grade because they feel that the grade
does not reflect the effort they put into the work; some students might
assume that putting a significant amount of time or effort into an assignment
or project will result in a high grade. Instructors can eliminate this
misunderstanding by making clear whether they are grading for effort or
for understanding. (e.g., if the instructor expects a polished report that is
detailed and formatted well, or if they are primarily looking for student
understanding of concepts). Give students formatting guidelines or report
templates to save them effort on the time-consuming aspects of an
assignment if they are being graded on content only rather than on content
and presentation quality.

   Grade appeals can be an interesting form of feedback from students on
instructor performance. If an instructor receives more requests than
expected, then the instructor's expectations of students may not be
apparent. These appeals reflect a lack of assignment clarity rather than a
student interested in learning more. If an instructor receives fewer requests
than expected, there may be an issue such as students not feeling
comfortable approaching the instructor for help; office hours may conflict
with a common course time; the appeal policy's procedure or purpose may
not be clear. Setting aside class time to allow students to discuss graded
work would help students who may not have time outside of class to attend
office hours. An alternative reason for fewer appeals/resubmissions than
expected is that the work was not challenging enough for students, so
students are not motivated to improve their understanding of the material.
During the semester, the instructor may seek anonymous feedback from

                                                                                           Grade Appeals | 133
students related to the course structure and appeal procedure. The
instructor may ask students whether the written feedback on graded work
is helpful and what could make it more useful. Students may be confused
by their instructor's feedback, may not be able to read the instructor's
handwriting, or may not know the instructor's feedback exists if it is deep
within an online learning management system. An instructor may also seek
peer feedback on rubric clarity and usefulness.

   A professor can convey expectations of student work before students
complete an assignment, such as by providing a list of objectives at the
beginning of the assignment. A rubric is one way to convey expectations
for individual assignments, and is sometimes given with the assignment
instructions or when returning graded student work. A rubric may contain
detailed explanations of the instructor's expectations, including examples
of correct and incorrect answers if the instructor alternatively provides a
rubric when returning graded assignments. Vague or generalized rubrics
that do not provide detail and only list options on a scale (e.g., "poor" to
"excellent") without explanation are not useful. Detailed rubrics such as
answer keys may be a good option for large courses where it would be time
consuming to handwrite individual feedback for each student submission.

Instructor Feedback

At the very minimum, a grade marks student performance at a specific time
on a problem or concept. An informal appeal process can instead show an
improvement in student performance over time. During an appeal process,
or during general grading, instructors can incorporate useful feedback into
evaluations to improve student learning. Grading that contains feedback
rather than just point deductions is more useful in helping students to
understand their errors. Writing feedback can also reinforce and remind
instructors of topics or concepts that need to be clarified for the entire
class that they can later address in class. Useful feedback contains clear
expectations, explanation of point deduction, explanation of point
accumulation, offers of help, and consistent feedback among all students.

   When writing feedback on student assignments while grading, instructors
need to explain their rationale for deducting points or giving points
(depending on the grading style). When removing points, instructors should

134 | Grade Appeals
explain why the student's answer is wrong, inaccurate, or lacking
information. It is necessary to give feedback on how a student did not
meet expectations. This kind of feedback can have a negative tone or be
perceived as negative by the student, whether intentionally or not, especially
if there is little acknowledgment of good/correct answers. To balance this,
acknowledge areas where the student performed well, such as well-reasoned
answers or correct answers to difficult questions. Include some positive
feedback on performance to encourage growth.

   If a student appears to be struggling based on his or her performance,
offer help and follow-through. If a student completely misses the point on
an aspect of an assignment and seems to lack comprehension, the instructor
should suggest the student attend office hours or send an email with further
questions. The student may have misunderstood the assignment directions
or may need help understanding what went wrong.

   Feedback should be easily accessible to students. If an instructor writes
feedback by hand, he or she should make sure the handwriting is legible!
If an instructor's writing is difficult for students to read, consider typing
feedback instead. Typing feedback to give to students is also good personal
record-keeping; it allows the instructor to easily access and refer to previous
feedback when discussing performance with a particular student. If a
teacher or grader types feedback and puts it on an online learning
management system (e.g., Canvas or Blackboard), the evaluation and
comments should be easily accessible to students. Students may be tech-
savvy, but instructors should still let students know how to find feedback
and graded assignments within the learning management system; consider
providing this information on the syllabus.

   Good feedback also requires equity. Lack of equity, or grading with
prejudice, is a valid reason for a formal grade appeal. In order to grade
equally, the instructor should not assume that one student values feedback
more than others and write more comments on the former student's work.
The instructor also should not assume that a student does not care and write
fewer or less-detailed comments. Instructors should try to give every graded
assignment the same amount of time/consideration. If a teacher is worried
about favoring students or discriminating against individual students, they
can consider having the students turn in work anonymously or semi-
anonymously. (An example of students turning in work semi-anonymously
would be writing their name on the last page of an exam or essay rather than
the first page.) This way, the grader can evaluate the assignment without

                                                                                            Grade Appeals | 135
first looking at names, which would lower the chance of accidental bias
or prejudice while grading. Learning management systems may also offer a
way for instructors to grade electronically submitted assignments without
viewing student names.

Conclusions

Instructors may use informal grade appeals as one of many tools to help
students learn in college classrooms. Especially in courses with often
subjective content and assignments that include open-ended questions,
essays, and exam responses, allowing and even encouraging students to
appeal their grades can lead to a better understanding of the material. A
survey conducted in the fall of 2017 illustrated that students overwhelmingly
preferred their professor to have a discussion with them about a grade
appeal rather than automatically adjusting (or deciding not to adjust) the
grade. These students are eager to learn from their mistakes and develop
a better understanding of the course material. On the other hand, to avoid
grade appeals that arise from misunderstandings, instructors should use
rubrics, answer keys, and detailed feedback to help students understand
expectations and objectives to minimize the occurrence of this type of
appeal. Grade appeals can be a positive element of a course and help
students understand their mistakes, however it may require more planning
and time by the instructor.

136 | Grade Appeals
     Reflection Questions

          What is a formal grade appeal, and why should instructors
             aim to prevent their students from submitting one?

          How can an informal grade appeal procedure be used to
             encourage student growth?

          Were any of the results from the Fall 2017 survey surprising?
             Why or why not?

          What are some strategies you are going to use in your
             classroom to minimize unwanted grade appeals?

References

Brown v. Armenti, (2001), 247 F.3d 69 (3d Cir. 2001).
Corrada, R. L. (2013). Formative assessment in doctrinal classes: rethinking

   grade appeals. Journal of Legal Education. 63(2):317-329. Found at:
   http://www.jstor.org/stable/42894344.
Euben, D. R. (2001). Who grades students? Some legal cases, some best
   practices. American Association of University Professors. (Accessed
   January 2018)
   https://web.archive.org/web/20160412000414/https://www.aaup.org/
   issues/grading/who-grades-students.
Graduate School, Virginia Tech. (2020). Graduate Catalog 2020-2021.
   Available at: https://secure.graduateschool.vt.edu/graduate_catalog/
   policies.htm?policy=002d14432c654287012c6542e3720049.

                                                                                            Grade Appeals | 137
Gynnild, V. (2011). Student appeals of grades: A comparative study of
   university policies and practices. Assessment in Education: Principles,
   Policy & Practice. 18(1):41-57. Doi:10.01080/0969594X.2011.535301.

Office of the University Registrar, Virginia Tech. (2020). 2020-2021
   Undergraduate Course Catalog and Academic Policies. Available at:
   https://www.undergradcatalog.registrar.vt.edu/2021/grades.html.

Parate v. Isibor, 868 F.2d 821 (6th Cir. 1989).
Regents of the University of Michigan v. Ewing, 474 U.S. 214. (1985).
Yohn v. University of Michigan, et al. (2002). 39 Fed. Appx. 225 (6th Cir. 2002).

138 | Grade Appeals
VIGNETTE: Does "Fairness" Get
in the Way of Learning and
Equity?

  LEAH HAMILTON

  My first teaching experiences were TA assignments that largely consisted
  of grading, with the occasional responsibility for creating new assignments.
  Usually, the grading for any given assignment was split between the
  instructor and either multiple TAs or me alone. Many teaching assistants
  have likely been in this kind of multiple-grader situation and are familiar
  with the rubrics, standardization, and long instructional team meetings that
  often result from concerns over "fairness" in these situations. As it's a word I
  hear constantly in all kinds of academic meetings about course and program
  expectations, I want to investigate what we really mean when we say
  "fairness" and how a focus on so-called unfair advantages draws attention
  away from the intended outcomes of a course. Additionally, I want to present
  a few suggestions to free up the time spent litigating course administrative
  details without either being unfair or lowering the expectations for the
  course.

     In my experience, the word "fairness" is almost always invoked in tension
  with mercy or grace in situations where a student asks for some
  accommodation that could feasibly be given. It represents the idea that other
  students, having done the work in accordance with the written course policy
  and undergone any associated suffering, will be angry that "lazy" students

How to cite this vignette:

  Hamilton, L. 2022. Does "Fairness" Get in the Way of Learning and Equity? In:
  Westfall-Rudd, D., Vengrin, C., and Elliott-Engel, J. (eds.) Teaching in the
  University: Learning from Graduate Students and Early-Career Faculty. Blacksburg:
  Virginia Tech College of Agriculture and Life Sciences. https://doi.org/10.21061/
  universityteaching. License: CC BY-NC 4.0.

                                                                          Vignette: Fairness and Equity | 139
are getting special treatment. Fairness is invoked as the more justifiable
of two evils whenever a student asks for an extension without a doctor's
note, wants a copy of the lecture notes, or sleeps through the final exam.
I spent many hours stressing over whether individual emails fell within the
precedent we'd set for excuses and extensions, asking for physical doctor's
notes and pretending I had some magic power to spot fakes, and forwarding
students to the dean, who would certify their mental breakdown or family
illness so I didn't have to. The student who missed the exam dropped a letter
grade in the class, even though it reminded me of the day I had slept through
a final in undergrad and my professor let me make it up while he graded
everyone else's. It was Organic Chemistry II, which I later went on to tutor.
I don't know if the grace I was shown was fair. It was an unearned privilege
in a class many students didn't pass. I don't know if those extra 24 hours
would've made a difference for those students. But, at the same time, I was
going to fail for missing the exam, not for lack of mastering the material--is it
really fair, either, to penalize a student by not giving them a second chance to
prove themself? Who, really, is being served by course policies that prioritize
a definition of "fairness" focused mostly on deadlines and standard policies
with built-in judgments about "real" excuses that can be accommodated if
the student has time to document them? Who benefited from telling the
student in Functional Foods that it wouldn't be fair to give them a makeup
exam without documentation of one of the acceptable excuses?

   A lot of these problems stem from a desire not to make judgment calls,
as an instructor, about what constitutes a valid excuse or a reasonable
accommodation. I think that's a good instinct. Unfortunately, I think the
policies that often follow are detrimental. Leaving the decision up to
university policy and requiring someone to fit into an easy paperwork bucket
or find time to meet with the appropriate offices when they're already behind
isn't fair. Removing the burden of deciding from yourself is not the same
thing as having fair policies. When I was a TA, I spent the most time litigating
the course policies most commonly addressed by disability
accommodations: assignment formats, time limits, and deadlines. It's not
fair to change these after the fact, but if some portion of students will
suffer or perform worse in the class only because of policies, why not build
flexibility into the course from the start? Is it any less arbitrary to draw the
line at documented disabilities when the accommodation might help some
percentage of people learn better regardless? For instance, many learning
disabilities are less frequently diagnosed in women (Shifrer, Muller, and

140 | Vignette: Fairness and Equity
Callahan 2011). Requiring documentation as a prerequisite for flexibility
means your course inherits that inequity. I'd much rather spend my time
designing better assignments and talking with students about my areas of
expertise than trying to grapple with such thorny questions.

   The only way I've found to reclaim my instructional and course planning
time (as well as my office hours and inbox) from endless administrative
judgement is to refocus myself on my goals as an instructor--to teach
students the course learning objectives (CLOs) by the end of semester and
assign grades that communicate how well they learned that material--and
accept that any seemingly easy-to-enforce line I can draw will be challenged
by an edge case. Linda Nilson's Specifications Grading (2014) fits well with
this philosophy, and since my co-instructor and I have adopted it, we've
spent far less time answering endless emails about extra credit, missed
deadlines, or points back on tests. In Specifications Grading, we tie each
assignment directly to a learning objective, we communicate a clear goal that
the students must meet to demonstrate their learning (and try to be flexible
about the medium or format they use to do so), and if the students don't meet
the goal, then we give them substantive feedback and ask for a resubmission.
Resubmissions allow students to improve their grade by demonstrating that
their understanding and mastery of the material has improved instead of
quibbling about points. Whenever there are non negotiable deadlines or we
need to limit resubmissions for the sake of our own time, we can be clear
with the students about why and they're generally more understanding of
the importance since we've demonstrated that we're willing to be flexible
where we can be. We almost never have students approaching us to argue
a grade. Instead, they open office hours with "I wanted to know if I did
the statistics right here" or "I wanted to make sure I understand what I did
wrong."

   It may seem odd to be arguing against standardization and the identical
treatment of all students, but in my experience, it's not actually possible
to be perfectly logically consistent and even-handed with grading. I don't
think I'm alone, either, based on the number of ethical dilemmas I've heard
discussed at length in teaching groups that boil down to "how can I most
fairly enforce course policy?" Pedagogical tools that emerge from a focus on
"fairness," like multiple-choice tests, strict deadlines, and documentation-
focused absence policies, distract from the actual stated learning objectives
and tie grades to how well students can work the system. Too many times, a
seemingly sensible rubric has forced me to give a worse grade to a student

                                                                       Vignette: Fairness and Equity | 141
whose assignment demonstrated better mastery of the material but didn't
precisely follow directions or wasn't fully completed before the deadline.
I'd much rather tell students that I need them to demonstrate a deep
understanding by the end of the class and work with them to get there.
In my experience, that requires a lot of flexibility and a continual focus on
the CLOs. Sometimes, that means giving every student a second chance so
that you don't have to decide whether sleeping through an exam is a good-
enough excuse.

References

Nilson, L.B. (2014). Specifications Grading--Restoring Rigor, Motivating
   Students, and Saving Faculty Time. Stylus Publishing.

Shifrer, D., Muller, C., & Callahan, R. (2011). Disproportionality and learning
   disabilities: parsing apart race, socioeconomic status, and language.
   Journal of Learning Disabilities, 44(3), 246-257. https://doi.org/10.1177/
   0022219410374236

142 | Vignette: Fairness and Equity
8. How to Oversee a Laboratory
Course Taught by Teaching
Assistants: Experiences in the Lab
and Field

  EMILY T. OTT AND HANNAH Z. ANGEL

 Introduction

  As former graduate teaching assistants (TAs), we have ample experiences
  preparing for and teaching lab-based courses in the natural sciences. Here,
  we share strategies for teaching introductory soil science and forestry,
  which are often hands-on and require special instruction and demonstration
  by the TA. These activities involve a combination of field and laboratory work
  or are conducted entirely in one setting.

     Our goal is to share collective firsthand experiences and provide advice
  and suggestions for lead instructors, TAs, and others in similar endeavors
  to foster a respectful and inclusive learning environment and maintain
  productive relationships between educators and students. If an instructor
  is clear and consistent in their expectations for both TAs and students,
  everyone involved will enjoy a more meaningful learning experience.

How to cite this book chapter:
  Ott, E.T. and Angel, H.Z. 2022. How to Oversee a Laboratory Course Taught by
  Teaching Assistants: Experiences in the Lab and Field. In: Westfall-Rudd, D., Vengrin,
  C., and Elliott-Engel, J. (eds.) Teaching in the University: Learning from Graduate
  Students and Early-Career Faculty. Blacksburg: Virginia Tech College of Agriculture
  and Life Sciences. https://doi.org/ 10.21061/universityteaching. License: CC BY-NC
  4.0.
                                                                          Oversee a Laboratory Course | 143
     This chapter will discuss...

          The best management practices for preparing activities and
             teaching students in a laboratory or field setting to enhance
             student learning.

          Strategies and tips for working closely with an instructional
             team.

          The roles and responsibilities of the lead instructor and
             suggest strategies for effective mentoring and training of TAs.

          Ways to incorporate lab and lecture materials in TA
             instruction.

          Some advantages and disadvantages of co-teaching and
             serving as a graduate versus undergraduate TA

Preparing for Teaching and Co-Teaching
Laboratory Courses

Creating Lab Activities

As the lead instructor of a lab-based course, you may need to create new
lab activities or alter existing activities to fit the goals and objectives of
your course. Perhaps you want to transition to a digital learning platform
to increase the use of open educational resources (OER), which include a
variety of open-source information and materials for teaching and learning.
Regardless of whether you are starting from scratch or revising pre-existing
content, lab activities must be structured around clearly defined learning
144 | Oversee a Laboratory Course
   objectives. The construction of learning objectives is the responsibility of
   the instructor of record, not the TAs. Additionally, it is the responsibility
   of the instructor, or an experienced TA, to help the TAs understand the
   learning objectives and utilize them in a way that reinforces the concepts
   or skills students need to learn or master. For example, as lead instructor of
   the course, ask your TAs to review what should be learned during a given
   lab session (e.g., learning objectives), explain or demonstrate how it will be
   learned (e.g., activity, task, lab procedure), and finally, evaluate the broader
   implications or importance of performing that activity or task using a group
   discussion approach. Thus, from start to finish, a productive lab session is
   structured around a set of well curated learning objectives that are put into
   practice during hands-on learning.

      The creation of lab activities and learning objectives might be daunting
   when starting from scratch. Instead of creating brand-new lesson plans, we
   recommend exploring OER to gather ideas and inspiration, particularly those
   that deal with lab-based courses in similar content areas. Here are some
   example OER2 that may help create new lab activities or modify existing
   activities, many of which emphasize agriculture and natural resource-based
   fields and may be adapted to class field trips and outdoor learning:

      https://www.fortheloveofsoil.org/educate
      https://scienceofagriculture.org/
      https://learn5.open.ac.uk/course/view.php?id=2
      https://www.biointeractive.org/
      https://libguides.mines.edu/oer/findOER

   Our experience with digital learning platforms is exclusively with Canvas.
   However, the digital learning platform provided by a given institution should
   allow instructors to develop interactive learning content such as modules,
   discussion threads, multimedia files, and quizzes, which are some of the
   features offered via Canvas. In the fall semester of 2019, all of the pre-
   existing labs for the introductory soil science lab course at Virginia Tech

2. Some of the resources provided in these websites may not be true OER as
   defined at https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-oercommunitycourse-
   understandingoer/chapter/defining-oer/. Please check the copyright
   status of these resources before use, modification, etc.

                                                                          Oversee a Laboratory Course | 145
(VT) were converted to online Canvas modules. This course has four indoor
in-person labs and three outdoor field labs. During each lab week, students
were expected to complete the weekly module, which contained all of the
necessary lab materials and documents (e.g., learning objectives,
expectations, preparatory videos and readings). Our rationale for creating
these online modules was that students might benefit from having learning
materials presented in an easy-to-access digital format in addition to the
traditional face-to-face setting. Additionally, we felt that weekly modules
would increase student preparedness prior to attending lab since the
modules provided a central location for the required materials and were
presented in a well organized and engaging fashion. For example, within
modules, we posted supplementary readings, short videos, and images that
depicted the topic for a given lab week. Modules also include itemized
"before class", "during class", and "after class" to-do lists, setting up the
overall lab objectives and expectations for students. The Canvas platform
allows instructors to create short, low-stake "pre-lab" multiple choice,
matching, or short answer quizzes within modules to help orient and
prepare students for in-person lab activities. In our experience, providing
concise pre-lab quizzes has been helpful for students as it gives them a sense
of what they generally need to know before a given lab session and gives
the TAs a sense of what topics might require more instruction. Additionally,
online discussion boards post-lab offer an opportunity for students to reflect
on activities and share insight and perspectives with their classmates, which
they otherwise might not be able to do in traditional in-person settings.
Overall, expanding a laboratory course to include some online components
will likely enhance motivation and learning potential among students.

Meeting Weekly

Weekly lab meetings with the instructor and lab TA(s) are essential to a lab
course. These meetings give TAs a chance to visit and familiarize themselves
with field sites or understand how to conduct an indoor lab activity. Also,
these meetings are an important opportunity for the lead instructor to
communicate their expectations of the TAs overall roles and responsibilities
and this should be done at the start of the semester. If the lab will be
an indoor hands-on lab, it is the lead instructor's responsibility to have

146 | Oversee a Laboratory Course
the lab activities set-up before the start of the meeting. These meetings
typically last about two hours depending on how technical the lab is and
may include demonstrations of experiment procedures or other activities.
The lead instructor should practice the mechanics of the lab activities with
the TAs instead of relying on written directions. During weekly meetings,
ideas for improved teaching strategies may be shared and it is a good time
to get to know your TAs and learn their strengths and weaknesses. If there
is a lecture component to the lab course, these meetings provide a good
opportunity for the instructor of the course to catch up with the TAs on
where the whole class is at in terms of lecture content. These meetings also
provide an opportunity for the instructor to remind TAs of essential tasks,
such as how to clean up after a given lab and other housekeeping-related
notes.

   Your lab course may not have a lead TA (e.g., experienced graduate student
who regularly teaches the course), but if it does, you should make sure
to be clear and consistent about your expectations of the lead TA during
weekly meetings. In our experience, the lead TA for the soils lab course at
VT oversees the proper functioning of the lab room for teaching, which is
crucial since there are multiple TAs (e.g., 4-5). Some professors may expect
the lead TA to do much of the lab set-up and clean-up for the week, as well
as run the weekly meeting. If the instructor does not communicate clear
expectations regarding the lead TA's role, this will likely cause confusion
among the other TAs. We suggest that for a given lab the lead TA reviews the
lab procedures and activities with the TA group, while the instructor focuses
on reviewing the learning objectives and content with the TAs. Additionally,
as the instructor, it is a good idea to observe at least one laboratory session
run by each of your TAs to provide constructive feedback and to gain insight
into how labs are being taught from semester to semester. Peer observations
among TAs (i.e., one TA evaluates another TA's lab teaching) may be desired
for professional development purposes or in some cases required depending
on the department, graduate program, etc. In this case, the TA who is
teaching will receive helpful feedback from the perspective of a fellow
graduate student, and the TA who is observing may walk away with some
new teaching ideas and strategies to implement. This scenario may be a
good approach for some TAs to learn from one another without feeling
the added pressure of being evaluated by a professor. However, other TAs

                                                                       Oversee a Laboratory Course | 147
may not appreciate feedback from their peers. Regardless, there should be
a respectful dialogue beforehand regarding TA preference of who conducts
the teaching observation.

Using TA Guides

Supporting your TAs is an important goal of any lab-based course. One great
way to do this is to create detailed teaching guides or "TA guides" for short.
These should be constructed for each lab session. TA guides should provide
thorough details of the overall lab logistics, materials, and learning topics
to prepare the TA beyond what may be possible to cover during the ~2
hour weekly lab meeting. For example, a TA guide will contain supplemental
information about a given topic (e.g., sedimentary rock formation) and
teaching suggestions to help students work through activities. In contrast,
the weekly lab meeting is designed to run through the lab procedures and
logistics, which should take precedence. Nonetheless, a detailed TA guide
educates TAs on the learning topic and nuances of the lab, which is especially
helpful for TAs who lack experience and knowledge in a given area. Some
suggestions for what to include in a TA guide are:

   List of required supplies including details on what supplies each
      student needs (e.g., X number of graduated cylinders per lab bench).

   Short sections on how to "set-up" and "clean-up" the lab.
   Organized descriptions of the flow and time sequence of all lab

      activities. Some examples: students might have multiple procedures to
      complete and should start the second procedure halfway through the
      first to complete all on time. Also, there may be three separate lab
      activities, so the lab class should be split up into groups of three
      students and the activities be completed in rotations.
   Important street addresses, directions, and maps for field-trip sites.
   Announcements to be made (e.g., open-notes quiz next week, bring
      calculator, laptop, etc.).
   Common student mistakes or lab procedure pitfalls to avoid.
   Supplemental information of learning content, where necessary. Note,
      the required lab manual or readings for students should also be enough
      background information for TAs.

148 | Oversee a Laboratory Course
   Teaching suggestions relevant to the given topic (e.g., special tips on
      how to estimate the percentage of sand in the soil sample).

   Suggested questions to ask students and tips for facilitating discussion
      after lab completion.

   Example calculations necessary to complete certain activities.

Overall, the TA guide's primary purpose is to provide all TAs with clear and
detailed instruction on how to run a given lab, including background learning
information, procedures, examples, and acceptable answers to common
student questions. These weekly TA guides should eliminate confusion and
ultimately eliminate differences in teaching protocols among TAs, so that
students will have comparable lab experiences. In other words, if one TA
knows the lab procedure or content very well, they will be able to run a lab
more smoothly than a TA running the system for the first time who might
need additional help. In particular, the TA guide should have a list of supplies
required for the lab procedure, including a list of supplies that should be
on each student's lab desk. A supply list in the TA guide ensures that all
necessary supplies are accounted for by the TA at the beginning of the
lab, promoting lab room organization and teaching efficiency. Additionally,
the TA guide should include example problems and solutions for the more
technical labs (e.g., chemistry based lab). It is very helpful for students if the
TA works through these example problems with the lab class as a whole.

Lab Assignment Grading

Grading lab assignments, reports, or group projects is a responsibility for
TAs in most lab-based courses and answer keys should be constructed by
the instructor or lead TA well before the start of a given semester. Answer
keys for lab assignments should be organized in the order of the lab's weekly
schedule and include detailed information on assignment answers and
grading (point deduction, bonus points, etc.; see example at the end of
chapter). In some cases, TAs may grade specific questions with more
flexibility (i.e., at TA discretion) and these questions should be specified in
the key. Further, short answer questions may receive a range of responses,
so it is important for the instructor or lead TA to be as thorough as possible

                                                                       Oversee a Laboratory Course | 149
when developing an answer key by adding many "possible answers." TAs
must use some discernment in their grading endeavors for subjective, open-
ended, and scenario-based questions.

   It is important for the lead instructor to be available for Q&A sessions
regarding grading throughout the semester for the benefit of the TAs.
Consider organizing group TA grading sessions, which will help TAs get a
sense of how assignments should be graded and will increase the similarity
in grading among lab sections. TA grading sessions are a particularly good
idea for the first couple of graded assignments. Additionally, for lab activities
that are project-based or require a results section for certain exercises and
lab procedures, it is good to catalog the results of each lab section to assess
trends over the semesters. Include a few tables of previous year's results
for a given lab procedure in your TA grading rubric to give TAs an idea of
"what the data looks like" (e.g., soil texture data compiled across lab sections
for a given semester). Keeping track of lab section results for a given lab
procedure may be beneficial in the future as those datasets, if data are
reasonable, can be used by students in upcoming semesters. There is an
abbreviated example of a grading rubric at the end of this chapter.

Learning and Teaching Environment: Laboratory
vs. Field

Safety

Before the start of every semester, instructors must discuss laboratory and
field safety guidelines with TAs. University departments should have safety
guidelines and a chemical safety officer should be assigned to instructional
and research laboratories. The professor or lead instructor of the course
should clearly communicate verbally and in writing the laboratory safety
guidelines to the TAs and others who may work in a given lab room. If you
teach labs, you must be aware of any potential risks to yourself and your
students. What will the protocol be if a student gets car sick on a field trip?
Or a student cuts themself on broken glass? How should the TA respond
if a student refuses to wear closed-toe shoes in the lab or field or simply

150 | Oversee a Laboratory Course
forgets? As the instructor, prepare your TAs by reviewing possible scenarios
with them, in addition to pointing out safety equipment (e.g., first aid kit,
chemical shower), exits, emergency contacts, safety protocols, and proper
disposal of solid and liquid wastes.

   Before the beginning of the semester, the lead instructor must write safety
protocols and make them accessible to the TAs responsible for conducting
labs. In your safety procedures, include specific guidelines for following
safety protocols so that all TAs can similarly inform students of these
protocols. For example, if a student comes to the lab wearing sandals without
safety protocols in place, one TA might send the student home, and a
different TA might not notice the footwear, or if they do, they may not realize
that it is a safety concern. Some of your safety protocols may be left up to
your best professional judgment, whereas some protocols are set forth by
the university or the Occupational Safety and Health Organization (OSHA).
A chemical safety officer may inspect your lab at any time, so it is best
practice to enforce safety guidelines at all times to avoid paying fines from
local or state OSHA boards due to safety violations. Suppose a given week's
lab procedure includes relatively safe activities such as viewing topographic
maps or laptop work. In that case, a chemical safety officer might still require
students to wear shoes if there are chemicals stored in the lab room. To
prevent a student from missing a lab because of forgetting safety equipment,
you may consider providing personal protective equipment (e.g., lab aprons,
goggles, plastic gloves) for students utilizing the lab room.

   Lab rooms should always be stocked with the necessary safety equipment
and supplies, but what about field trips? Suppose your lab class goes on
field trips or conducts labs outdoors. In that case, you can prepare for this
by going through safety scenarios and protocols with your TAs before labs
start and make sure they are aware of how to access supplies or assistance if
needed (e.g., in case of vehicle trouble). If your lab includes driving field trips,
give the TAs first aid kits to keep in the vehicle. Outdoor dangers range from
minor bruises, cuts, insect bites and stings, to more significant concerns
such as venomous snake bites and personal health issues (e.g., dizziness,
fainting, and seizure).

                                                                       Oversee a Laboratory Course | 151
   If your outdoor field trip requires extensive hiking in the woods, you may
want to give students a list of supplies they are responsible for bringing and
wearing, such as:

   Boots or sturdy closed-toed shoes, ideally waterproof and snake-proof
   Long pants, ideally tucked into socks or boots
   Bug spray
   Sunscreen
   Poison ivy soap
   Epinephrine pen for students who are allergic to bee stings
   Rain jacket
   Warm layers for cold weather
   Fully stocked first aid kit for both indoor and outdoor settings

Supplies

As the instructor of record for a lab course, it is important to keep an
inventory of the supplies for lab activities. Lab supplies might include
materials for lab activities (e.g., soil, rock, plant samples), glassware, paper
towels, weighing tins, chemical reagents, chalk, dry erase markers, and other
items. As the instructor, you may have a more experienced "lead" TA who,
based on the nature of their teaching assistantship, is appointed to work
closely with you to efficiently run a given lab course. Lead TAs generally have
taught the lab course before and have more experience in the course topic.
As the instructor, you should advise the lead TA to create a checklist of the
lab supplies well before the semester begins to allow enough time for order
placement and shipping. If you do not have a lead TA, this responsibility falls
on you as the instructor.

   One way to manage the supply inventory is to create an Excel spreadsheet
organized by lab activity and date. For each lab or group of similar labs
(e.g., all field labs or all chemical labs), a detailed list of supplies should be
included, as well as a marking system to indicate whether an item is missing,
broken, out of stock, etc. Additionally, it will be helpful to provide brief notes
on the volume of supplies as well as the quality (i.e., indicating wear and
tear) of equipment and other classroom resources. It is a good idea to create
and provide a working template that can be used by all responsible parties

152 | Oversee a Laboratory Course
(e.g., instructor, lead TA) and can easily be reused and updated in subsequent
semesters. Advise the lead TA to update the spreadsheet weekly and then
submit it to you, the instructor, before the close of a given semester. Keeping
an inventory of supplies on a weekly basis each semester will help reduce the
likelihood of forgetting to order essential supplies before the next semester
starts. Keeping an inventory of supplies is an excellent way to help manage
your time as the lead TA or instructor since one of your responsibilities is
ensuring that labs are "ready to go."

Setting Expectations

As the instructor, creating a detailed lab safety guidelines document and
having the TAs review it with students at the beginning of the semester
creates an opportunity to set the tone for classroom expectations. In these
guidelines, it is a good idea to include a brief paragraph on acceptable lab
room behaviors. For example, one expectation might be that students must
complete hands-on lab activities in groups, while all graded assignments
must be completed individually. As the instructor, you will have acquired
many years of prior teaching experience and you will have an opportunity
to share your teaching tips and advice with your TAs during the weekly
meetings. For example, your TAs might be hesitant to show any sort of
authority when delivering laboratory expectations and safety guidelines. As
the instructor, you should help motivate and inspire your TAs by sharing a
real-life example of how you navigated a position of authority in front of
students while maintaining a welcoming and respectful atmosphere. In our
personal experiences as TAs, we discovered that the first few interactions
with students are essential in establishing how they will perceive their TA for
the remainder of the semester. Thus, we recommend that TAs be careful not
to appear overly authoritative and strict at first, but also to avoid appearing
too "laid back," which might encourage students to "walk all over you." In
many ways, teaching is a balancing act.

   During lab instruction, the TA might consider taking time at the start of
the semester to meet and greet their students and allow them to get to
know their classmates by using a short icebreaker activity. This icebreaker
approach makes it easier to transition into the mechanics of the course, such
as reviewing the safety guidelines and student classroom expectations. Also,

                                                                       Oversee a Laboratory Course | 153
TAs should remind students that the ball is in their court; in other words,
if everyone follows the safety guidelines, the lab and field experience will
run smoothly and there will be more time for discussion, sharing stories,
and capturing the fun and essence of each lab activity. Further, the use
of TA guides, as discussed above, will also help prepare TAs for setting
the proper tone and expectations for successful lab teaching. TA guides
should contain reminders of essential points to make during the lab about
safety or protocol, such as deliberately asking students to put on their seat
belts during off-campus field trips. The best way to ensure that students
follow safety procedures is to model good behavior as the TA. An example
of modeling behavior in the presence of students is dressing appropriately
for the field and dressing professionally when teaching indoors. For example,
wearing long pants and sleeves may be uncomfortable in the hot months
of late summer and early fall, but it is quite practical for field work since
it protects against poison ivy, sunburn, insect bites, etc. Your students will
be more likely to engage in good outdoor safety practices if they see their
professor and TAs following them as well. For some students, your lab might
be their first outdoor lab experience, so it is up to you and your TAs to let
them know what to expect beforehand.

Preparing to Teach Indoors vs. Outdoors

Educating students has unique challenges both inside and outside of the
classroom. For either situation, it is essential to familiarize yourself with
your classroom or field surroundings. If you as the instructor or TA will be
teaching in the laboratory, make sure to understand all of the features of the
room before you start your first class. Once you review the safety protocols
and general layout of the lab room, prepare for each lab by familiarizing
yourself with the logistics of a given lab activity. If you are the lead
instructor, walk your TAs through each lab's logistics during the weekly
meetings as discussed earlier. For example, provide your TAs with tips and
advice on how and where to begin the lab, the order of the lab activities,
and how to end the class with a wrap-up discussion and summary. Before
each lab, the TAs should have thoroughly reviewed the TA guides. If a TA is
less experienced, you as the instructor may advise him or her to practice
teaching some of the topics or lab procedure logistics in the lab room

154 | Oversee a Laboratory Course
beforehand to get a feel of the space and the technology to be utilized.
While your teaching style is unique to your personality and preferences, lab
teaching is less flexible and subjective since you will need to stay on schedule
and conduct activities using a specific "order of operations," so to speak. As
the TA, it is necessary to practice the lab logistics and review key points
beforehand, get to the lab room early on the day of your lab session, and
be concise and organized during overall lab instruction. Time management
is particularly important in the lab room since it helps the instructor better
adapt to unexpected changes that may arise, such as lab activities taking
longer than anticipated.

   You have several additional considerations in the field, such as weather
and vehicle use, if the field lab is off-campus. The TA guides should have
detailed instructions on vehicle use, from pick-up and drop-off to parking
advice, and important contacts for emergencies. Time management is also
essential during field trips, especially those off-campus, requiring you to
factor in driving time, heavy traffic hours, and how long you should take at
each stop, as there is typically more than one area to visit. For the benefit
of TAs, it is essential to conduct a dry run of the field trip to help locate and
become acquainted with the area. For the students' benefit, it is a good idea
for each TA to briefly discuss the nature and objective of the lab and field-
specific safety guidelines before departing the building. Framing the heart
of the lab will help students better understand their expectations. Also, the
beginning of the lab may be an opportunity for TAs to instill excitement and
pose to students one or more questions about the topic of the day. Once
in the field, it is helpful to give students interesting facts and background
information about the site location and reiterate the lab's key objectives. As
you would normally do in the lab room, frequently check in on the individuals
or groups of students and try to do so in a way that avoids favoritism. It
is always a good idea to have a list of questions ready to ask students to
help keep them focused on the purpose of the lab. Encourage students to
take pictures and notes for future reference. One important consideration
is to project your speaking voice in the field, as there are usually more
distractions in an outdoor environment. To boost confidence, prepare for
your field-based lab in an outdoor setting if you are not accustomed to
teaching outside.

                                                                       Oversee a Laboratory Course | 155
Setting Up and Maintaining Productive Lab
Room Dynamics

Undergraduate vs. Graduate TAs

Teaching, even for a single semester, is a valuable experience for graduate
and undergraduate students. Departments often require graduate students
to teach one semester, including responsibilities that range from grading
a few exams to overseeing a course. Sometimes these same teaching
opportunities are offered to undergraduate students. Assistant teaching as
a student, whether at the graduate or undergraduate level, is a great way
to build a resume and gain first-hand professional experience teaching in
higher education. When setting up a new course, or taking over the teaching
responsibilities of an existing class, consider how you as the instructor will
enlist the assistance of one or more TAs. Will these TAs be graduate students,
undergraduate students, or a combination of both? Table 8.1 summarizes a
few critical differences between undergraduate and graduate student TAs.

Table 8.1 Some observed differences between undergraduate and graduate TAs.

Undergraduate TAs                      Graduate TAs

Unethical for undergraduates to grade  Able to grade undergraduate work, but
the work of peers.                     may be unable to grade work of fellow
                                       graduate students.

Close in age to students.              Likely a few years older than students.

May be friends with students or know   Likely not close to students, but may
them personally.                       have had one or two classes with a few.

They have taken the course recently,   Possibly has not taken the course to be
usually in the past 1-2 years.         taught or lacks experience in the course
                                       topic.

May not be allowed or trusted to       Can supervise students.
supervise students alone.

May not be allowed to drive school     Can drive school vehicles for field trips.
vehicles for a field trip.

Your department or university may have certain stipulations in place
regarding TAs. For example, it is likely that undergraduate students at your
university are not allowed to grade the work of their peers. Another possible

156 | Oversee a Laboratory Course
concern is that undergraduate TAs are often not allowed to drive school
vehicles, although this is department- and university-specific. Not having
enough drivers for field trips might lead to the need for volunteer staff and
graduate students to help. You may work at a small college with no graduate
students at all, so the only students eligible to be TAs are undergraduates.
On the other hand, your department may need to find more teaching
assignment positions for graduate students with assistantships, and you may
only have the option of having graduate TAs.

The Student Age Gap

The gap in age and experience between a professor and their students
widens every semester; with each passing year, the professor gains more
knowledge by attending conferences, conducting research, and giving talks
on their area of expertise. With each passing semester, the students'
experiences in and out of the classroom have changed. It is essential to
recognize the impact of these differences in age, experience, and culture
and adapt your teaching accordingly so that all students feel like they are on
the same base-level understanding of the course material and feel included
in the conversation. The age gap is usually smaller between students and
TAs than between students and professors, and may even be zero between
an undergraduate TA and undergraduate students. The smaller difference in
age between TAs and students can be helpful. For example, if the professor
is having difficulty connecting with the students, they can ask for input
from the TA, who may better relate to the students. If there is a small age
gap between the students and TA, the students may feel more comfortable
going to their TA with issues than to their professor who might appear much
older and too far removed from his or her own undergraduate experience.
On the other hand, a TA might be very close in age with the students and
may unintentionally become too friendly in a way that compromises their
professional image as an educator. If either a professor or a TA becomes
too familiar with one or more of the students, it may be difficult to remain
unbiased and objective while grading. The instructor should give guidance
to TAs on how to maintain a professional relationship with students, for
example, by limiting socializing outside of class time for the duration of the

                                                                       Oversee a Laboratory Course | 157
course. Undergraduates who are potential TAs may even know students in
the class personally and should be discouraged from becoming TAs until they
are less likely to have their friends as students.

Considerations for Assigning TAs to Lab Sections

It would be inaccurate for us to make broad generalizations about
undergraduate students versus graduate students. Undergraduate students
can be "traditional" (aged 18-22) or "non-traditional." Likewise, graduate
students may have recently completed their undergraduate or master's
degree, or they may be continuing their education after being in the
workforce for years in the same or a similar field. Thus, experience and
age levels may differ quite a bit. However, the roles and responsibilities
of undergraduate and graduate students are easier to generalize.
Undergraduate students typically take several courses in one semester, with
14-20 credit hours per week of coursework before factoring in homework
assignments and class projects. Many students have a part-time or full-
time job on top of their schoolwork. With these additional responsibilities,
it is crucial to determine how much time you would require from an
undergraduate TA and whether the time required to be an undergraduate TA
would realistically fit into their weekly schedule. Ideally, an undergraduate
TA would be either paid as a student worker or given independent study
course credit, but this is not always possible, so be sure to check with
your department. In contrast, graduate students often have assistantship
contracts that factor in their time as TAs, so be sure to work with your
department's Graduate Program Director or other person who works
directly with graduate student contracts and the assignment of TAs.
Depending on the student and their contract, there may be only 10-20 hours
of teaching assigned per week. All of these details must be understood well
before TAs are assigned to lab sections and certainly before the semester
starts, as some students may only be able to teach one lab section based on
their semester course load or graduate contract. Additionally, undergraduate
students (due to their class schedule and experience level with the course
material) will likely need to serve as a "lab assistant" who is paid hourly to
help with laboratory set-up, clean-up and some in-lab activities under the
supervision of a graduate TA.

158 | Oversee a Laboratory Course
Hiring an Undergraduate TA

A great way for the lead instructor to recruit undergraduate TAs is to treat
the situation as a job that includes a job posting and an interview. Posting a
job announcement may also be an effective way of choosing a graduate TA,
although departmental procedures on TA assignments may not give you as
much flexibility. The instructor may title the job posting as "undergraduate
TA position", unless independent study course credit is offered in lieu of a
paid hourly position. Creating this posting will allow you to consider and
outline your expectations for the undergraduate TA. Your undergraduate TA
will have an understanding of their role and responsibilities. A job posting
with defined expectations for the TA position is useful even if there is only
one student who will apply because it defines your expectations clearly,
which is crucial in managing any professional relationship. We also suggest
that you do not show favoritism and automatically grant a TA position to
the "best" student in the previous class. Great TAs are not necessarily the
students who made no mistakes on their work or were persistent in asking
questions during class. A great TA will be able to communicate the material
effectively to help students understand and learn. We suggest that you set
up an interview with your prospective undergraduate TA to get to know him
or her a little better and gauge whether they would make a good TA for your
lab. Here are some questions that you might want to consider when selecting
an undergraduate student to fill a TA position:

   Does this student know their potential students very well? The
      student might be classmates with lab students in another course. An
      obvious conflict of interest arises if the student is friends with students
      in the class.

   How was this student's performance in the course when they took it?
      A good TA does not necessarily need to have received A+ grades in the
      course previously, but their previous coursework should show a level of
      understanding that would allow them to be able to explain concepts to
      other students. Attending pre-lab meetings and going over the
      professor's lab content helps reinforce the student's subject knowledge.

   Is the student interested in teaching, or would they prefer to perform
      other tasks? For example, the student may be interested in instructing
      in-lab, or they may rather help with other tasks such as grading

                                                                       Oversee a Laboratory Course | 159
      assignments, helping design activities, setting up, and cleaning up.
   Is this student calm and confident, energetic, mature? Maturity is an

      important quality for a TA. A TA should be prepared to assist and lead
      students if something goes wrong such as a fire, a chemical spill or
      burn, a student injury, a student health issue in the field, extreme
      weather in the field, etc. The TA should know about lab safety in
      addition to the course material. If the student seems too excitable or
      immature, they may not be ready to be a TA or may need extra
      guidance from you to teach and lead peers.
   Is the opportunity to be an undergraduate TA limited to one student
      per lab section?
   Has the opportunity been announced fairly so that all interested
      students may pursue the opportunity?
   Why does the student want to help teach? Is there a genuine interest
      in assisting other students in learning?
   How much effort are you willing to invest in teaching an
      undergraduate how to teach? If you only want an undergraduate TA to
      assist with grading and do not expect to mentor the student on their
      teaching, then maybe having an undergraduate TA is not a good idea.
      Enlisting the help of an undergraduate TA will not necessarily lighten
      your teaching load. If anything, it might require more time! You might
      have a graduate TA who you trust to mentor an undergraduate student
      on teaching, granting the graduate student a unique opportunity.
      Additionally, having your graduate TA train and mentor the
      undergraduate TA gives you less responsibility and work so that you
      have time to focus on other more pressing tasks.

Additionally, you as the instructor may assume that an undergraduate
student only wants to be a TA as a resume-filler or to simply have an
on-campus job, without caring much about gaining hands-on teaching
experience. You may be right, as students and young professionals are
constantly faced with the pressure to have impressive resumes of
extracurriculars and job experience. If multiple students express an interest
in a TA position, each student's reason for that interest may be more critical
to address than the student's grade and performance in the class and we
recommend that you directly ask the student, "why are you interested in this
position?" during your interview. Put another way, a student who received
an A+ in the class may not be invested in teaching versus a student who

160 | Oversee a Laboratory Course
received a lower grade and does express an explicit interest in teaching.
Good teaching does not come solely from expertise in a field but rather from
an interest in communication and self-improvement.

Establishing an Atmosphere of Respect

Academia is undoubtedly a place of hierarchies. In certain areas of academia,
the hierarchy and roles may be well established (i.e., tenured professors,
adjunct professors, etc.). Still, it is up to you as the lead instructor to
establish your personal "chain-of-command" to set clear expectations that
foster respect in the lab room. It is essential to communicate these
expectations to your TAs and students as they may be much different from
the expectations of other professors'. In this section, we will introduce some
questions to consider before the semester begins.

   Do you want your TAs to call you by your first name or Dr. [Surname]?
   Do you expect them to refer to you as only Dr. [Surname] in front of
students, or is it okay for them to refer to you more casually?
   These two questions form the basis of your (instructor) relationship with
your TAs and students. Your answer to these questions likely will depend on
how you view your TAs--as young professionals who are capable of managing
a lab section or as your subordinate and surrogate teacher. As the instructor,
are you going to manage down to your TAs or are you going to work with
them? Would you like to be referred to as Dr. [Surname] in front of students
to reinforce your authority as someone who holds a doctoral degree and
is an expert in your field? How will your TAs address you in the presence
of students? One consideration is that students may appreciate that the
relationship between the professor and TA is different than the relationship
between the professor and student. Depending on how you view the
graduate TA role, we find that allowing graduate TAs to refer to the course
professor in a casual way helps the students view the TA with greater
authority and respect. Establishing a closer relationship between the TA
and the course instructor is preferred, particularly if the TA oversees one
or more lab sections or is at the stage in their program where they are
considered a Ph.D. Candidate.

                                                                       Oversee a Laboratory Course | 161
   How much grading responsibility does each TA have, and how much does
it affect students' grades?

   As the instructor, your TAs could oversee a lab section and supervise
students without your supervision, or your TAs may just help with grading
behind the scenes. Maybe the role of your TA is to assist during labs with
no grading involved. The more TAs are involved with grading student work,
the more critical it is to foster a respectful relationship between TAs and
students. As discussed earlier, verbally communicate your expectations to
your TAs during the first couple of in-person meetings at the beginning
of the semester to be sure that everyone is clear and comfortable with
their roles and responsibilities. Additionally, it is a good idea to develop a
"Lab Management Plan" written document before the semester begins. This
document is different from the weekly TA guides because it does not focus
on how to effectively run one specific lab session, but rather it serves as
a set of best practices that the TAs can utilize for all labs throughout the
semester. In other words, the lab management plan is a comprehensive guide
that helps TAs in the lab course be more confident and successful in their
instruction given the unique nature and nuances of the course. This lab
document should be adapted to your specific lab course and might include
the following sections: lab course overview, student-teacher responsibilities,
communication, learning assessment, time management, accountability,
attitude of teacher-classroom, and enforcing lab safety guidelines. These
sections would ideally provide details on the roles, responsibilities, and
expectations of TAs to avoid misunderstanding and confusion as the
semester progresses.

   How well do you know the course material? Do any of the TAs know the
content better?

   As an educator, whether an associate professor or graduate TA, no one
expects you to know everything. You may even want to emphasize this
to your students at the beginning of the semester. The course that you
are assigned to teach might include some of the fields you are an expert
in and some content from fields outside of your expertise. Even as the
course instructor, you might encounter students or other TAs who are more
knowledgeable in a particular area. One way to handle a lack of knowledge
during your teaching experience is to simply acknowledge your level of
understanding of a specific topic to the students or other TAs. Expressing
humility and learning from others despite being the authority figure in the
classroom is a productive way to foster a collaborative learning environment

162 | Oversee a Laboratory Course
among the instructional team and students. Students can often tell when
their professor does not know the content they are teaching, so you cannot
"save face" by pretending to know better than you do. As the instructor,
expressing humility where necessary, showing respect for your TAs, and
modelling professionalism is a simple way for students to gain your respect.

Attending a Lab Section Respectfully and Productively

This section addresses how to foster an atmosphere of respect when present
and involved in lab sections taught by TAs. Not being cognizant of this
particular topic may be detrimental to student learning and compromise
professional relationships. As a professor, you have every right to attend or
sit-in on the lab sections in your course; however, we encourage you not to
underestimate the importance of attending lab sections respectfully. At the
beginning of the semester, and possibly before the semester starts, if this is
the first time you are teaching your course, think about how and why you
might attend lab sections. For example, some professors teach lab sections
themselves, and have TAs in the lab to assist students with procedures.
Table 8.2 summarizes a few lab teaching scenarios and how they relate
to the professor attending lab sections. The bulk of this chapter (and our
experience) deals with Scenario B, but we would like to present Scenarios
A and C as additional options as there are different levels of instructor
involvement in a university lab course.

                                                                       Oversee a Laboratory Course | 163
Table 8.2 Teaching scenarios in the lab room.

Scenario A:                Scenario B: TA-Led Lab      Scenario C: Professor
Professor-Led Lab          Sections                    Co-Taught Labs
Sections

 Professor teaches         TAs lead lab sections,     Two professors
    every lab section.         usually 1-2 sections        alternate teaching of
                               per TA.                     labs or lab weeks
 Course may have 1-3                                      (e.g., based on the
    lab sections.           Professor may visit           course unit).
                               the lab occasionally
 TA may grade student         to "check-in".           Instead of alternating
    work, but not teach a                                  labs, two professors
    lab section.            Multiple labs may             (or TAs) may split up
                               meet at the same            teaching
 TA may tutor                 time (e.g., large           responsibilities
    students individually      chemistry lab               within a single lab
    during lab and             classes), or only one       session.
    outside office-hours.      lab section at a time
                               (e.g., smaller classes   Usually, 1-3 lab
                               with one lab room).         sections per course.

                                                        May or may not have
                                                           a TA to assist.

If you as the instructor have TA-led labs you should establish with your TAs
at the beginning of the semester whether you will attend a lab section, and
if so, on which specific date(s). Visiting a given lab section can take many
respectful forms, from poking your head into the room to quietly sitting in
for the entirety of the lab class. You should also estimate how often you
will attend (e.g., the first few lab sections, a couple of times throughout
the semester), and stick to your word. Do not make any surprise visits, and
do not create a promise of attending without following through. If it is the
TA's first-time teaching, they may already be nervous speaking in front of
students and might be slightly more at ease without you watching, which
may improve their teaching performance. Consider what type of presence
you would like to have when visiting a given lab section (e.g., passive
approach versus a more hands-on and vocal approach) and communicate
this to your TAs. You may even ask your TAs what they prefer. Regardless,
we recommend that the instructor discuss with their TAs the reasons why
they may want to attend one or more lab sections to help alleviate any nerves
associated with teaching for the first time under supervision.

   Further, If you (instructor) have more than one TA and lab section, you
should attend all sections equally. If there is a lab section at a certain time
that you cannot attend, you should consider not attending other lab sections
for consistency among the TAs. Another option is to ask another professor

164 | Oversee a Laboratory Course
or graduate TA to observe that section if your goal is to conduct a formal
teaching observation for all of your TAs. Consider how your presence in the
lab might be a distraction to the TA and students and might give one lab
section an advantage if you are never present to observe due to a conflict
in schedule. Instead of attending the lab sections, we suggest that you make
yourself available during the lab times and let your TAs know you will be
available if they need any assistance. Hopefully, your office will be close to
the lab room, but if not, you can let the TAs know that they can send you
a quick email or text message if they need your help. It may be convenient
for you to attend a specific lab section more than others, but attending
one class more often can make the TA feel uneasy. Even if it is the only
section that fits into your schedule, and the TA knows this, it can still feel
like you are giving the TA more attention than the other TAs, which may
be unhelpful or perceived negatively (if, for example, you are correcting the
TA after a mistake, answering student questions before the TA can respond,
etc.). Overall, it is important to set fair and equal boundaries among your TAs
to cultivate respect.

   When you as the instructor attend your TA's lab section, you should
establish with your TA what you plan to do during the lab. When you attend
the lab section, will you arrive at the start of the lab? Or will you visit partway
through? Do you want to observe quietly, or do you want to help your TA
if they are unclear when instructing students on the lab procedure? Do you
simply want to be there for assistance, such as answering student questions?
One way to respectfully attend the lab section is to be there when the lab
session starts, introduce yourself, introduce the TA, verbally "hand over" the
lab to the TA, and then either sit down or leave the room. Letting your TA
know how you will use their lab time will allow them to plan accordingly.
Another consideration as the instructor is that if you interfere during any of
the lab instructions, this might frustrate and "throw off" the TA, negatively
impacting their teaching performance. On the other hand, if you quietly sit
in the back of the room to observe, you can get a good idea of how the
students handle the lab procedures and what kind of feedback might be
useful to the TA. As mentioned earlier, it is a good idea to ask your TAs if they
prefer when and how you visit and observe their lab sections. Regardless, it is
important to set these sorts of expectations ahead of time so that everyone
is on the same page and understands how a lab session will operate when the
instructor and TA are both present in the lab room.

                                                                       Oversee a Laboratory Course | 165
   If you plan on having TAs lead your lab sessions, respect your TA's
authority in front of their lab students. Interrupting the TA, contradicting
what the TA says, answering student questions before the TA can respond,
and many other considerations may lower the TA's authority over their
students and negatively affect the lab room's student-teacher atmosphere.
As a TA, establishing a tone of civil authority is crucial in the first few weeks
of the semester and will help build rapport and trust with students. As
the instructor, if you happen to hear the TA say something incorrect, we
recommend that you refrain from interrupting to correct them unless it is
particularly urgent. Everyone makes mistakes or misspeaks, and sometimes
little corrections are not needed (e.g., if a TA writes "Ca" on the chalkboard
but says "Ca2+", it is clear that the TA meant the common valence charge of
"two plus" when writing it on the board). If a correction is needed, then you
can quietly talk to the TA on the side (e.g., "I heard you tell the students that
the answer to question three is only [certain answer], but [another answer] is
also acceptable for [specific reason]"). This way, the TA can then address the
students and announce their mistake and perhaps write it on the chalkboard,
and you have corrected the issue without interfering with your TA's lab room.
Avoiding interruptions in an ongoing lab session also gives the TA a great
way to build trust with their students. We have learned that students are
more likely to respect an instructor who admits to a mistake and clears up
a misunderstanding for the student's benefit. Recognizing and correcting
mistakes gives the TA a good chance to display humility; we all get things
wrong occasionally. It is critical to correct ourselves in front of students!
Also, if you are a professor, you do not need to "one-up" your TA, or vice
versa. Your students are aware that you are the course's main instructor, and
the TA is still a graduate (or even undergraduate) student.

   In summary, when considering whether or not to attend lab sections
regularly, you should consider how many chefs are "too many for the
kitchen," as the saying goes. Co-teaching lecture courses without a cohesive
plan does not work well, and it does not work well for labs either. The topic
of co-teaching will be discussed in more detail in a later chapter. Consider
how the instructor-to-student-ratio might affect student learning. Will the
students feel intimidated with two sets of eyes watching them instead of
one? Will the students know who to ask for help? Will the students feel
comfortable making mistakes and learning from those mistakes in front of
both instructors? Make sure the students and the TAs know and understand
what your role as the instructor is when you are in the lab room versus the

166 | Oversee a Laboratory Course
lecture room. Additionally, it might be helpful if either the instructor or TA
announces to the students at the start of a given lab session what the role of
the instructor will be in the lab room.

   Here are examples of what to say when you attend a lab:

   "Good morning students, today I'll be sitting in to observe the lab
      session. I'm working with the TAs to do teaching evaluations, so I'll be
      sitting in the back taking notes. Please pretend I'm not here and direct
      all questions to your TA."

   "Hello everyone, I wanted to come to the lab today because this is my
      favorite lab of the semester. TA will explain the procedure and get you
      started as usual, and I'll also be here to help you as you go and answer
      questions."

   "I'll be driving one of the two vans for our field trip today. Once we get
      to the site, I'll hand over the lab to [TA name] as usual."

As the instructor, attending lab sections that are led by your TAs is fine
and, in some cases, highly encouraged. However, we suggest visiting the labs
thoughtfully and with the intent to maintain students' respect for their TA
and you. Asking TAs what they think of the above points is also an excellent
idea to make them feel their opinions are valued. Failing to consider all
the points discussed above may cause frustration for the TAs and students,
ultimately resulting in a poor teaching and learning environment.

Mentoring TAs to Ensure Effective Teaching

If you as the instructor view your relationship with your TAs as a mentor
instead of a manager, you are more likely to gain TA and student respect
and foster active learning. Your TAs are likely learning how to teach, so
it is your job to help them in the process. If you as the instructor lack
teaching experience or you have no training in education, then there is
no shame in learning with your TAs. An example would be to devise an
active learning activity, for either lecture or lab, and ask your TAs to assist
in the activity and provide feedback. A lot of teaching is simply trial and
error. Seeking out pedagogical resources, many of which are open access
online, would be a great task to do with your TAs. After exploring some

                                                                       Oversee a Laboratory Course | 167
educational training resources online, use the weekly TA prep meetings to
brainstorm better ways to present the learning objectives at the beginning
of a given lab and the discussion component following activities at the end.
Take this meeting time as an opportunity to explore and try new teaching
methods that are low-stakes and do not necessarily change the main goals
and objectives of a given lab. Additionally, supposing you are not formally
trained in education, it is not advisable to direct your TAs to perform specific
pedagogical practices in which you have no experience. Even if you have
education training, it is better to mentor rather than manage your TAs
teaching style, giving them the room and flexibility to learn and evaluate
their teaching as they desire.

   One aspect of mentoring is providing evaluation and feedback to young
professionals where necessary. Remember as the instructor to give criticism
sandwiched between compliments and positive comments; the TA will be
less likely to take your feedback into consideration if it only focuses on
the negative aspects of their performance. Help your TAs recognize the
importance of maintaining a growth mindset by sharing experiences of how
you as an early educator struggled to improve in certain areas and succeeded
in the end. If you plan to evaluate a TA, do not sit in on their lab unannounced
or without an observation plan, but rather be clear and transparent on how
you will conduct an observation. For example, are you going to jot down
some notes, or will you use a form? When and how will you discuss the
assessment with the TA? It is not appropriate to discuss a TA's evaluation
in front of other TAs or students. If you have multiple TAs, then all of them
need to be equally evaluated. Typically, teaching evaluations are required
for internal purposes by your university department. Even if you are not
planning or required to conduct teaching evaluations, keep in mind that
one of your TAs might request one for professional development purposes.
Your TA evaluation efforts can be used later in a reference letter or teaching
portfolio.

168 | Oversee a Laboratory Course
Utilizing TAs in Various Components of a Course

Teaching assistants can be wonderful assets in a professor's lecture class and
their fellow TAs' lab sections. Their participation can include guest lecturing,
co-teaching with other TAs (discussed below), proctoring exams, and helping
other TAs during particularly resource-intensive and time demanding
classroom or lab activities. If your course has a laboratory section, it likely
includes a lecture section as well. As the instructor, consider if you want
your TAs to attend the lecture sections to better understand what students
are learning. Having your TAs attend lecture classes might help them teach
more effectively in their lab section(s) and it is especially helpful if they lack
experience in the subject area or if it is their first-time teaching. However,
your TAs might already be busy teaching a 3-hour lab once or twice a week
and spending another 1-3 hours per week preparing for the lab, grading
assignments, and addressing student questions through email and in-person
office hours. When requesting the attendance of your graduate TAs in the
lecture, consider their teaching appointment (i.e., 10-20 hours per week)
and the fact that they are also working on their research in addition to the
teaching assignment.

   If you require TA attendance during the lecture, then try to make good
use of their time. Some examples of TA lecture duties may include passing
out and collecting papers, helping students with classroom group work or
activities, keeping track of attendance, and watching for students who are
struggling. If you only want TAs to attend the lecture so that they are aware
of the lecture material and schedule, consider an alternative to save your TAs
some time in their schedules. For example, you may inform students during
weekly lab meetings about what was covered in the lecture, whether you are
on schedule or behind, and so on. Guest lecturing is a valid option to have
on the table and it is an excellent learning and resume-building opportunity
for graduate students. Additionally, guest lecturing may help professors with
their workload and semester travel plans. Further, one of your TAs might
specialize in a particular topic due to research experience or because they
have taken many courses on the subject. Students taking the class will likely
gain new perspectives and encouragement for pursuing advanced degrees
if they observe and learn from a graduate student who is guest lecturing.
Further, just as you (i.e., lead TA or professor) should communicate with
your TAs regarding their roles in the lab room, you should also express your

                                                                      Oversee a Laboratory Course | 169
expectations of TAs in the lecture portion of the course, if one exists. If
you would like for the TA to help students work on an in-lecture exercise,
demonstrate the task and expected results to the TA before class. Although
the TA may know the course material quite well, this does not guarantee that
they can follow a specific problem if they are put on the spot in the lecture
room without first being adequately prepped. The TA may provide a different
answer that is correct, but not one that you considered, or the TA might
provide an incorrect or unhelpful answer; thus, it is best to make a plan
beforehand so that everyone is on the same page. Additionally, one TA might
have suggestions for improvements to the lecture lesson plan or concerns
about the feasibility of a particular in-class activity. Thus, preparing your TAs
for the in-lecture exercise beforehand and having a discussion afterwards
on what went well will help build upon the professional relationship and
improve the teaching and learning environment for everyone.

   Undergraduate TAs and sometimes graduate TAs, if they attended the
same university for their undergraduate degree, may have recently taken
the lab course to be taught. A TA that has recently completed your course
might give a unique perspective to your class. For example, if you have a
TA who has taken your course, this TA may provide you with better insight
into whether certain lab activities worked for the students. If you make small
changes to your course every semester, asking this TA for insight could be
incredibly helpful. They might tell you that a particular lab required much
more explanation than given, but that the students were too confused to
ask for help, so you might not have noticed. Or, the TA might inform you
of topics that the students found especially interesting. The smaller the
age (or experience) gap, the more relevant the insight your TA will be able
to give you when you are developing and making changes to your course.
Conversely, a graduate student who took a similar course with a different
professor at another university may offer insight and other ideas that you
may decide to incorporate into your lab course.

170 | Oversee a Laboratory Course
Fostering a Positive Learning Environment

An essential part of being an educator of any sort is making everyone in
the classroom feel welcome. Teaching laboratory-based courses requires
students to work closely with others and be comfortable asking for help,
especially since lab activities are almost entirely hands-on. Thus, reassuring
students and even other TAs that you (instructor) are here to support them
in your highest capacity is an effective way to boost morale and increase
learning for all. In the lab, there will be a variety of students with different
backgrounds and experiences. Since there will also be a variety of preferred
learning styles from students in the classroom, we advise TAs to mix up their
teaching style to include passive and active forms of engagement during
each lab session. For example, instead of asking questions by calling on
individual students during pre-and post-lab discussions, opt for allowing
students to form group discussions first before sharing with the entire class,
or pass around notecards for students to write down their answers, which is
particularly helpful for more introverted individuals.

   At the start of the semester, make sure to review the resources your
university provides for students with accessibility issues. As the instructor,
make sure to educate your TAs on the proper protocols for accommodating
students with disabilities (e.g., the deadline for students to provide an
accommodation letter). As the lab TA, be sure to remind students of your
office hours and frequently offer help sessions outside of the scheduled
lab class. Other considerations for improving the learning environment as
the instructor or TA would be to write a diversity statement in the front
matter of your lab manual and utilize pronouns (e.g., she, her), encouraging
students to feel comfortable doing so as well if they wish. Another important
consideration is the accessibility of instructional materials, whether as a
word document (e.g., syllabus, lab manual) or educational video. There are
many online resources that help guide instructors on how to convert online
documents, handouts, and videos to more accessible versions for students,
from providing hyperlinks in Microsoft Word to generating captions for
videos and other media. Visit this webpage to find several resources and
articles from the National Center on Disability and Access to Education:
https://ncdae.org/resources/.

                                                                       Oversee a Laboratory Course | 171
   Another consideration is including TAs in the preparation of lab activities.
For example, it might be helpful for you as the instructor to request
constructive feedback during weekly meetings and, if necessary, recruit help
in designing or reviewing a new lab activity or modifying lab procedures
from previous semesters. Whether or not a TA has any experience with
a particular subject, they may have helpful insight into how a lab activity
could be improved, particularly after having taught a given lab. If you, as the
instructor, have not taught a lab section for several semesters, you may have
lost sight of how a particular lab is conducted. Thus, you may be stuck in
the conventional way of how a given lab was run while ignoring new and
potentially more effective strategies. Therefore, it is essential to provide TAs
with a platform to voice their opinions and concerns. Making a concerted
effort to include TAs in the discussion will only improve everyone's learning
and teaching environment.

Co-Teaching

Many of the same principles discussed above apply to co-teaching with
faculty members or TAs. Some examples include attending the co-teacher's
lab or lecture and maintaining effective communication regarding co-
teacher roles, responsibilities, and expectations. It is generally best practice
to stay engaged and attentive while your fellow TA or faculty member is
teaching lab or lecture. In some cases, co-teaching may be a viable option.
For example, in the soils lab course at VT, we had one of our undergraduate
TAs, who are less experienced, co-teach with a more experienced graduate
TA. During the first one or two labs, the undergraduate TA simply assisted
the other TA to see how the lab is run before taking on any active teaching
roles. The graduate TA guided, mentored, and offered suggestions for how
and where the undergraduate TA could be useful. Depending on the
undergraduate TA's level of experience, the laboratory instruction may be
split in half; that is, one TA may discuss some of the material (e.g., more
technical), while the other TA covers the remaining material (e.g., less
technical). During co-teaching, it is essential to keep the flow of the
instruction logical, organized, and clear for students. Thus, it might be
helpful to briefly overview "who will teach what and when" at the start of the

172 | Oversee a Laboratory Course
lab. Also, if there is more than one lab activity, the co-teaching tasks may
be split up between different activities (instead of both teachers covering
one topic) to give students appropriate time to adjust to different teaching
styles and personalities. Co-teaching may involve many other scenarios,
such as co-teaching with two faculty members in a lecture-style classroom.
As one might expect, co-teaching includes both pros and cons related to
classroom size, instructor personality, experience level, background, conflict
management styles, and so forth. Before setting up a co-taught classroom,
there are several considerations to take into account. Co-teaching has
several advantages in lab-based hands-on courses since students benefit
from greater one-on-one guidance and support. Based on our experiences
co-teaching with both undergraduate and graduate TAs, we created a list
of benefits and considerations that should be addressed before co-teaching
with other TAs (Table 8.3). We recommend exploring Cook and Friend (1995),
which is an article covering many key topics related to co-teaching.

Table 8.3 The benefits and considerations of co-teaching a laboratory course.

Benefits                               Considerations

 Allows a less-experienced             Requires extra "set-up" time on the
    instructor to "shadow" and             part of the primary instructor or TA
    observe a more experienced             (e.g., time spent meeting with the
    instructor.                            co-teacher).

 Provides an opportunity for           Requires clear organization,
    professional development and           communication, and respect between
    reinforcement of knowledge for         instructors.
    an undergraduate TA.
                                        Inefficient use of lab space with two
 Allows for students to receive           instructors.
    help and instruction from an
    additional instructor with          Student may have negative
    different perspectives and             perceptions of lab activities with two
    teaching styles.                       instructors present in the room (i.e.,
                                           feeling overwhelmed or pressured to
 Increased one-on-one                     perform).
    assistance is especially helpful
    with "hands-on" activities in lab
    settings.

                                       Oversee a Laboratory Course | 173
Conclusions

Laboratory courses require a combination of teaching strategies and
generally take more preparation and time-management skills. Additionally,
since lab-based courses usually involve multiple TAs and may include both
a lecture and lab component within the course, it is essential to keep
expectations clear among the instructional team and student-teacher.
Maintaining effective communication between TAs and instructors should
help create a well-functioning laboratory and an enjoyable working
environment. Students who take lab-based courses may not be accustomed
to the hands-on nature and group-learning format of lab classes. It is the
responsibility of the TA or instructor to be prepared for every lab, help
students stay engaged with the learning content, and facilitate discussions
regarding the importance of each topic. Perhaps the best way to succeed
in a lab course as an educator is to stay prepared and organized, which
will in turn increase confidence. Proper lab planning and preparation, as
described in this chapter, will allow the lab field trip, activity, or procedure
to run smoothly and create a meaningful learning environment for most
students. To effectively oversee a lab course as the lead instructor, it is
necessary to provide clear instructions and expectations for your TAs. The
teaching expectations in lab-based courses go beyond what is expected from
a traditional lecture-style course. Even the seemingly smallest efforts, such
as creating detailed TA guides for each lab and having a weekly coordination
meeting, can have a positive impact on TA performance.

174 | Oversee a Laboratory Course
Reflection Questions

  Will you be teaching a laboratory, field, or combination
     course? What strategies will you use to motivate and inspire
     students aside from the hands-on nature of the course?

  What are some challenges you have faced or think you
     might face working with a an instructional team (e.g.,
     professor, TAs) or co-teaching with another instructor?
     Reflect on your experiences and consider some possible
     scenarios given your unique teaching appointment.

  Describe some ways that you might positively improve your
     work conditions in a lab room or field setting and manage
     conflict if and when it arises.

  Have you considered the benefits of co-teaching in your
     courses? What about the use of open educational resources or
     digital learning platforms? Consider alternative ways to
     enhance the student learning environment.

                                                              Oversee a Laboratory Course | 175
Table 8.4 Example Undergraduate TA Position Description

Position Title:  Undergraduate Teaching Assistant for Soils Lab

                 This is a unique opportunity for teaching and leadership
                 experience in Soil Science. The undergraduate teaching assistant
                 (TA) role will include shadowing the Lab Coordinator and helping
                 with lab set-up, clean-up, and instructing. Applicants must be
                 available on Monday mornings for lab preparation and on
                 Tuesday mornings to attend the lab. Specific times for clean-up
                 and set-up are flexible.

                 Description of specific duties:

Job               Independent clean-up work, such as washing lab dishes,
Description:         grinding soil, and general cleaning.

                  Instructing students on background information for lab
                  Instructing students on lab procedures
                  Assisting students during lab activities
                  Answering student questions during office hours or optional

                     study session

                 The undergraduate TA may lead 2 or more labs if they have
                 background knowledge (e.g., Soil Chemical Properties lab if the
                 student has taken Environmental Soil Chemistry course, Soil
                 Profiles and Description lab if the student has been involved with
                 Soil Judging, etc.). The undergraduate TA will teach under the Lab
                 Coordinator/Lead Graduate TA, who is responsible for grading
                 assignments and will lead most lab sessions.

                    The position may be paid, up to 10hrs/week depending on
                 available funding.

Qualifications:   Junior or Senior standing
                  Crop and Soil Sciences (CSS), Environmental Science (ENSC)

                     major preferred. Applications with similar major/minor (e.g.,
                     Biological Systems Engineering) will be accepted if
                     appropriate coursework has been completed.
                  Must have taken Soils and Soils Lab (CSES 3114, 3124) and at
                     least one of the following:
                     Wetland Soils and Mitigation, Soil Genesis and Classification,
                     Reclamation of Drastically Disturbed Lands, Environmental
                     Soil Chemistry, Geomorphology, Soil Fertility and
                     Management
                  Comfortable speaking in front of groups
                  Ability to explain soil science concepts to peers

How to Apply:    Send resume and short statement of interest to:
                 [Department Student Support Coordinate or Course Instructor]
Contact for      Course Instructor
questions and
more                Lab Coordinator/Lead Graduate TA
information:

176 | Oversee a Laboratory Course
Example Grading Key

          Text in orange represents the answer guide and point deduction.

Notebook 4: Field Trip #1 - Soil Profiles and Parent
Materials

Total Possible Points: 20
   (10 total; 5 pts. each) Profile Descriptions
   Profile description sheets for the two FT1 soils are on the following pages.

Fill these out and save them for the final report.
   (10) Summary Questions

 1. What is the main soil forming factor that is different between the two
      soils (Brush Mtn. and TRC)?
      Parent material rock type (but not soil type, both are residuum). Brush
      Mountain is sandstone (soil pit 1), TRC is limestone (soil pit 2).
      3 points total:
      -2 points if parent material and rock type (e.g., sandstone) is not the
      answer given.
      -1 point if `parent material' alone is given without rock type.

2. How does this soil forming factor influence the soil morphological
      properties and land use management of the two soils? Compare and
      contrast for each soil.
      Soil Pit 1: yellowish brown, shallow, sandy, Bw horizon. The sandstone is
      not easily weatherable; thus, shallow to bedrock which affects
      conventional septic systems. Steep slopes and sandier, less fertile soils
      make forestry the best land use option.Soil Pit 2: reddish brown, deep,
      clayey, Bt horizon. Less restrictions. Deeper soil and higher clay
      content makes this a better agricultural soil. The gentle sloping
      landscape is easier to develop.
      4 points total. 2 points per soil for key morphological properties (depth,
      texture) and land use.
      -1 point if overall depth or texture is incorrect or not mentioned.
      -1 point if land use is incorrect or not mentioned.

                                                                       Oversee a Laboratory Course | 177
3. Explain how the climate differs at the two soil locations.
     Brush mountain is on the top of a mountain, TRC is in the valley. Brush
     Mountain is a few degrees colder than the TRC. Brush Mountain is also
     north facing, which would be colder than the SW aspect at TRC.
     3 points total:
     -1 point if no thorough explanation (i.e., just `Brush Mtn is colder').
     -3 points if no answer or given answer is not climate related.

References

Arthur Lakes Library. (2021, Dec. 9). Open educational resources.

https://libguides.mines.edu/oer/findOER

Arreola, R. A. (1998). Writing learning objectives: a teaching resource document

from the office of the vice chancellor for planning and academic support.

The University of Tennessee, Memphis. p. 1-6. http://www.icoph.org/

dynamic/attachments/resources/learning_objectives_tennessee.pdf

Cook, L. & M. Friend. (1995). Co-teaching: guidelines for creating effective

practices (EJ545936). ERIC.

Howard Hughes Medical Institute. (n.d.) BioInteractive.

https://www.biointeractive.org/classroom-resources

Lumen  Candela.                    (n.d.).  Understanding   OER.

https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-oercommunitycourse-

understandingoer/chapter/defining-oer/

The National Center on Disability and Access to Education. (2022). Resources.

https://ncdae.org/resources/

The Open University and The Wolfson Foundation. (2013). The open science

laboratory. https://learn5.open.ac.uk/course/view.php?id=2

New Mexico State University. (2021). Science of agriculture.

https://scienceofagriculture.org/

Vaughan, K. Y. & Pressler. (n.d.). For the love of soil.

https://www.fortheloveofsoil.org/about

178 | Oversee a Laboratory Course
VIGNETTE: Use of Personal

Response System in Classrooms

SIHUI MA

Years of research on neuroscience and the scholarship of teaching and
learning have provided solid evidence that students get knowledge through
active learning (National Research Council, 2000). Instead of pouring
knowledge into students' heads (passive learning), active learning requires
students to construct understanding rather than purely receiving. Often,
active learning provides students a richer experience than listening to
lectures that likely involve elaborative encoding and experiential memory
(Brown, 2014). Personal response systems--from traditional handheld
iClickers to smartphone-based applications such as TopHat to the polling
function of Zoom for virtual classrooms--is one practical tool that can allow
teachers to implement active learning in the classroom (Silberman, 1996).

   In addition to active learning and student engagement, personal response
systems provide instant evidence of student learning. It is well-established
that we learn from practice and feedback (Schmidt, 2019). By giving frequent
evaluations about student performance, we help our students learn through
guidance on future effort. However, if the feedback is not provided early on,
it is less effective at helping students stay on track after multiple attempts.
The use of a personal response system in the classroom can prompt
feedback on student learning that can be incorporated in subsequent
teaching and learning.

How to cite this vignette:

Ma, S. 2022. Use of Personal Response System in Classrooms. In: Westfall-Rudd,

D., Vengrin, C., and Elliott-Engel, J. (eds.) Teaching in the University: Learning

from Graduate Students and Early-Career Faculty. Blacksburg: Virginia Tech

College of Agriculture and Life Sciences.   https://doi.org/10.21061/

universityteaching. License: CC BY-NC 4.0.

                                            Vignette: Personal Response Sysem | 179
   Before investing in personal response systems, teachers often consider
the following questions: (1) Which one should I choose, handheld or
smartphone-based? (2) How much does it cost? (3) Does it improve the
academic performance of students? (4) Do students like it? (5) Is it a
distraction to students? The research findings on using a smartphone-based
application (TopHat) in an undergraduate Food Science class may provide
you some insights into the above questions (S. Ma, Steger, Doolittle, &
Stewart, 2018; Sihui Ma et al., 2020). TopHat is an application that students
install on their smartphones. Using the Polls and Quizzes function, teachers
can ask fourteen different types of questions to assess student learning. In
this class, TopHat was used to break down each of the 50-min lectures into
three shorter episodes.

   We chose the smartphone-based personal response systems over the
traditional handheld ones for several reasons.

 1. For student learning, this application allows for the ability to use
      questions other than simply true/false or multiple-choice--for
      example, circling the wine production region on a map.

2. Additionally, we were curious if we can turn smartphones into an
      instructional tool for both teaching and learning. We cannot deny that
      we bring our smartphones everywhere, and use them frequently,
      including attending classes via their device (Tindell & Bohlander, 2012).
      On the other hand, we cannot deny the evidence that multitasking,
      such as listening to lectures while using smartphones, is detrimental to
      student learning and performance (Schmidt, 2020). These significant
      problems bring us the golden opportunity to teach our students to use
      their smartphones to help them learn effectively.

3. This is a new area of research that we want to explore and eventually
      contribute our findings to the scholarship of teaching and learning.

The cost of using TopHat is problematic. The Pro version of TopHat is free
for teachers, but students may need to pay. The basic version of TopHat is
free to students, but it only comes with the polling feature; the quiz feature
is not included. So if you would like to assign points to the questions that
are implemented using TopHat and include the points in your grade book,
students will need to purchase the Pro version, which (as of this writing)
is $30 per student for four months, or $48 per student for 12 months. The
cost is more justifiable if students use TopHat in multiple classes for multiple

180 | Vignette: Personal Response Sysem
terms or if the institution purchases a campus-wide subscription (TopHat,
2021). Another cost-saving approach is to ask the teaching and learning
center on campus if they are willing to cover the cost through teaching
enhancement grants, but this method may not be sustainable.

   We found that using TopHat in lectures improved student performance
in the Wines and Vines class. Student performance was measured using the
scores on quizzes. Students performed better on quizzes covering content
in which TopHat was used in the lectures than for content in which TopHat
was not used in the lectures. However, this effect was only observed on
questions that assess lower levels of thinking (Remembering, Understanding,
and Applying) as defined by Bloom's Taxonomy, not those that assess higher
levels of thinking (Analyzing, Evaluating, and Creating). In other words, if you
are teaching a lower-level undergraduate class in which most of the learning
objectives involve lower cognitive thinking, using TopHat in the lectures is
likely to help the student learn and perform better.

   We used a survey at the end of each semester to collect student
perceptions of the use of TopHat. Students believed that the use of TopHat
improved their learning, encouraged more higher-level thinking during
class, and improved their focus on the course. They also considered TopHat
easy and straightforward to use. However, we do not know if students would
still like to use TopHat if they had to pay for it.

   We also gathered information from the survey results about whether
students think they are distracted by using their smartphones to answer
TopHat questions. Although the self-reported data show that students feel
using TopHat did not divert their attention from the course, our observations
tell us that students are likely to use their smartphones for non-instructional
purposes after finishing TopHat questions. Further, the instructors observed
that the use of smartphones caused a multitasking distraction that lasted at
least 5 minutes following the TopHat questions. Students may be confident
in their multitasking capabilities and may not believe multitasking negatively
affects their learning. Substantial evidence gathered from research
demonstrates negative consequences from distracted learning (Schmidt,
2020). However, students will not change their behaviors or stop using their
smartphones for non-instructional purposes during class if they do not
believe multitasking interrupts their learning (May & Elder, 2018). Teachers
can help students understand the negative impact of distracted learning by
demonstrating it in class activities (Schmidt, 2020).

                                                               Vignette: Personal Response Sysem | 181
   Overall, the use of smartphone-based personal response systems during
lectures can improve student academic performance, and students reported
that they like to use them if they are free. However, smartphone use for
instructional purposes may introduce a distraction to the classroom--that is,
multitasking by using the smartphones for non-instructional purposes while
learning. Teachers need to strategically incorporate smartphone-based
personal response systems to serve their purpose of facilitating learning and
avoiding the negative impact of distraction.

References

Brown, P. C. (2014). Make It Stick. Harvard University Press.
Ma, S., Steger, D. G., Doolittle, P. E., & Stewart, A. C. (2018). Improved

   academic performance and student perceptions of learning through use
   of a cell phone-based personal response system. Journal of Food Science
   Education, 17(1). https://doi.org/10.1111/1541-4329.12131
Ma, Sihui, Steger, D. G., Doolittle, P. E., Lee, A. H., Griffin, L. E., & Stewart,
   A. (2020). Persistence of multitasking distraction following the use of
   smartphone-based clickers. International Journal of Teaching and Learning
   in Higher Education, 32(1), 64-72.
May, K. E., & Elder, A. D. (2018). Efficient, helpful, or distracting? A literature
   review of media multitasking in relation to academic performance.
   International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education, 15(1),
   1-17.
National Research Council. (2000). How People Learn: Brain, Mind,
   Experience, and School: Expanded edition. National Academies Press.
Schmidt, S. J. (2019). Rethinking our approach to mistakes. Journal of Food
   Science Education, 18(4), 76-77. https://doi.org/10.1111/1541-4329.12172
Schmidt, S. J. (2020). Distracted learning: Big problem and golden
   opportunity. Journal of Food Science Education, 19(4), 278-291.
   https://doi.org/10.1111/1541-4329.12206
Silberman, M. (1996). Active Learning: 101 Strategies to Teach Any Subject.
   ERIC.

182 | Vignette: Personal Response Sysem
Tindell, D. R., & Bohlander, R. W. (2012). The use and abuse of cell phones
   and text messaging in the classroom: A survey of college students. College
   Teaching, 60(1), 1-9. https://doi.org/10.1080/87567555.2011.604802

TopHat. (2021). TOPHAT. https://tophat.com/

                                                              Vignette: Personal Response Sysem | 183
9. Teaching, Training, and
Mentoring Students in Research
Practices Inside and Outside the
Classroom

  ANNE M. BROWN

 Introduction

  Graduate students and faculty often engage in supporting, training,
  teaching, and mentoring undergraduate researchers in order to achieve
  research project milestones and to contribute to university experiential
  learning initiatives, much as you may be doing now. However, as you may
  have found, little training or guidance exists on how to successfully engage
  and train students in the research environment of an R1 university setting.
  Undergraduate research is identified by the Association of American
  Colleges and Universities (AAC&U) as a high-impact practice (HIP) (AAC&U,
  2020). These undergraduate research experiences can be very valuable in
  enhancing workforce development skills for undergraduates, but lack of
  planning, project scope, training, acknowledgment of skill level, and
  consideration for how to best train and teach students can be challenges for
  both graduate students and faculty. This chapter outlines an organizational
  teaching structure that can be used to engage students in undergraduate

How to cite this book chapter:
  Brown, A.M. 2022. Teaching, Training, and Mentoring Students in Research Practices
  Inside and Outside the Classroom. In: Westfall-Rudd, D., Vengrin, C., and Elliott-
  Engel, J. (eds.) Teaching in the University: Learning from Graduate Students and Early-
  Career Faculty. Blacksburg: Virginia Tech College of Agriculture and Life Sciences.
  https://doi.org/ 10.21061/universityteaching. License: CC BY-NC 4.0.

  184 | Teaching, Training, and Mentoring
research in a traditional (e.g., classroom) and a non-traditional (e.g., research
lab) environment. Additionally, this chapter offers best practices to ensure
a successful experience in teaching, training, and mentoring undergraduate
research students in a research-intensive university setting.

     This chapter will discuss...

          Strategies for structuring research experiences in a
             classroom or lab environment.

          Practices to incorporate in the mentorship of students in
             undergraduate research

Background

The role of experiential learning in higher education is expanding as new
initiatives and strategic plans incorporate and support the practice in the
undergraduate career of all students (Eyler, 2009). Pioneered by David Kolb
in the 1980s, experiential learning can be cyclic and moves students from
"concrete experiences" to "active experimentation/application", with
reflection and conceptualization components integrated into the cycle (Kolb,
1984). As a collective whole in higher education, "experiential learning" is
frequently used synonymously with the term "experiential education."
Experiential education is often viewed as the broader philosophy of the
complete educational pathway of a student, whereas experiential learning
applies to an individual learning experience. This experiential learning
process benefits students by grounding the theoretical core domain
knowledge in an applied setting, where it harnesses the creativity of
students to promote deeper levels of critical thinking, and it can incorporate

                                                               Teaching, Training, and Mentoring | 185
a "trial-by-error" level of confidence and engagement with the material
(Kolb & Kolb, 2018). Experiential learning can take many forms, including
field work, internships, service-learning, and, in the context of this chapter,
undergraduate research.

   Undergraduate research experiences (UREs) can be a pivotal experience
for students, regardless of major and anticipated career routes (NASEM,
2019). Undergraduate research is considered one of the high-impact
practices (HIPs) defined by the Association of American Colleges and
Universities (AAC&U) and can benefit students by its integration in a
classroom setting or in an applied learning setting (e.g., in a lab, in the
field, etc.) (AAC&U, 2020). Often, undergraduate research is not a well-
understood activity for undergraduate students in their first and second
year, especially at a research-intensive (R1) university. Students often hear
about undergraduate research opportunities, but are rarely exposed to what
that represents for both the institution and for them in their own personal
career journeys. As faculty members in the university, we can fill this
knowledge gap by improving the communication systems to emphasize the
utility and impact of undergraduate research, alongside training in research
and data literacy, on our students' durable skills.

   Research as a broad conceptualization can engage students in thinking
about questions they have about the world or an area of personal topic
interest, promote a route for them to explore these questions, and ultimately
collect necessary information (data!) to make decisions. Students develop a
variety of skills such as information management, data management, data
ethics, and problem solving during a URE. Importantly, students can leverage
these UREs in their future careers--the major skills of critical thinking/
problem solving, communication (oral, written, digital), and teamwork/
collaboration that are developed during a URE influence the abilities of
individuals in every sector of the workforce (McClure-Brenchley et al., 2020).
Conveying the broad skillsets learned in an URE, in addition to the domain-
specific technical aspects, can be incredibly useful in promoting these
experiences for students and often enhance engagement as well (Brown et
al., 2016). Describing these topics to the students as both skills learned and
marketable features as they enter the next steps of their careers can further
clarify the role of the university research enterprise to students.

   As faculty members and graduate students, we can recognize the
importance of UREs for undergraduates, but how do we creatively,
strategically, and equitably engage students in these skills without

186 | Teaching, Training, and Mentoring
overtaxing our own capacities? We must structure an unstructured
experience, frame skill development, and focus on both research theory and
domain specific training to provide an exceptional experience for students
and the instructors (Brown et al., 2016). This chapter will discuss these
practices in the classroom and in the research lab, where each setting has
different goals and outcomes, but can benefit from commonalities in
approach to engaging students in research.

Teaching and Mentoring Students in Research in
the Classroom

Course-based undergraduate research experiences (CUREs) are becoming
increasingly more common as a means to consistently engage a larger group
of students in active-learning of research skills (Bangera & Brownell, 2014;
Dolan, 2016). CUREs can be framed as a repeated, tested implementation
or a certain research methodology that still maintains authentic inquiry by
the student or as a research project related to the research interests of the
instructor. Specifically for the latter example, individuals have implemented
CUREs in a biology curriculum to have multiple student groups participate in
a stepwise test of mutations of certain protein structures, using the student
human power as a means to more widely scan for impact of mutation.
Regardless of the intention and implementation, students are able to
participate in this experience for course credit, easily integrate the
experience into their schedule, and in some cases get required course credit
for degree completion.

   CUREs are not without challenges. For example, the time to instruct or
serve as a teaching assistant (TA) in a CURE is much more time intensive
than other courses, such that students often have issues in motivation and
ownership of projects, and TAs lack the expertise to mentor students in a
CURE environment (Heim & Holt, 2019). Having implemented a CURE for a
first-year, 1 credit, P/F environment in the field of biochemistry, personal
experience indicates these challenges are justified.

                                                                Teaching, Training, and Mentoring | 187
   There are some strategies that have aided in the mitigation and improved
experience (of both the instructor and the TA):

 1. Outline requirements up front. On the first day of class, we provide
      the rubrics, instructions, and expectations for the final deliverables of
      the CURE. Students are grouped either naturally at the start of class
      (using a SCALE-UP classroom, students naturally join tables) or in
      virtual teaching--via randomized assignment to smaller "breakout
      rooms" wherein small groups of students can synchronously
      collaborate until allocated group time ends. Students remain in these
      groups for the entire semester. Originally, we did not define group roles
      (i.e., everybody had an equal role). However, in more recent iterations
      of the course each person/group fills a specific role (project manager,
      lead data collection, lead writer, lead presentation design, etc.) so that
      there are more tangible responsibilities up front and students can
      conceptualize the process throughout the entire semester on the first
      day. Second, framing the project in terms of specific roles helped
      students properly conceptualize the complexity of collaborative
      research. As instructors, we also created all sign-up sheets for these
      roles (via Google Sheets) and shared notes documents (via Google Docs)
      and have these linked on the homepage of the course learning
      management system (LMS). These specific tools were chosen because
      they had the lowest barriers to access, requiring only a browser and
      limited processing power. The clarity of expectations and routes to
      move forward have improved student engagement and diminished
      confusion.

2. Explicitly discuss the impact on their skills and careers. In the first-
      day materials, there is an explicit slide that details the skills to be
      taught and the objectives that will be experienced/performed by the
      student. These include basic research and data literacy skills (file
      management, file naming, data ethics, consumption of credible
      information, teamwork, writing and presentation skills) and domain
      specific, technical skills (for our course - command line interface, bash
      scripting, molecular visualization, summary statistics, etc.). After
      polling the class for general career interests, we then use at least one of
      those skills as an example in a career case the student might encounter.
      While the actual topic of the CURE implemented in the course might
      not be a direct interest of the student, the students can now

188 | Teaching, Training, and Mentoring
      conceptualize how this process can be beneficial for them. This has
      helped with the issues of ownership and follow-through of students.
3. Offer incentives. While not possible in all situations, many universities
      offer an end-of-semester research symposium. Students have indicated
      that a final poster presentation that is attended by non-class faculty
      and students is an incentive. Additionally, students can add this
      presentation and/or symposium to their resume. Participating in a
      symposium hosted outside of the class might be extra work for a
      graduate teaching assistant (GTA) or instructor, so other opportunities
      include inviting faculty of the discipline to attend an in-class digital
      poster session (using screens in a large classroom or meeting room) at
      the end of the year. This then creates networking opportunities, which
      is a big attraction for students. Additionally, some of the research
      training modules in the course (e.g., data management, data ethics, etc.)
      have all been designed to be a digital credential (sometimes referred to
      as badge) so students will have records of completion as they explore
      internships or other on-campus research opportunities.
4. Don't forget to be a mentor. We have all struggled in the process of
      research in a variety of ways. Convey that to your students and
      humanize yourself and the process of research. Sometimes we focus
      solely on completing the in-class activities of the day and reaching the
      final deliverables of a course. With a CURE, however, there will be down
      time for the instructor to be circulating the room. One strategy that
      was very helpful was making sure each group had a regular check-in.
      How was their project going? What questions did they have? Did they
      know why they were doing today's task? Finally, and what might be
      most important, how were they doing in general? How was their
      semester going? Were they excited about something coming up? Those
      questions greatly influenced the collegiality of the course and made the
      entire class, not just an individual group, feel like a team. These
      questions additionally opened the door for students to ask the
      questions they might be hesitant to ask out of lack of confidence, and
      even comment "I learned about things I didn't know I needed to learn
      about."

These four strategies have been helpful in finding balance and having clear
expectations for both the student and instructor during a CURE. For a GTA,
it can be useful to have all of the planning and expectations of the student

                                                               Teaching, Training, and Mentoring | 189
deliverables completed at the start of the semester so that both the student
and GTA know the final goal. Instructing or acting as a TA for a course that
includes a CURE can be a rewarding experience and will be quite different
from a lecture experience. Working with students in this capacity can also be
a fantastic experience for GTAs earlier in their career, as mentoring students
in the completion of a research task can develop their own mentorship and
research skills.

Teaching and Mentoring Students in Research in
the Lab

More structured undergraduate research experiences in the lab setting can
be beneficial in supporting inclusivity and STEM retention (NASEM, 2019;
Hernandez et al., 2018). While it might seem oxymoronic since
undergraduate research is about exploration and discovery, students need
structure when learning many of the technical and procedural aspects of
undergraduate research. Students are accustomed to being in a defined
learning environment and classroom. Expectations are highlighted on the
first day and there is a pretty standard procedure of events. However, often
it is solely up to the principal investigator (PI) to determine how a research
experience is structured. This structure varies greatly even among
instructors within the same department. While that freedom for the PI
is warranted, we need to consider how that can affect the student and
the GRA (graduate research assistant) that might become the central point
of contact with the student. Implementing structure and training in both
domain specific techniques and research methodology is necessary in order
to provide a comprehensive training and experience for undergraduate
research students and best utilize graduate student and faculty time and
resources. Structuring the "standard" parts of the research process, like
end of semester goals and deliverables, highlighting the timetable in which
certain major milestones should be reached (which should not be tied to
actual research results obtained), developing a grading/accountability scale,
and presenting expectations in a way that students are used to will alleviate a
lot of repetitive questions and provide a sandbox for the student to develop.
This structured approach has been studied (Brown, Lewis, & Bevan, 2016) by

190 | Teaching, Training, and Mentoring
examining the pre- and post-implementation of a structured undergraduate
research experience, and the value and utilization of a structure in
undergraduate research experiences, and highlights the impact of
continuous iterations and lessons learned implemented since deployment.
Tips for implementing structure but allowing sandbox creativity are as
follows:

 1. Use a syllabus. While it might seem confining or unnecessary to have a
      syllabus for a URE, most students are receiving credit for their time in
      the research lab. This credit is counted equally to any other course
      credit they receive, so why not have the same standardization that
      students are used to? We have found that having a syllabus greatly
      streamlines the process and semester expectations that already exist in
      other UREs as well as in other courses (e.g., paper, weekly participation,
      documentation, etc.) and defines expectations in a way that makes clear
      the grade the students will receive for credit. This has greatly enhanced
      our ability to host more undergraduate research students and has
      provided equitable settings for all students--from those starting in their
      first semester to those that have been in the lab for years.While the
      syllabus is a useful tool for setting student expectations, it is also highly
      valuable for the instructor and GRA. There are times when students
      might vanish, becoming unresponsive to emails and not heard from
      again. Perhaps the student is overwhelmed, overcommitted, or other
      issues have arisen; it therefore becomes more difficult for the
      instructor to assign a grade if there is no track-record of accountability
      and no route to prove that assignment of the given grade was
      warranted. This can also ease the stress of a GRA who has a student
      who is not showing up and provides easy documentation to show the PI
      the issues occurring without feeling responsible for them.

2. Create structured training protocols. Students starting in the research
      lab will likely have minimal training both in the concepts of the
      research process and in the specific techniques utilized in the research
      group. Therefor we have found it useful to implement a standardized
      training process that all students must complete regardless of skill
      level. This provides equitable scaffolding for all students to join the
      group and requires output of the student so skill level and interest in
      research can be assessed and students can be more appropriately
      matched to projects based on these skills and interests. While some

                                                                Teaching, Training, and Mentoring | 191
      labs might not be able to afford that level or time commitment of
      training, it has paid off in the outputs after the first semester.
3. Use an online platform for protocols and training. All aforementioned
      training is hosted on an LMS, which makes new students joining the
      group much easier to handle once the initial time investment in
      module/training material creation has occurred. Having all tutorials for
      the specific lab and training in one place, be it be on an LMS, an Open
      Science Framework, or an internal website, the central location and
      focus of a purposeful training can ease the burden of students
      integrating into the lab and developing the skills need to work on
      research projects.
4. Implement several indicators of "success." Often, GRAs or PIs expect
      students will produce stellar research results right out of the gate. In
      reality, this will not often be the case. Developing the skills to revise
      and re-do experiments in order to grow is a core component of the
      research process and it is our responsibility to develop the acceptance
      of and need for iteration in students. It is important for students to
      experience that the first time we do something, especially in research,
      it will often not result in a final product. Iteration and the normalness
      of this process of improvement needs to be both communicated and
      embraced. The little wins--the connection of two pieces of information,
      forward movement even if small, or having a good student
      discussion--need to be acknowledged. PIs should be gracious with their
      GRAs and praise their overall interaction and work with a student,
      especially when the student grasps a difficult topic or continually
      improves at their presentations in group meetings. Looking at the
      process holistically, not solely based on the research outputs, will
      improve morale and motivation in the undergraduate research student
      and the team as a whole. There are occasions when GRAs may become
      stressed that it will reflect poorly on them as the GRA that a student is
      not performing--and you should remind them of the overall goals and
      various measures of success. We are all in different places in our life
      and we must be kind and observant of this with our students. We are
      here to perform high-quality research and to mentor the next
      generation in research and data literacy, and prepare them for their
      next steps in their careers. This approach and attitude can greatly
      improve team morale, relieve stress, and indirectly, improve the
      research outputs.

192 | Teaching, Training, and Mentoring
Imposing a structured framework on the research process a student
partakes in during a lab-based URE can benefit the student, GRA, and
instructor. The general structure, grading scheme, expectations, and routes
to find information related to the URE should be easy to access and find
(e.g., one central location). Standardization across all students enhances
community and can help with students lacking confidence in an URE..
Openly and easily accessible trainings (e.g., publicly available and easy to
find) and protocols can improve the transparency of research performed as
well as teach best practices for both open research and open science. While
there is some up-front time required to create the structure--specifically
the syllabus and training materials--that time is recouped in the future with
a system that makes it easy to bring new students on board. In the end,
this structure and planning contributes to both the research and teaching
enterprises of the university.

Lessons Learned from Teaching and Mentoring
Students in Undergraduate Research

UREs are a fantastic experience that allow students to engage more deeply in
a topic, experience success and failure in safe environments, and propel their
curiosity and skills to the next level (Petrella & Jung, 2008). That is not to say
that these experiences are not time-consuming for instructors and GRA/
GTAs, but the interactions, excitement, and outcomes that result can greatly
outweigh the challenges. This chapter has highlighted the importance and
role of experiential learning, specifically undergraduate research, in the
education and development of the student in multiple settings. Routes and
advice to deal with challenges of UREs in both the classroom environment
and in the research lab setting are discussed, as well as highlighting the
commonalities between them. Preparing and thinking about the kind of
environment and setting you want to create in an URE is an important
starting place. As instructors, we must continually consider how we frame
and present to students the process of research, enhance their data literacy,
and introduce domain-specific techniques and knowledge. Given the
proliferation of misinformation, how we approach research and data literacy
training via UREs is critical.

                                                               Teaching, Training, and Mentoring | 193
   In retrospect as an instructor/PI in who both teaches an URE in a course
and leads a large undergraduate research lab, these roles as a research
instructor and research mentor are one of the most important, if not the
most important, aspect of my position at the university. Mentorship has the
ability to propagate long-lasting, far-reaching effects. The excitement that
we demonstrate and the environment that we create in class and in the
research lab has an ability to etch into the life experience of the student
given the nature of UREs. UREs provide us the chance to be a mentor
for both our students and our GRAs/GTAs. I have had and currently have
exceptional mentors and I challenge myself to give back in the same way that
I have benefited, propagating that cycle further. Just like framing of benefits
is discussed in how to work with challenges of CUREs, it is important to
conceptualize how important being a good mentor is at the onset of working
with students in UREs.

   A piece of advice when conceptualizing mentorship in UREs: one cannot
"blanket mentor." That is, each student needs an individualized approach to
their particular mentoring relationship. Start those conversations early, and
know that while it is a time investment, it benefits both the mentee and the
mentor in the long run. Mentorship is a learning process, and I encourage
you to follow Slack channels, Twitter threads, and scholarship on the matter
for advice and solutions. As academics, we all are continually refining our
craft. Participate and challenge yourself in these mentorship conversations
as well as in your approach to deploying UREs in the classroom and lab
environments. The tips and techniques discussed in this chapter will
hopefully improve your experience in engaging with students in research
environments. If you are a GRA/GTA beginning your journey in mentoring
undergraduates, do not hesitate to ask your PI/instructor/mentor questions
about these topics and challenge yourselves to grow in this area; it will
benefit you throughout your career, no matter the path you take.

194 | Teaching, Training, and Mentoring
     Reflection Questions

          What is one technique that was discussed that can be
             implemented in an undergraduate research experience that
             you work with?

          What is a technique or strategy that you have implemented
             that might mirror those discussed here? Have they been
             successful in alleviating challenging experiences in the
             classroom or the lab?

          Have you thought reflectively about your current and past
             mentorship of students? What is working or not working and
             how might you adjust?

          As a GRA/GTA working with students in an URE, what is
             something you will utilize from this chapter in your current
             class or research lab?

References

Association of American Colleges and Universities (AAC&U). (2020, May 1).
   High-impact educational practices. https://www.aacu.org/node/4084.

Bangera, G., & Brownell, S. E. (2014). Course-based undergraduate research
   experiences can make scientific research more inclusive. CBE--Life
   Sciences Education, 13(4), 602-606.

Brown, A. M., Lewis, S. N., & Bevan, D. R. (2016). Development of a structured
   undergraduate research experience: Framework and implications.
   Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education, 44(5), 463-474. doi:10.1002/
   bmb.20975

                                                               Teaching, Training, and Mentoring | 195
Dolan, E. L. (2016). Course-based undergraduate research experiences:
   current knowledge and future directions. National Research Council
   Communication Paper, 1, 1-34.

Eyler, J. (2009) The power of experiential education. Liberal Education, 95(4).
   https://eric.ed.gov/?id=EJ871318.

Heim, A. B., & Holt, E. A. (2019). Benefits and challenges of instructing
   introductory biology course-based undergraduate research experiences
   (CUREs) as perceived by graduate teaching assistants. CBE Life Sciences
   Education, 18(3), ar43. https://doi.org/10.1187/cbe.18-09-0193.

Hernandez, P. R., Woodcock, A., Estrada, M., & Schultz, P. W. (2018).
   Undergraduate research experiences broaden diversity in the scientific
   workforce. Bioscience, 68(3), 204-211. doi:10.1093/biosci/bix163

Kolb, D. A. (1984). Experiential Learning: Experience as the Source of Learning
   and Development. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Kolb, A., & Kolb, D. (2018). Eight important things to know about the
   experiential learning cycle. Australian Educational Leader, 40(3), 8.

McClure-Brenchley, K. J., Picardo, K., & Overton-Healy, J. (2020). Beyond
   learning: Leveraging undergraduate research into marketable workforce
   skills. Scholarship and Practice of Undergraduate Research, 3(3), 28-35.

National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM). (2019).
   5 promising strategies that contribute to STEM student success, in
   Minority Serving Institutions: America's Underutilized Resource for
   Strengthening the STEM Workforce. Washington, DC: The National
   Academies Press. doi:10.17226/25257.

Petrella, J. K., & Jung, A. P. (2008). Undergraduate Research: Importance,
   Benefits, and Challenges. International Journal of Exercise Science, 1(3),
   91-95.

196 | Teaching, Training, and Mentoring
VIGNETTE: Lessons Learned as a
First-Time Experiential Learning
Program Instructor

  CAITLIN CRIDLAND

 Introduction

  As a teaching assistant and Graduate Teaching Scholar for a summer
  experiential learning program, I have had a very different experience than
  many other TAs. The program I was involved in provided undergraduate
  students with hands-on basic and applied plant and food science research
  experiences. In addition to research experiences, scientific workshops are
  held throughout the summer to enhance student engagement with
  agricultural and food security techniques and issues, as are professional
  development workshops to help students navigate research labs and
  academia. During my last year as a Graduate Teaching Scholar, we were
  forced to pivot our usually in-person program online and provide a novel
  research experience virtually during a global pandemic. For those of you who
  are in similar positions working with an experiential learning program or
  course, or looking to include an experiential learning piece in your course, I
  hope this reflection on three lessons I learned can help you in your teaching
  journey.

How to cite this vignette:
  Cridland, C. 2022. Lessons Learned as a First-Time Experiential Learning Program
  Instructor. In: Westfall-Rudd, D., Vengrin, C., and Elliott-Engel, J. (eds.) Teaching in
  the University: Learning from Graduate Students and Early-Career Faculty.
  Blacksburg: Virginia Tech College of Agriculture and Life Sciences. https://doi.org/
  10.21061/universityteaching. License: CC BY-NC 4.0.

                                                                        Vignette: Experiental Learning | 197
1. Provide Clear Structure and Expectations from
the Outset

With the changing schedules of online, hybrid, and in-person teaching that
2020 and 2021 brought, setting clear expectations and objectives for
students was paramount for success. When designing the syllabus, create
a consistent schedule, with recitations or report writing sessions spaced
predictably throughout the semester. Schedule consistent deadlines and due
dates for similar assignments or exams. For example, homework is always
due on Fridays before class or exams are always on Thursdays. This structure
helps keep the students on top of their deadlines in the class. Additionally, it
helps you stay on top of grading, lesson planning, and assignment writing.

   In addition to creating structure within the course, set clear expectations
for the different sessions/lab periods and the materials students are
expected to bring with them to class. If your experiential learning course
contains a recitation portion where students don't need to bring personal
protective equipment (PPE) but do need laptops or textbooks, communicate
these expectations early on to avoid confusion. If your experiential learning
course is online and students are running experiments from home, set
expectations early about how you will check in with their experimental setup
and data collection. For example, will you require students to share their
experimental setup in real-time over Zoom, or is sharing a prerecorded
video or photo sufficient? Setting these expectations early also provides
time for you to help students access institutional resources if needed--for
example, renting a laptop, iPad, or camera from the library. Similarly discuss
expectations and etiquette that you will follow when using video
conferencing. For example, do you prefer your students to have their video
on the entire time? Do you mind if pets walk in and out of the background?
Discussing your expectations, and also your students' expectations, is
important in this new environment. It is important to note here that with the
pandemic, our schedules and responsibilities have changed, and expecting a
pristine background, quiet kids and pets, and top-speed internet the entire
time is unreasonable. Additionally, provide resources on how to use the
video conferencing software or application to help your students with the
transition to online meetings.

198 | Vignette: Experiental Learning
2. Be Flexible

Just like in research, obstacles and delays are bound to occur in experiential
learning. When I first started working with the program, I thought changing
the schedule because of unavoidable delays or unexpected results would
result in me looking disorganized and unprofessional. However, the longer
I worked in research and teaching, the more I realized that adaptability
and flexibility were key skills that students needed to learn. In addition
to teaching students how to plan experiments and analyze data, we also
need to teach students how to troubleshoot and adapt when experiments
don't go as planned. During my last summer with the experiential learning
program, we had delays because the plants that students were growing
weren't growing as fast as they do in the lab. Instead of being worried
(and also worrying the students) about how this delay would impact the
schedule, we took the time to discuss their growing conditions and how
different factors impact plant growth. By looking at other phenotypes the
plants were displaying, we figured out that the lighting intensity for the
at-home experiments was lower than in a lab setting, and discussed how
this lower light could be impacting other phenotypes they were seeing in
their experiments. From this experience, students came out with a better
understanding of how abiotic factors impact plant growth, and how they
could improve their experimental setup if they were to repeat the
experiment. I encourage you to use problems that arise from students'
experiments as learning opportunities and still gather as much data from
"failed" experiments as possible. Students will come out of your course with
enhanced troubleshooting and critical thinking skills, which are important
for researchers.

   Whether or not your course or program is in-person, virtual, or hybrid,
your students may still be feeling the impacts of the pandemic. Changing
responsibilities, online schooling, and reduced childcare access due to
COVID-19 can all contribute to additional stress. Acknowledge the
constantly changing current environment and the extra bandwidth and time
this can take. While this "lesson learned" may seem contradictory to the
previous lesson, I believe setting deadlines and being flexible work hand-in-
hand to make the students' experience in experiential learning as beneficial
as possible and your experience leading experiential learning as stress-free
and organized as possible.

                                                                     Vignette: Experiental Learning | 199
3. Check in Frequently

Whether your experiential learning experience is in-person or online,
checking in with your students frequently is a must. Checking in with
students can include surveying students about the course material (e.g.,
Do you feel like you understand impacts of phosphate starvation on plant
growth? Would you like the instructor to spend more time going over statistical
analysis in class?), if events outside the classroom are impacting their focus
or performance inside the classroom (e.g., What concerns or worries do
you have about being engaged in an online research experience compared to
an in-person research experience?), or both. Consistently checking in with
students allows you to cultivate a learning environment of respect and trust.
When our experiential learning program went online due to the pandemic,
I queried the students before the start of the program to get an idea of
the level of plant science experience they had coming in and any concerns
they had for the program. While we knew we could not control all of the
concerns or comments that our students raised in the survey, making an
effort to address the concerns that were within our control was important
to build trust and openness with our students. In addition, every week
students completed a short survey that included specific questions about the
week's content and space for students to leave any questions or concerns
anonymously. Consistently, students asked for more lectures and tutorials
on one of their projects, so we added weekly tutorials to take the students
through each step of that project. If your program or course is online or even
hybrid, consider making time for students to gather to work in groups or
socialize. The physical distancing and lack of social interaction that virtual
learning brings can lead your students, especially first-year students, to feel
disconnected and lonely. Use weekly meetings as an opportunity to check
in and discuss how they are really feeling. Create space, whether in current
meetings or coffee hours where students can gather, chat and socialize.
Encourage your students to prioritize their mental, emotional and physical
health--even acknowledging current struggles and emphasizing their health
as the priority can be helpful.

200 | Vignette: Experiental Learning
Conclusion

Being the instructor of record for the first time is scary, and leading an
experiential learning experience with its many moving parts can be even
more daunting. I hope these three lessons I learned during my first summer
of teaching can help you on your teaching journey!

                                                                     Vignette: Experiental Learning | 201
10. The Power of Extension:
Research, Teaching, and Outreach
for Broader Impacts

  JEREMY ELLIOTT-ENGEL; COURTNEY CRIST; AND GORDON JONES

 Introduction

  The land-grant university (LGU) system was created on a foundation of three
  missions: classroom-teaching, research, and a specific type of community
  education called Extension. The majority of this book has highlighted and
  focused on the formal higher-education classroom-teaching experience of
  the mission, and your doctoral program has provided training on the
  research component. This chapter will focus on the third mission, Extension
  (at non-LGU institutions similar efforts may be called outreach, engagement,
  or service). The Cooperative Extension System (CES) has a mission to
  translate research-based findings, best practices, and information in four
  broad program areas: youth development (4-H), agriculture and natural
  resources (ANR), family and consumer sciences (FCS), and community
  development (Seevers et al., 2007). Land-grant universities employ Extension
  educators to work from campus and state regional centers, as well as in
  local county or city offices to deliver Extension education programs based
  on stakeholder needs--including state, industry, and community needs

How to cite this book chapter:
   Elliott-Engel, J., Crist, C., and James, G. 2022. The Power of Extension: Research,
   Teaching, and Outreach for Broader Impacts. In: Westfall-Rudd, D., Vengrin, C., and
   Elliott-Engel, J. (eds.) Teaching in the University: Learning from Graduate Students
   and Early-Career Faculty. Blacksburg: Virginia Tech College of Agriculture and Life
   Sciences. https://doi.org/ 10.21061/universityteaching. License: CC BY-NC 4.0.

  202 | The Power of Extension
(Baughman et al., 2012). It should be noted that university and state
Extension organizational structures and program priority areas differ by
state.

   Extension educators offer nonformal educational programs to both
businesses and the citizens of their communities. Local Extension educators
are supported by research and Extension faculty across departments from
the LGU. To start our journey to understanding what Extension education is,
and how you, as a future or current LGU faculty member and researcher, will
support Extension education, we will recount the history of the LGU mission,
then introduce a learning theory for nonformal education, and finally explain
the unique planning processes of Extension education programs.

   The objectives of this chapter are to provide a translation of effective
teaching practices from the higher-education classroom and emphasize the
interconnections of teaching and research disciplines to impactful
community outreach, engagement, and impact.

     This chapter will discuss...

          The origin and mission of the land-grant university system.
          Educational theory utilized in non-formal educational

             settings.
          Educational learning contexts and environments outside of

             the formal classroom.
          How to establish and integrate a research, teaching, and

             outreach educational program to support broader impacts

                                                                              The Power of Extension | 203
What Is Extension?

The use of the word "Extension" derives from an educational development
in England during the second half of the nineteenth century. Around 1850,
discussions began in the two ancient universities of Oxford and Cambridge
about how they could serve the educational needs, near to their homes,
of the rapidly growing populations in the industrial, urban area. It was not
until 1867 that a first practical attempt was made in what was designated
"university Extension," but the activity developed quickly to become a well-
established movement before the end of the century. (Jones & Gartforth,
1997, p. 1)

   The idea of Extension started in the late nineteenth century in both the
United Kingdom (UK) and the United States of America (US) with three
components: adult education, technology transfer, and advisory services
(Shinn et al., 2009). In the United States, the development of the Extension
system started on July 2, 1862, when President Abraham Lincoln signed
the Morrill Land-Grant College Act (Morrill Land-Grant Act, 1862). This
legislation forming the LGU system was sponsored by Vermont Senator
Justin Smith Morrill. Passage of the Morrill Act was unexpected because
President James Buchanan had previously vetoed a version of the act in June
1860 due to Southern state representatives' criticisms that granting Western
territorial land was an imprudent use of resources. The Western territorial
lands were lands taken from Native Americans by the US government. The
bill that was vetoed had granted just 2,000 acres for a university's setup.
The successful version of the Morrill Act granted 30,000 acres of Western
territorial land as an endowment to establish at least one college per state
and territory (Wessel & Wessel, 1982). The Morrill Act successfully passed
in 1862 largely because Southern states representatives were absent from
Congress at the time of the vote due to the Civil War (Lee, 1963).

   The established purpose of the LGU institutions is to make liberal and
practical education available to all citizens of the nation, particularly the
working class (Duemer, 2007; Depauw & McNamee, 2006; Lee, 1963; Simon,
1963). To achieve this mission the Morrill Act and its successors were
deliberately designed not simply to encourage, but to force the states to
significantly increase their efforts on behalf of higher education. The federal
government, having promoted the establishment of new colleges, made it
incumbent upon the states to supply the means of future development and

204 | The Power of Extension
expansion (Lee, 1963, p. 27). The LGUs married the humanistic idea of the
renaissance university (liberal education) and the German university
(practical education) (Bonnen, 1998). This combination of liberal and
practical education in one institution was designed to democratize
education and provide educational opportunities for all citizens. The LGUs
evolved into entities with a three-pronged mission of research, teaching, and
outreach (Simon, 1963).

   In 1890, a second Morrill Act was passed, which prohibited the distribution
of money to states that made race a consideration when making decisions
about admission to their state's 1862 LGU institution (Lee & Keys, 2013). Each
state had to demonstrate that race was not a criterion when considering
a student's admission to the LGU. If Blacks or other persons of color were
unable to be admitted because of race, then a separate LGU was established
for them (Comer et al., 2006). This resulted in 19 previously slave-holding
states establishing public colleges serving Blacks (Allen & Jewell, 2002;
Provasnik et al., 2004; Redd, 1998; Roebuck & Murty, 1993). These "1890"
institutions were awarded cash in lieu of land; however, they retain the
designation of "land grant" due to the legislation. The 1890 institutions
brought public and practical education to previously excluded and
marginalized populations.

                                                                              The Power of Extension | 205
Figure 10.1 Map of the 1862, 1890, and 1994 Land Grant Colleges and Universities.
University of Puerto Rico, University of the Virgin Islands, University of Guam,
Northern Marianas College, College of Micronesia, and American Samoa Community
College, all 1862 institutions, are not shown.

In 1994, the Equity in Educational Land-Grant Status Act established 29
tribal colleges and universities as "1994" tribal land-grant institutions. These
institutions have a mission to provide federal government resources to
improve the lives of Native American students through higher education
(USDA-NIFA, 2015).

   The three current missions of research, teaching, and outreach were
achieved through additional legislation. The 1887 Hatch Experiment Station
Act (Hatch Act) established the State Agricultural Experiment Station (SAES)
to improve agricultural production through applied agriculture research and
to provide educational outreach opportunities through the LGUs (Knoblauch
et al., 1962). Joining the locally responsive research from the SAES with
the LGUs expanded the capacity for classroom education and provided the
opportunity to share knowledge onsite at research stations across each
state. However, to extend the positive benefits of knowledge farther afield,
more efforts were needed. Cooperative Extension began when President
Woodrow Wilson signed the Smith-Lever Act into law on May 8, 1914. The

206 | The Power of Extension
purpose of Extension was declared to be an effort "to aid in diffusing among
the people of the U.S. useful and practical information on subjects related
to agriculture and home economics, and to encourage the application of
the same" (Rasmussen, 1989, p. 7). The Smith-Lever Act did not specifically
state that Extension services should only work with farmers (Ilvento, 1997;
Rogers, 1988). Extension was designed to take the research-based knowledge
generated at the LGUs and the SAES to US citizens through a partnership
between LGUs and the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA).

   The implementation of this organizational system had significant and
profound effects on adult education in the United States. Liberty Hyde
Bailey, a renowned botanist and Cornell faculty member, was instrumental
in the formation of the Extension service and 4-H; he argued that Extension
could not address agricultural production issues without also addressing the
social and human issues facing rural communities (Ilvento, 1997; Rosenberg,
2015). At the time, he lost the argument to Seaman Knapp, then president
of Iowa Agricultural College, who laid the foundation of the Agricultural
Experiment stations as an employee of the USDA. Knapp argued the role
of Extension was solely to educate reluctant farmers on new technology
(Ilvento, 1997; Peters, 1996). Because of Knapp's influence, the purpose of
Extension began as instruction and practical demonstration concerning
agriculture and home economics for individuals in communities across the
state who would otherwise not have access to information and new
innovations.

   The name Cooperative Extension emerged from the cost sharing, which
required using state and local funding sources to match the funds
contributed by the USDA. Currently, federal partners supply approximately
30 percent of the system's financial resources, while state and local (e.g.,
county) funds make up the remaining portion of the budget (Rasmussen,
1989). Further, following funding trends within higher education, a growing
share of Extension budgets consists of extramural grants and contracts
(Jackson & Johnson, 1999).

   The focus of US Extension work has evolved from primarily relaying
technical innovation to also providing leadership for social, cultural, and
community change and development (Stephenson, 2011) by partnering with
communities to identify solutions to challenges in partnership (Vines, 2017).
As previously mentioned, this adaption reflects a move toward Bailey's
perspective that community programming cannot provide technical
knowledge without first supporting the individual and social needs of the

                                                                              The Power of Extension | 207
participants. Extension, because of the nature of the organization, has always
engaged with communities, and more importantly, has acted as an accessible
and knowledgeable resource for the communities they serve. Extension
professionals have sought to respond to society and community needs,
whether in response to supporting a reduction of poverty in rural
communities (Rogers, 1988; Selznick, 2011) or helping the nation survive
World War I, the Great Depression, and World War II (Rasmussen, 1994)
by ensuring the sustainability of food resources, and by supporting rural
electrification (Rosenberg, 2015), rural telephone, and today, broadband
access (Whitacre, 2018). The mission of Extension has expanded from a
focus on agriculture and family and consumer sciences to incorporate areas
of health, community, and business development, and from solely rural
audiences to rural, suburban, and urban communities (Morse, 2009; DePauw
& McNamee, 2006). While work remains to be done, 1862 LGUs in every state
and territory work to serve a demographically representative population and
address community challenges (Elliott-Engel, 2018), and 1890 and 1994 LGUs
target historically underserved populations with specific interventions.

What Is Extension Education?

Early practitioners of ... Extension education drew from foundational
theories of learning and teaching (Dewey, 1938; James, 1907; Lancelot, 1944).
During the early evolution, knowledge was grounded in observation and
experience and passed to others through direct engagement methods. Over
time, ...Extension education integrated the principles of learning and
teaching, applied research, and Extension outreach. Today's field of study
draws from educational psychology and the works of Bandura (1977), Bruner
(1966), Gagn (1985), Knowles (1975), Piaget (1970), Thorndike (1932), Vygotsky
(1978), and others. Perspectives of learning rise from the educational theories
of behaviorism and constructivism, while the perspectives of teaching are
drawn from the works of Freire (1972), Habermas (1988), Kolb (1984), Lewin
(1951), and others who advanced problem solving, critical thinking, and
communicative reason. (Shinn et al., 2009, p.77)

208 | The Power of Extension
   Extension is an organization that continuously plans, executes, and
evaluates programs with learners (Meena et al., 2019, p. 17) and updates or
modifies as needed. Extension education is a knowledge exchange system
that engages change agents in a participatory persuasive process of
educating stakeholders in a changing world (Shinn et al., 2009). Extension
educators are professionals in the social, behavioral, and natural and life
sciences who use sound principles of teaching and learning, and they
integrate the sciences relevant for the development of human capital and for
the sustainability of agriculture, food, renewable natural resources, and the
environment (Shinn et al., 2009).

   Extension education can be conducted and executed in many forms
including in-person education (e.g., workshops, seminars, demonstrations,
short courses), publication (e.g., website, print media), and using social media
(e.g., infographics). In many non-LGU institutions, Extension is commonly
referred to as community outreach or engagement. These terms originated
in the Extension education movement. The work, when adopted, contributes
to the democratic process of encouraging institutions of higher education
to help extend research efforts beyond the students in the classroom and
fellow researchers in academe to communities or businesses where it can be
directly applied.

   There are several principles that are important to keep in mind to ensure
success in extending research and knowledge outside the higher education
environment. The education of community members has different principles
than the formal education setting. In formal education settings, motivation
is incentivized by earning grades needed to receive certification through
the earning of a degree. In nonformal education settings, education centers
around learners' motivations to obtain the knowledge being offered and its
impact on their livelihood or success.

Nonformal Education Theory

Nonformal education is the learning instruction provided beyond the
traditional secondary education system designed to prepare individuals
(adolescents and adults) to achieve their personal, social, and economic
life goals (Okojie, 2020). When extending their research beyond the formal

                                                                              The Power of Extension | 209
classroom, the educator becomes an adult and nonformal educator, also
known as an Extension educator. Extension educators remain intentional
and systematic while also recognizing content can and should be adapted for
different clientele (Etling, 1993).

   Researchers have defined adult learners in overlapping but somewhat
different ways. Merriam (2008) describes adult learners as those whose age,
social roles, and self-perception define them as adults. Adult learning theory
is informed by foundational scholars in related fields such as psychology
and sociology. The theories of behaviorism, cognitivism, humanism,
constructivism, and connectivism illuminate different learner types and their
disposition toward the process of education (Balakrishnan, 2020). The main
ideas, approaches, and contributions of these theories have been
summarized for your reference in table 10.1. The denotation of the theory,
approach, and application is indicated by the theorists' major works and
forthcoming implications.

210 | The Power of Extension
             Table 10.1 Summary of the primary theories of adult and non-formal learning and behavior change.

Theorist/    Approach/     Definition of Learning
Thinker      Premise

mile        Sociology of  Education is a social process.
Durkheim     Education

B. F. Skinner Behaviorism Demonstration of learning is a resultant change or modification in behavior, largely overt behavior.

Jean Piaget Cognitivism    Teaching and learning results from observation, attention and personal involvement by the teacher along
                           with practice aimed at bringing out individual capabilities.

Abraham      Humanistic    Human capacity for choice and growth, and inner emotions is needed to effectively learn. Maslow linked
Maslow                     readiness to learn to Maslow's hierarchy of needs. Rogers argued learning needs to be student-centered
                           and personalized.
Carl Rogers

Jean Piaget Constructivism Learning is facilitated by providing an environment that promotes discovery and assimilation/ accommodation.

Lev Vygotsky Social Constructivism Collaborative learning occurs in the presence of facilitation and guidance. Group work is encouraged.

George       Connectivism  Behaviorism, cognitivism, and constructivism are used together. Learning is about knowledge distribution
Siemens                    across an information network, storage, connectivity and new forms of learning communities.

David Kolb   Experiential  Abstract concepts are easier to comprehend based on practice.
             Learning

Vincent      Interactionalist Persistence and departure from learning programs is a result of individual and environmental factors.
Tinto

Alexander    (Student)     Change and development is an output of curricular and cocurricular factors.
Astin        Involvement
John Bean &  Persistence  Nontraditional students have specific requirements for retention, attrition, and persistence.
Barbara      (model)      Adults need autonomy and self-directedness in learning programs.
Metzner                   Learning is from peers through methods like observation, modeling, and imitation.
             Andragogy    Learning is represented by adoption (use) of new technology and innovation.
Malcolm S.
Knowles      Social
             Learning
Albert       Adoption of
Bandura      Innovation

Everett
Rogers
Each theorist presents a systematic explanation for the observed facts and
laws that relate to a specific aspect of life (Williamson, 2002), in this case
the nonformal learner. Each of the theorists allows the Extension educator
to conceptualize the learner in different ways. The nonformal learners bring
their lived experiences, and thus, their varied motivations to the educational
process. The educator in the nonformal context must think about barriers
to participation and adoption (Rogers, 2003) of the practice or materials
presented.

Nonformal Education Is Present Everywhere

The nonformal educator views all contexts and environments as a possible
classroom and everyone as a possible student. The educator working with
or through Extension (Extension Educator) has the flexibility to extend
research and technical knowledge across many meaningful educational
strategies (Fordham, 1979). The variety of strategies provides the Extension
educator much greater flexibility, versatility, and adaptability than their
formal classroom educator counterpart to meet the diverse learning needs
of each clientele, and to adapt as those needs evolve (Coombs, 1976).
Education can happen within numerous contexts. Common educational
strategies for Extension education can be broken into three broad
categories: An Extension educator can support a learner's knowledge change
through (1) face-to-face programming, (2) print, and (3) social media. Each
approach has unique considerations for teaching and learning across areas
of content, which are discussed below.

Face-to-Face

Many methods exist for engaging learners in person, and each uses a
different approach to disseminating research. Clientele and subject matter
will largely drive the type of face-to-face instruction. While many of the
same teaching strategies for formal education can be applied in the
nonformal educational setting, it is important to note the differences. For

                                                                              The Power of Extension | 213
example, in most Extension programming, you will not assign homework
and will not be giving graded assignments. Also, your learners need to be
engaged with real-world relevance--this should also happen in a formal
education setting, but sometimes this connection is forgotten. Learners
also bring their own lived experiences and expertise into the learning
environment. Many different strategies can be implemented and each has a
different educational approach.

   The in-person strategies vary from one-on-one training or consulting
to large format training, to groups of learners co-developing knowledge,
or applied hands-on demonstrations. You will notice that each of these
teaching and learning modes connect to the theoretical constructs of
learning in table 10.1.

   Direct client support, such as technical assistance, is a large component
of Extension specialists' responsibilities. Stakeholder needs can vary with
program area or content. Often, in specific circumstances, specialists may
visit clients at their operations to assist directly with troubleshooting,
system improvement, pilot testing, or optimizing methods. Extension has a
rich history of disseminating information and teaching best practices to the
stakeholders they serve. Each discipline may have a different approach or
structure for assisting clients. Client assistance is largely dependent on the
client's current state and needs. As an example, food science (family and
consumer sciences) provides a wide array of services to clientele including
food safety consultation on process deviations, interpretation of laws,
labeling review, educational information, shelf-life information, product
analysis, food safety training, and meeting the requirements for processing
and selling food.

214 | The Power of Extension
     Diversity

        The work of Extension provides an opportunity for educating and
     connecting with all of society in a state and/or local region rather
     than solely those connected to higher education. It is important to
     develop Extension programs and supporting materials that are
     inclusive of the broad range of human experiences, cultures,
     resources, and identities, and to be sensitive to the systemic
     disadvantage that many groups have experienced (Farella, Moore, et
     al., 2021). We should strive to remember that programs which have
     historically been offered by the Extension Service were designed to
     cater to the needs of the majority, and that we have a responsibility
     to design--or redesign--our Extension programs to be equitable and
     meet the needs of everyone (Farella, Hauser et al., 2021; Fields,
     2020). Careful assessment of the needs of the communities we serve
     and, in many cases, further understanding for ourselves as
     educators, are required to develop inclusive, accessible, and
     culturally sensitive programming.

Extension provides services such as seminars, training, continuing
education, and certifications for clients ranging from producers to general
public interest. Extension has and provides the subject matter experts to
deliver these training and educational opportunities in diverse content
areas. Further, Extension often has a public reputation for disseminating
reliable information without bias. Training may be presented in collaboration
with state and/or federal regulatory agencies or may be provided to meet
regulatory standards and requirements outlined by governing agencies. For
example, American National Standards Institute (ANSI) certification (e.g.
ServSafe, Safe Plates), Good Agricultural Practices (GAPs), related
certifications of Food Safety Modernization Act (FSMA), and Hazard Analysis

                                                                              The Power of Extension | 215
Critical Control Point (HACCP) trainings and certifications are required by
regulatory agencies depending on the sector of the industry. In agriculture,
Extension educators deliver programs which provide continuing education
credits for pesticide applicators and programs like Beef Quality Assurance
for livestock producers. Extension specialists and personnel/agents often
offer these training and certifications as part of their programmatic planning
in a way to serve stakeholders. Extension trainers may need additional
training and experience to certify participants and lead state training
sessions.

   Similar to research collaborations, Extension educators also collaborate
with colleagues in other states, counties, departments, and universities to
diversify and expand programmatic efforts to a wider audience. Expertise
among state Extension systems can vary and collaboration allows for better
programming that serves both stakeholders and Extension educators. and
Additionally, within the university, course collaborations are useful as clients
may need topic diversity. Generally, entrepreneur series include speakers
from across departments (i.e., varied subject areas) as well as topics to
provide a general introduction to the subjects.

   Using the Food industry as an example, subject matter experts represent
agricultural economics, government/regulatory agencies, marketing, food
safety, and business (Crist & Canales, 2020). These programs provide
stakeholders a foundation of information as well as contacts in the event
they need further assistance in that specific subject area. Recently, Extension
program delivery has shifted toward using more online educational
platforms, certification programs, expert happy hours, and "lunch and learn"
series in order for stakeholders to access the information they need as well
as provide a forum for questions.

   Extension specialists-faculty with a content area focus- can provide
programmatic and subject matter competency in-service opportunities and
training to Extension agents-county-based Extension professionals.
Inservice training is considered continuing education and an opportunity
to increase subject matter competency. Further, agents select the programs
that they will deliver in the county. Specialists provide in-service training
to agents so they may deliver these programs as intended and/or provide
additional insight to the execution of the program. Inservice opportunities
can include many topics and range in subject matter from youth

216 | The Power of Extension
development to agriculture and natural resources. Further, inservice training
is provided throughout the year and on different education platforms
including webinars, face-to-face training or lectures, and online platforms.

     Syllabus Development

        As Extension educators, it is important to make connections for
     students in traditional education to career paths and opportunities.
     As a group, Extension educators need to advocate and share their
     stories and passion with audiences that may not be familiar with the
     unique career opportunities of Extension, as most will associate
     higher education with the pillars of research and teaching. Some
     students may be familiar with part of Extension either through 4-H
     involvement or by having parents who were involved in educational
     offerings (e.g., master gardener). You can strengthen the connection
     of careers in Extension by incorporating assignments,
     presentations, and curriculum development into courses.
     Additionally, your institution may have Extension apprenticeship
     programs. These types of programs can be a valuable opportunity
     for students to learn more about the day-to-day Extension roles
     while at the same time impacting their communities. Integrating
     some of our communication pathways into syllabi or student
     experiences will expose them to the multifaceted world of
     Extension.

                                                                               The Power of Extension | 217
Community of Practice

The Communities of Practice (CoP) framework is constructed from the
exchange of a group of people who have a shared interest and want to
improve on that interest using regular interactions with each other to
accomplish that development (Wenger, 1998). Lave and Wenger (1991)
introduced CoP to provide a template for examining the learning that
happens among practitioners in a social environment comprising both
novices and experts. Newcomers use this exchange between these
populations to create a professional identity. Wenger (1998) then advanced
the focus of CoP to personal growth and the trajectory of individuals'
participation within a group (i.e., peripheral versus core participation). No
matter the purpose of educational outcome, CoPs can be designed
intentionally, fostered informally, or identified after they have developed
organically. A CoP can also be an outcome from learning experiences (Elliott-
Engel & Westfall-Rudd, 2018) that result from your strategy and lead to
connecting people, providing a shared context, enabling dialogue,
stimulating learning, capturing and diffusing existing knowledge,
introducing collaborative processes, helping people organize, and generating
new knowledge (Cambridge et al., 2005).

   A great example of direct client support (and farm model training), as well
as being the foundation of the Extension service, is boll weevil eradication.
The boll weevil was an invasive insect pest that was devastating cotton crops
throughout the South in the early 1900s. Seaman Knapp, who has been
mentioned previously, was sent to Mississippi by the USDA to help find a
solution to the boll weevil infestation. Knapp set up an experimental farm
to demonstrate to growers' methods for mitigating the boll weevil damage.
The farm opportunity became the model for agricultural demonstration
(Mississippi State University Extension Service, 2020; Palmer, 2014). Similar
stories exist for other areas and educational formats. For example, the
foundation of family and consumer sciences began with home-
demonstration clubs that focused on improving nutrition and living
conditions for rural families. These sessions continue today and address a
variety of topics such as nutrition, cooking, health, mental health, financial
literacy, volunteer programs, and home-based businesses (Mississippi State
University Extension Service, 2020).

218 | The Power of Extension
Print Communications

Print media is an important form of education delivery we often think of
as andragogy rather than pedagogy. Most, if not all of us, have heard the
phrase "publish or perish" in reference to faculty roles. This colloquialism
emphasizes that print formats of education are highly valued in the academe.
Yet, not all forms of print publication are equivalent or have the same
credibility (e.g., burden of peer review), and thus their value is weighted
differently by the institution's Promotion and Tenure review board.

   A successful Extension educator should formulate a plan of distribution
that includes each level of communication. Figure 10.2 provides a framework
for you to think through how you can take your research findings and
translate these specific findings into all forms of print communication. An
Extension educator should provide multiple communication formats to
ensure that the research done on campus is communicated to the citizens of
the state they serve.

Figure 10.2 Academic production by possible population reach and promotion and
tenure value.

It is unfortunate that social media and electronic options give the greatest
reach for distributing research findings to a large audience and yet are
weighted the least. Social media and other digital forms of publication are
hard to evaluate for impact as well as implementation and/or behavior
change. It would be easy to become hyperfocused on submitting
publications to journals with a high-impact factor because that is what is
favored for promotion. Yet, in Extension, we must ask, what is the value

                                                                              The Power of Extension | 219
of creating new knowledge if it stays within the walls of the ivory tower?
Extension's purpose and mission is disseminating research-based evidence
to improve the lives of the stakeholders they serve.

Social Media

Social media may not be commonly viewed as a pedagogical tool or accorded
traditional forms of value in academe. However, it is a tool for rapidly
spreading knowledge and its reach is hard to ignore in current society. Social
media has evolved our consumption of both information and entertainment;
it has also changed our preferences on how to consume new information
(Subramanian, 2018). The use of social media provides the greatest
opportunity to distribute research findings to a wide audience and to affect
social discourse both positively and negatively. The field of science
communication is rich, filled with best practices for effective outcomes,
including language, strategy, and design. We won't address those strategies
here, yet we do want to emphasize the need to use and engage with social
media and to view it as a platform for teaching. (For further reading on
science communication, we recommend Laura Bowater & Kay Yeoman's
Science Communication: A Practical Guide for Scientists, New York: Wiley,
2012.)

In Conclusion: Extension Is a Bridge

Extension activities should be viewed as a bridge to enhancing and
expanding the reach of research-based evidence and technical information
from members of academe to stakeholders in need. Faculty who hold
Extension appointments should funnel energy into sharing their findings to
the betterment of society. Many grants and funding opportunities require
a broader impact statement, outreach, expected outcomes, and evaluation
component and approach. This is where Extension professionals should
shine and can use their expertise to develop methods for reaching and
educating the audience where the findings will be most impactful. The

220 | The Power of Extension
"traditional" researcher may overlook this area of importance, but many
funding agencies are placing higher priority on proposals that address how
the grant will impact or improve the affected stakeholders. The next chapter,
"Program Planning for Community Engagement and Broader Impacts," will
further discuss how to develop and translate knowledge to benefit
stakeholders.

   Powerful and impactful teaching is rarely confined to the classroom. The
Extension system and nonformal education are valuable for early career
faculty members and graduate students. We hope that you will integrate
the educational approaches from nonformal educational settings into your
classroom and engage your learners with issues relevant to our
communities.

   Not every reader will be an Extension specialist or a county-based
Extension professional (a.k.a., Agent), nor will every reader even work at
an LGU. However, all faculty have the motivation, if not the obligation, to
share findings from your research agenda to the public. Many times this
outreach is labeled as "broader impacts" (Donovan, 2019). We hope this
chapter helps you see how your teaching and research can become integral
to your community. If you are a graduate student seeking a position in
higher-education, we hope this chapter has raised your interest in Extension
education at LGUs or in developing better ways to communicate your ideas
about how to bring community-relevant research and teaching to your
research agenda.

   If you are reading this while working or studying at a LGU institution
we hope this chapter has raised your awareness of the mission of your
institution, and that you will seek out Extension professionals to help you in
your teaching, research, and outreach efforts. If you do become an Extension
specialist, or a county-based 4-H professional, congratulations! You are in
for a challenging and rewarding career. We hope this chapter serves as a
framework for conducting excellent Extension education programming and
provides a greater awareness of the organization's beginnings, the theory
that frames the work, and some basic practices of non-formal education that
you can use to maximize community outreach efforts.

                                                                              The Power of Extension | 221
     Reflection Questions

          When you think about your research and teaching, what
             public issues do you see yourself ready to contribute solutions
             and education?

          After reviewing Figure 2, how are you using an array of
             mediums to share content? Where can you improve your
             efforts?

References

Allen, W.R., & Jewell, J.O. (2002). A Backward Glance Forward: Past, Present
   and Future Perspectives on Historically Black Colleges and Universities.
   The Review of Higher Education 25(3), 241-261. https://doi.org/10.1353/
   rhe.2002.0007.

Balakrishnan, S. (2021). The Adult Learner in Higher Education: A Critical
   Review of Theories and Applications. In I. Management Association (Eds.),
   Research Anthology on Adult Education and the Development of Lifelong
   Learners (pp. 34-47). IGI Global. http://doi.org/10.4018/
   978-1-7998-8598-6.ch002.

Baughman, S., Boyd, H. H., & Franz, N. K. (2012). Non-formal educator use
   of evaluation results. Evaluation and Program Planning, 35(3), 329-336.
   https://doi.org/10.1016/j.evalprogplan.2011.11.008.

Bonnen, J. T. (1998). The land grant idea and the evolving outreach university.
   In R. Lerner, & L. A. K. Simon (Eds.), University-Community Collaborations
   for the Twenty-First Century (pp. 25-70). Garland Publishing.

222 | The Power of Extension
Cambridge, D., Kaplan, S., & Suter, V. (2005). Community of Practice Design
   Guide: A Step by-Step Guide for Designing & Cultivating Communities of
   Practice in Higher Education. EDUCAUSE. https://library.educause.edu/
   resources/2005/1/community-of-practice-design-guide-a-stepbystep-
   guide-for-designing-cultivating-communities-of-practice-in-higher-
   education.

Comer, M. M., Campbell, T., Edwards, K., & Hillison, J. (2006). Cooperative
   Extension and the 1890 land-grant institution: The real story. Journal of
   Extension, 44(3), Article 3FEA4. https://www.joe.org/joe/2006june/
   a4.php.

Coombs, P. (1976). Non-formal education: Myths, realities, and opportunities.
   Comparative Education Review, 20(3), 281-293. https://www.jstor.org/
   stable/1187481.

Crist, C., & Canales, E. (2020). Multidisciplinary program approach to
   building food and business skills for agricultural entrepreneurs. Journal of
   Extension, 58(3). https://tigerprints.clemson.edu/joe/vol58/iss3/12.

DePauw, K. P, & McNamee, M. (2006). The new responsibility for state and
   land grant universities. In A. C. Nelson, B. L. Allen, & D. L. Trauger (Eds.),
   Toward a Resilient Metropolis. Metropolitan Institute at Virginia Tech.

Duemer, L. S. (2007). The agricultural education origins of the Morrill Land
   Grant Act of 1862. American Educational History Journal, 34(1), 135-146.
   http://www.infoagepub.com/index.php?id=11&s=s4671eb77329b1.

Elliott-Engel, J. (2018). State Administrators' Perceptions of the Environmental
   Challenges of Cooperative Extension and the 4-H Program and Their
   Resulting Adaptive Leadership Behaviors [Doctoral dissertation, Virginia
   Tech]. VTechWorks. https://vtechworks.lib.vt.edu/handle/10919/98002.

Elliott-Engel, J., & Westfall-Rudd, D. (2018). Preparing future CALS professors
   for improved teaching: A qualitative evaluation of a cohort based program.
   NACTA Journal, 62(3), 229-236. https://www.nactateachers.org/
   index.php/volume-62-number-3-september-2018/2769-secondary-
   agriculture-science-teachers.

Elliott-Engel, J., Westfall-Rudd, D. M., Seibel, M., & Kaufman, E. (2020).
   Extension's response to the change in public value: Considerations for
   ensuring the Cooperative Extension System's financial security. Journal of
   Human Sciences and Extension, 8(2), 69-90. https://www.jhseonline.com/
   article/view/868.

Etling, A. (1993). What is non-formal education? Journal of Agricultural
   Education, 34(4), 72-76. doi:10.5032/jae.1993.04072.

                                                                              The Power of Extension | 223
Farella, J., Hauser, M., Parrott, A., Moore, J. D., Penrod, M., & Elliott-Engel, J.
   (2021). 4-H Youth Development Programming in Indigenous Communities:
   A Critical Review of Cooperative Extension Literature. The Journal of
   Extension, 59(3), Article 7. https://doi.org/10.34068/joe.59.03.07.

Farella, J., Moore, J., Arias, J., & Elliott-Engel, J. (2021). Framing Indigenous
   Identity Inclusion in Positive Youth Development: Proclaimed Ignorance,
   Partial Vacuum, and the Peoplehood Model. Journal of Youth Development,
   16(4), 1-25. https://doi.org/10.5195/jyd.2021.1059.

Fields, N. I. (2020). Exploring the 4-H Thriving Model: A Commentary
   Through an Equity Lens. Journal of Youth Development, 15(6), 171-194.
   https://doi.org/10.5195/jyd.2020.1058.

Fordham, P. (1979) The interaction of formal and non-formal education.
   Studies in Adult Education, 11(1), 1-11. doi:10.1080/02660830.1979.11730384.

Ilvento, T. W. (1997). Expanding the role and function of the Extension system
   in the university setting. Agricultural and Resource Economics Review, 26,
   153-165. doi:10.1017/S1068280500002628.

Jackson, D. G., & Johnson, L. (1999). When to look a gift horse in the mouth.
   Journal of Extension. 37(4), Article 4COM2. https://www.joe.org/joe/
   1999august/comm2.php.

Jones, G. E., & Garforth, C. (1997). The History, Development, and Future
   of Agricultural Extension. Improving Agricultural Extension: A Reference
   Manual. FAO.

Knoblauch, H. C., Law, E. M., & Meyer, W. P. (1962). State agricultural
   experiment stations: A history of research policy and procedure (No. 904).
   Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture.

Knowles, M. S., Swanson, R. A., & Holton, E. F. III (2005). The Adult Learner:
   The Definitive Classic in Adult Education and Human Resource Development
   (6th ed.). Elsevier.

Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral
   Participation. Cambridge University Press.

Lee, G. G. (1963). The Morrill Act and education. British Journal of Educational
   Studies, 12(1), 19-40. doi:10.1080/00071005.1963.9973102.

Lee, J. M., & Keys, S. W. (2013). Land-grant but unequal: State one-to-one
   match funding for 1890 land-grant universities. APLU Office of Access and
   Success publication, (3000-PB1).

Meena, D. K., Meena, N. R., & Sharma, S. (2019). Fundamentals of Human
   Ethics and Agriculture Extension. Scientific Publishers.

224 | The Power of Extension
Merriam, S. B. (2008). Adult learning theory for the twenty-first century.
   New Directions for Adult and Continuing Education, 2008(119), 93-98.
   https://doi.org/10.1002/ace.309.

Mississippi State University Extension Service. (2020). About Extension.
   Retrieved from: http://Extension.msstate.edu/about-Extension.

Morrill Land-Grant Act. (1862). U.S. Statutes at Large, 12 503.
Morse, G. W. (2009). Extension's Money and Mission Crisis: The Minnesota

   response. iUniverse.
Okojie, M. C. P. O., & Sun, Y. (2020). Foundations of adult education, learning

   characteristics, and instructional strategies. In M. C. P. O. Okojie & T. C.
   Boulder (Eds). Handbook of Research on Adult Learning in Higher Education
   (pp. 1-33). IGI Global. https://www.igi-global.com/book/handbook-
   research-adult-learning-higher/232294.
Palmer, D. 2014. Boll Weevils and Beyond: Extension Entomology [Blog].
   Retrieved from: http://blogs.ifas.ufl.edu/ifascomm/2014/05/19/boll-
   weevils-and-beyond-Extension-entomology/.
Peters, S. J. (1996). Extension and the Democratic Promise of the Land Grant
   Idea. University of Minnesota Extension Service and Hubert H. Humphrey
   Institute of Public Affairs.
Provasnik, S., Shafer, L. L., & Snyder, T. D. (2004). Historically black colleges
   and universities, 1976-2001 (No. NCSE 2004 062). Washington, D.C.:
   Government Printing Office.
Rasmussen, W. D. (1989). Taking the University to the People: Seventy-Five
   Years of Cooperative Extension. Iowa State University Press.
Redd, K. E. (1998). Historically black colleges and universities: Making a
   comeback. New Directions for Higher Education, 26(2), 33-43. doi:10.1002/
   he.10203.
Roebuck, J., & Murty, K. (1993). Historically Black Colleges and Universities:
   Their Place in American Higher Education. Praeger Publishers.
Rogers, E. M. (2003). Diffusion of Innovations (5th Ed.). Simon and Schuster.
Rogers, E. M. (1988). The intellectual foundation and history of the
   agricultural Extension model. Science Communication, 9(4), 492-510.
   doi:10.1177/0164025988009004003.
Rosenberg, G. (2015). The 4-H Harvest: Sexuality and the State in Rural
   America. University of Pennsylvania Press.
Seevers, B., Graham, D., & Conklin, N. (2007). Education Through Cooperative
   Extension (2nd ed.). Delmar Publishers.
Selznick, P. (2011). TVA and the Grass Roots. Quid Pro Books.

                                                                              The Power of Extension | 225
Shinn, G. C., Wingenbach, G. J., Lindner, J. R., Briers, G. E., & Baker, M.
   (2009). Redefining agricultural and Extension education as a field of study:
   Consensus of fifteen engaged international scholars. Journal of
   International Agricultural and Extension Education, 16(1), 73-88.
   https://www.aiaee.org/attachments/101_Shinn-Redefining-
   Vol-16.1%20e-6.pdf.

Simon, J. Y. (1963). The politics of the Morrill Act. Agricultural History, 37(2),
   103-111.

Smith-Lever of 1914, 7 U.S.C. 341 et. seq. (1914).
Stephenson, M. (2011). Conceiving land grant university community

   engagement as adaptive leadership. Higher Education, 61(1), 95-108.
   doi:10.1007/s10734-010-9328-4.
Subramanian, K. R. (2018). Myth and mystery of shrinking attention span.
   International Journal of Trend in Research and Development, 5(1).
   http://www.ijtrd.com/papers/IJTRD16531.pdf.
U.S. Department of Agriculture-National Institute of Food and Agriculture
   (USDA-NIFA). (2015). The 1994 Land-Grant Institutions: Standing on
   Tradition, Embracing the Future. USDA- NIFA. https://nifa.usda.gov/
   sites/default/files/resource/
   1994%20LGU%20Anniversary%20Pub%20WEB_0.pdf.
Vines, K. (2017). Engagement through Extension: Toward Understanding
   Meaning and Practiceamong Educators in Two State Extension Systems
   [Doctoral dissertation], The Pennsylvania State University.
   https://etda.libraries.psu.edu/catalog/13816kav11.
Wenger, E. (1998) Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning, and Identity.
   Cambridge University Press.
Wessel, T. R. & Wessel, M. (1982). 4-H: An American Idea, 1900-1980: A History
   of 4-H[USA]. National 4-H Council.
Whitacre, B. E. (2018). Extension's role in bridging the broadband digital
   divide: focus on supply or demand? Journal of Extension, 46(3), Article
   3RIB2. https://joe.org/joe/2008june/rb2.php.
Williamson, K. (2002). The beginning stages of research. In K. Williamson,
   A. Bow, F. Burstein, P. Darke, R. Harvey, G. Johanson, S. McKemmish, M.
   Oosthuizen, S. Saule, D. Schauder, G. Shanks, & K. Tanner (Eds.), In Topics
   in Australasian Library and Information Studies, Research Methods for
   Students, Academics and Professionals (2nd ed.), (pp. 49-66). Chandos
   Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-1-876938-42-0.50010-1.

226 | The Power of Extension
Figure and Table Attributions

   Figure 10.1 Adapted under fair use from USDA NIFA 2019. Graphic by
      Kindred Grey.

   Figure 10.2 Kindred Grey. CC BY 4.0.
   Table 10.1 adapted from Balakrishnan, S. (2020). The adult learner in

      higher education: A critical review of theories and applications. In
      Accessibility and Diversity in the 21st Century University (pp. 250-263).
      IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-7998-2783-2.ch013

                                                                              The Power of Extension | 227
11. Program Planning for
Community Engagement and
Broader Impacts

  JEREMY ELLIOTT-ENGEL; COURTNEY CRIST; AND GORDON JONES

 Introduction

  Good teaching in higher-education doesn't solely occur in the formal
  classroom setting. Thus, the objective of this chapter is to help graduate
  students and early career faculty to plan effective education in a community
  setting, particularly through Extension education efforts. While this chapter
  will discuss Extension programs it will be relevant for individuals who want
  to extend their research through community engagement to achieve
  broader impacts.

     Extension educational programs can include both individual workshops
  and larger coordinated efforts that comprise a Program. Fordham (1979, p.
  1) wrote "`responding to needs' as rapidly as possible is often the major
  justification for creating individual programs;" while there are many
  developments in praxis of program planning, this approach remains very
  common in practice (Gagnon et al., 2015). Yet, there is a risk of running from
  program to program --or need to need--as an Extension educator. If this
  is the educators method they will be busy and overwhelmed without any
  demonstrable impact (Arnold, 2015).

How to cite this book chapter:
  Elliott-Engel, J., Crist, C., and James, G. 2022. Program Planning for Community
  Engagement and Broader Impacts. In: Westfall-Rudd, D., Vengrin, C., and Elliott-
  Engel, J. (eds.) Teaching in the University: Learning from Graduate Students and Early-
  Career Faculty. Blacksburg: Virginia Tech College of Agriculture and Life Sciences.
  https://doi.org/10.21061/universityteaching. License: CC BY-NC 4.0.

   228 | Program Planning
     This chapter will discuss...

          The principles of program planning.
          Program planning factors including community needs and

             relationships.
          The principles of program planning in community context.
          How to make community impacts through research and

             teaching.

Any educator can succumb to the urge to respond in the moment and lose
sight of the long-term goals. So, how does the Extension educator find
intentional purpose and stay focused on the overarching goal? They plan.

   The commonly accepted program planning model consists of six aspects
(Cafarella, 2002; Cummings et al., 2015; Sork & Newman, 2004):

 1. Planning Table: Analyze planning context and client systems
2. Needs assessment: Assess needs
3. Logic modeling: Develop program objectives
4. Formulate instructional plan: Prepare to teach across many modes
5. Formulate administrative plan: Prepare to implement and utilize

      relationships to plan
6. Evaluation: Design a program evaluation plan

It is important to note that while these steps are presented in a sequential
order, they rarely occur linearly in practice (Arnold, 2015; Houle, 1996; Morell,
2010; Netting et al., 2008).

                                                                                      Program Planning | 229
Analyze Planning Context and Client Systems

Extension educators, even more than classroom educators, need to
understand the social and political context of their work. Extension
educators conduct their work in local communities and engage with diverse
and established ideals and knowledge. Understanding the political context
of program delivery is important because, although community education
work can increase political capital (Place et al., 2019), educators and the
organization can also experience backlash (Elliott-Engel, Westfall-Rudd,
Seibel et al., 2021). Recognition of the social context allows the educator to
navigate appropriate partnerships and messaging. Further, each community
and audience has cultural differences. The Extension educator must be
sensitive to cultural differences in their many forms, not only differences
in demographics, but also in language, religious affiliation and spiritual
practice, values, and family and kinship patterns (Fields, 2020). The
Extension educator must design and implement education that is responsive
to these differences and engages these learners (Sork & Newman, 2004).

   A superb resource for in-depth guidance on program planning is the
      book Planning Programs for Adult Learners: A Practical Guide by
      Rosemary S. Caffarella and Sandra Ratcliff Daffron.

   An excellent resource for further reading is Working the Planning Table:
      Negotiating Democratically for Adult, Continuing, and Workplace
      Education by Ronald M. Cervero and Arthur L. Wilson.

   An excellent resource to explore social justice and societal context read
      Privilege, Power, and Difference by Allan G. Johnson.

Assess Needs

       Training needs assessment is an ongoing process of gathering data
       to determine what training needs exist so that training can be
       developed to help the organization accomplish its objectives. ...
       Often, organizations will develop and implement training without

230 | Program Planning
       first conducting a needs analysis. These organizations run the risk
       of overdoing training, doing too little training, or missing the point
       completely. (Brown, 2002, p. 569).

Once you are familiar with the planning context and client systems they
will frame your ability to collect data in order to inform your understanding
of your community needs. A needs assessment is essential to ensure the
effectiveness of your Extension education efforts (Angima et al., 2014). Needs
assessments are data driven and should help you identify gaps between
current results and desired outcomes (for you and your community) and
place the gaps in priority order (Kaufman et al., 1993).

   To begin your needs assessment you must first establish what you want
to know that will inform your educational program design. This will define
the data collected. The data you collect can and, in many cases should, be
wide ranging (e.g., Census or publicly available economic data, interviews
with key stakeholders, surveys of your target clientele, focus groups, or even
the photovoice method (Wang & Burris, 1997)). This data collection should
be rigorous and theoretically informed (Arnold, 2015). Using a theory of
behavior change (refer to Table 10.1 in Chapter 10) your needs assessment
data should help you delineate what you can do to respond to the needs of
your audience.

   Make sure you maximize the effort you put into your needs assessment by
publishing the process and/or the findings.

Figure 11.1 Phases of a Needs Assessment.

   For further reading on how to establish a strategic plan, refer to
      Strategic Planning Workbook for Nonprofit Organizations published by
      the Amherst H. Wilder Foundation.

   An excellent print resource for further reading and implementation is A
      Practical Guide to Needs Assessment by Kavita Gupta.

                                                                                       Program Planning | 231
   Extension bulletins often cover needs assessment, such as Needs
      Assessment Guidebook for Extension Professionals by J. Donaldson and K.
      Franck or Methods for Conducting an Educational Needs Assessment by
      P. McCawley.

Develop Program Objectives

Using your needs assessment you now have established a direction for your
Extension education efforts (McLaughlin & Jordan, 2004; Taylor-Powell, &
Henert, 2008). There are two levels for you to consider when developing
learning objectives: There is the macro level of identifying the long-term
changes you are trying to accomplish, and there is the learning objective of
each of your educational workshops. Unfortunately, in Extension education
vernacular, both are called programs. The first occasionally are referred to
as "Big P programs," while the latter are often called "little p programs," We
will use these terms for this discussion.

   Establishing objectives for your "Big P Program" takes on many of the
characteristics of strategic planning. You will identify the long-term
outcomes you want to see over time, and you will need to establish the many
short-term goals necessary to accomplish these objectives. These plans
should lead toward significant changes in society or in your organization
(Elliott-Engel, Westfall-Rudd, & Corkins, 2021). These objectives are the
overarching goals you have for your Extension work and will be the basis for
all of your "little p programs."

   For your "little p programs," Extension educators have adopted the use of
logic models (Israel, 2001; Taylor-Powell & Henert, 2008). The logic model is
a sequential causal relationship tool. It allows an educator to connect theory
of change with the objectives sought. However, many program logic models
are built on the "assumption that new knowledge leads to attitude change,
which leads to behavior change" (Patton, 2008, p.108). The sometimes
simplistic program plans developed in Extension, when they are developed
at all, focus on creating change without considering the pervasive systems
in which that change happens and the influence the system can have on
whether changes take place (Arnold, 2015; Arnold & Nott, 2010; Patton, 2008).

232 | Program Planning
At worst, logic models are developed based on erroneous assumptions and
unsound theory, which leaves the measurement of program outcomes
incapable of demonstrating program impact.

Figure 11.2 Program Logic Model Framework.

Of course, as a new educator you do not want to replicate the shortcomings
of those who have come before. To improve logic model utilization, it is
important to first consider which outcomes you want to achieve, and then
identify the inputs you will need and what outputs you will develop. These
outputs are your objectives.

Figure 11.3 Example of a Program Logic Model for Reducing Pesticide Contamination to
Surface Water

Figure 11.3 shows an example of a program logic model related to pesticide
application techniques and drift prevention. In a watershed in southern
Oregon, a group of agricultural professionals, local organizations with a
focus on water quality, Oregon State University Extension Service, and
concerned citizens engaged with the Oregon Departments of Agriculture
and Environmental Quality to monitor streams in the watershed for

                                                                                      Program Planning | 233
pesticide contamination. The water quality results indicated some pesticides
were likely drifting into surface water from air-blast applications to orchards
and/or vineyards. In developing the logic model, we worked backward from
the long-term goal of reduced pesticide detections and developed learning
objectives targeting specific drift reduction mechanisms. We delivered both
classroom and hands-on programs and shared print materials to provide
a range of learning opportunities. Through our follow-up evaluations, we
learned that many producers in the region have adopted the recommended
strategies, and we await further water quality results to determine the real
environmental impact of our program. Taylor-Powell & Henert (2008) is a
great resource to help you develop your own logic model.

     Syllabus Development

        In a formal classroom setting there are many ways to bring
     nonformal education into the syllabus; these include adding a
     community education component to a group project (i.e., creating a
     YouTube video or social media graphic, or presenting to a
     community partner). Asking a learner to teach their content is an
     excellent way to demonstrate content knowledge, help expose gaps
     in knowledge, and build a deeper understanding. In addition, you
     could partner with local Extension educators across the state to
     help students see how the issues they are learning about in the
     classroom are being experienced in other communities, or to learn
     how people are addressing the issues. These approaches can help
     you develop and prepare educational materials to support your
     Extension education agenda, and can also help make a real-world
     connection to the class topic for the learner.

234 | Program Planning
Formulate Instructional Plan

Now that you have long-term objectives and know how to connect those
objectives to your long-range goals, what should you teach, and in what
format? Formulating your instructional plan should start with your learners
in mind. Who are your learners? What do you know about their knowledge
on the topic? And, of course what educational goals do you want to
accomplish?

   Choosing what will be taught during a learning activity is a challenge
because of time limitations, delivery modes, the varied backgrounds and
experiences of the participants, materials available, and your own capability
or style (Alessi & Trollip, 2001; Wlodkowski, 2008). To arrive at what is
important, you can construct visual tools, such as a content map or outline.
You can also talk it through with a colleague or knowledgeable stakeholder.

   Caffarella and Daffron (2013, pp. 185-186) encourage the Extension
educator to think about the following questions as they formulate the scope
of the teaching:

   What content is essential for learners to know and does this content
      address one or more of the learning objectives?

   What is the content that learners should know, which supplements the
      essential material?

   What is the content that might be interesting and relevant to the
      essential materials, but will only be addressed as time allows?

   What is the content that learners do not need to know (that is, it may
      be useful but does not pertain to the learning objectives?

The above questions help the Extension educator set parameters of their
content, just as a formal educator formulates a syllabus using similar
objectives. Yet, the Extension educator also has to assess the framework
for relaying the content. The Extension educator has many instructional
techniques at their disposal. Earlier in the chapter, there was a discussion of
the types of techniques the Extension educator will use to decide on which
approach is most effective for learner knowledge change.

                                                                                      Program Planning | 235
   The Extension educator can ask themselves the following questions for
clarity:

   What is your capability and preferred style of instruction? (e.g., your
      comfort facilitating)

   What learning environment is most effective for the learners'
      characteristics? (e.g., different ways of knowing)

   What is the environment available to offer learning? (e.g., physical and
      virtual environments)

   What additional learning resources are available to me? (e.g., print,
      video, hands-on projects)

The nonformal learner should be valued for their possible contributions to
the learning environment and co-creation of understanding and knowledge
is an important assumption for the Extension educator. To do this the
Extension educator will adopt teaching and learning opportunities that allow
for knowledge transfer and discussion and opportunities to experience the
phenomena being discussed (Moseley et al., 2019). Experiential learning is
based on a theory of sociocultural experiences (table 11.1, refer to Kolb,
Dewey, Piaget) and an educational philosophy which educators can adopt.

   Experiential learning can be a challenge for any educator, including the
Extension educator. As you try out new techniques it is important to engage
the learners in the process to prevent discomfort by the instructor or the
learner. For example, you can choose to inform the learners that you are
trying new techniques and would welcome feedback on whether they
worked. Feedback can also be solicited in the form of written responses to
open-ended questions at the end of the session. This allows both learner
and educator to reflect on the process and establishes both individuals as
valuable to the process.

   A great resource on experiential learning is Learning through
      Experience: Troubling Orthodoxies and Intersecting Questions by Tara J.
      Fenwick.

   A great resource for specific tools for developing nonformal learning
      objectives is Planning Programs for Adult Learners: A Practical Guide by
      Rosemary S. Caffarella and Sandra Ratcliff Daffron.

236 | Program Planning
Formulate an Administrative Plan

An administrative plan is the behind-the-scenes frame for how to execute
your Extension education efforts. Finally, a conversation about the planning
is needed for implementation. As always, the better the plan, the better
the outcomes (Mehta & Mehta, 2018). An administrative plan involves
recognizing your available time commitment (job description and
appointments), budgets, and resources (e.g., personnel) needed to
implement the plan.

Your Appointment and Job Description

Your appointment and job description will determine how much Extension
education you will conduct in your role. Even faculty with zero Extension
commitment, however, would be remiss if they did not ensure their research
has value to the broader society, especially to Land Grant University (LGU)
faculty. We only have so many hours in a day, and there are many demands
on a faculty member's time, so Extension education efforts must be planned
with your other commitments from research and teaching in mind.

   Extension efforts are, too often, an afterthought and are viewed as
secondary or viewed as a second job on top of the teaching and/or research
efforts. To be successful as a LGU faculty Extension education efforts should
be embedded throughout your work and viewed as an important portion
of your work to make a public impact. The more time and intentionality
you invest in planning and informing your work with your needs assessment
findings, the more likely you are to ensure your contribution to and impact
on the stakeholders is maximized.

Funding Your Extension Education Work

In the higher education setting the ability to generate funding is increasingly
important for professional success. No one will dispute that funding matters.
It is important to keep in mind your big P objectives and little p opportunities

                                                                                       Program Planning | 237
when seeking funding. If you are clear about your goals, then you will be able
to ensure grants are funding your efforts instead of your funding being your
efforts. Being clear about what your audiences need and want is important as
you seek funding to make your programs happen. First, you must know what
your financial needs are to make your Extension education programming
happen; second, you can discern what opportunities make sense to your
goals; and third, you should think creatively about how a grant's objectives
intersect with your own. You will already be further ahead in your grant
writing because you will have clear and well outlined objectives, informed by
needs assessment data (that is hopefully published).

   Increasingly, federal granting agencies discuss the term broader impacts
(Donovan, 2019). Broader impacts are those short- and long-term impacts
that our communities realize because of the research conducted. Extension
education efforts are always a portion of the broader impact conversation,
although it is rarely specifically mentioned despite the relationship between
Cooperative Extension and the federal government. An LGU faculty is in a
unique position to be supported in these efforts because of the Cooperative
Extension expertise of the LGU, and the network of county-based
professionals across the state.

Relationships

Relationships are important for your success. We have all heard about the
value of networking for professional success. Relationships are important
within academia and throughout the community. Relationships and
networks are informed by power, and planning for education is a negotiation
between power and knowledge. Thus, forming an administrative plan is not
a quotidian task. Rather, it is fraught with critical decisions that will have
implications for you and the people you choose to educate.

   It will be important for you to think about the relationships that you
build not only as social capital but as the opportunity to understand your
educational context more effectively. Your relationships will be your access
to new audiences and to ensure support for the programming you offer.
These relationships will also inform the feedback you receive (Cervero &
Wilson, 2001).

238 | Program Planning
   The relationship between county agents and campus-based Extension
specialists is fundamental to the functioning of both an Extension service
and the LGU model. In agriculture and natural resources, as in the other
program areas, the system functions at its highest level when there is rich
interconnection between field and campus faculty. County agents serve as
the front line in identifying new challenges and opportunities facing
agriculture, forestry, and other managed ecosystems. When those
challenges and opportunities are beyond the technical or logistical capacity
of agents, Extension specialists help to provide expertise, grant-writing, and
research support to ensure that clientele are well served. When an unknown
insect, disease, or nutritional deficiency begins to show up on farms or a
new crop or technology takes hold in a region or state, the benefits of
having a network of faculty and agents becomes clear. County faculty will
have direct, personal connections with local producers, will be a valuable
resource in identifying those emerging needs, and can form a vital network
of research partners to validate or demonstrate new practices across the
state. Extension specialists will oversee or conduct the applied research to
answer new or lingering questions, lead the development resources and
Extension programs, and serve as subject matter experts for county faculty
to rely on. The back-and-forth collaboration between county agents and
Extension specialists is a keystone in delivering helpful and impactful non-
formal education and technical assistance to clientele.

   County agents (this title varies by institution) are often the front line of
Extension and the heartbeat of the county as they serve state stakeholders
and communities. In the event a client has a need or question, in some
state Extension systems they are encouraged to directly contact the county
Extension office first instead of a subject matter expert or Extension
specialist. For example, in the Extension program area of family and
consumer sciences (FCS), as in the other areas, specialists answer
stakeholder questions through agents. Additionally, programming ideas may
be derived from agent experiences or common questions that are received
at the office. In other words, agents often identify gaps in programming
and agents and faculty may work together to develop programming. Some
programming may have different categories (e.g., agent-delivered, agent-
coordinated and specialist-delivered, specialist delivered). In agent-
delivered programs, agents are often trained to deliver the content (inservice

                                                                                      Program Planning | 239
training). Agents select these programs from a program of work that they
deliver over the course of a year. Programs may vary in their time, duration,
and number of meetings.

   The organizational structure of Cooperative Extension will vary by your
LGU. To give you an example of how individuals across an LGU may work
to support community education we share this example. At Mississippi State
University specialists are expected to develop and manage at least one
statewide program that agents may choose to offer in their counties. FCS,
one of the core program areas, conducts programming that ranges from
childhood development, finances, home economics, food safety, home food
preservation, nutrition, exercise, etc. As an example, a home food
preservation program was developed to serve state stakeholders when
agents identified a gap in programming. Some agents have significant
canning experience while others do not. While agents have the ability to
conduct subject sessions in their county, only specialists can develop
statewide programs; however agents can contribute and assist with the
development. Home food preservation was developed in coordination with
two county agents that have experience with home canning. The specialist(s)
met with the agents to determine the sessions, lab activities, and program
modules. Then the specialist developed the program and agents in the state
pilot tested the program to work out content and guidance.

   Feedback is very important for the success and execution of a program,
especially when lab activities are involved. Once the program is finalized,
agents will select the program (if interested) and attend inservice training
(competency) to learn the content and lab activities (hands-on). Agents will
then conduct the program in their county with their interested stakeholders.
Generally, there is an evaluation piece to assess knowledge change and
competency. In closing, agents are invaluable resources and are experts in
their ability to extend knowledge. As a Specialist, it is important to make
agents who have client questions a priority as they are the "face" of
Extension. Agents are a vital part of the team and developing relationships
and rapport with them is essential to success. Remember that agents want
to see you and you should be involved.

   No matter your area of expertise you will have varying levels of
administration. For example, a county-based faculty member will have a
County Director, and a Program Leader; a state level specialist will have a
Department Head and a Program Leader. There may be other administrative
structures depending on your university Extension organization (e.g.,

240 | Program Planning
Regional Directors, Unit/Program leaders). Individuals in these
administrative roles have the responsibility to inform you of your specific
job duties, provide a supportive framework for your success, and serve as
coach and mentor. Individuals in this role will help you navigate the many
vagaries and pitfalls of the public interface and they should be viewed as a
resource for program development. They have a different vantage point in
the organization and may be able to connect you to your peers with similar
work, or to other partners across the university, state, or country.

   Keeping your administrators aware of your work is important--the more
they know about what you are working on the more then can help you be
successful. However, updating your administrators about your programming
should be done succinctly and with respect for their time and role. More is
not always better. Be judicious and respectful about time and place. No one
likes a hard sell, and that strategy can backfire. Also, going above someone's
head without notification is rarely appreciated. Higher education is a
bureaucracy and as such you should navigate through the chain of
command, not because you could get what you want by jumping levels this
one time, but because administrators in higher education are long-timers
and building the relationships and following the organization norms will help
you go farther for the long-term.

Partners

Our fast-changing world means that we cannot have all the answers;
especially when it comes to solving problems, we must collaborate. In
addition to making our resulting outcomes more effective, working as a team
is just plain more fun, and the research shows if teams are more cognitively
diverse, then they also arrive at better solutions (Aggarwal et al., 2019; Olson
et al., 2007). Your partners should

   complement your areas of job performance weakness,
   bring new audiences to your program,
   bring new perspectives to your program,
   be responsible for the work they say they will do,
   be professionals who you respect, and
   be enjoyable to work with!

                                                                                       Program Planning | 241
Your partnerships need to be authentic and reciprocal. Authentic
partnerships are based on mutual respect and value for the person and
organization even when there is no specific ask on the table. Reciprocal
partnerships are based on mutual benefits. Do not confuse reciprocal with
transactional (Burns, 1978). Reciprocity in successful partnerships is about
working toward both parties' best interests and being conscious about
stewarding the relationship.

   Partners are also important in maximizing impact (Bryson, 2004); they are
important for your Extension education capacity to maximize your outreach,
but also for many other aspects of your professional needs, not limited to
grantsmanship and research. Partners have different networks and different
vantage points, thus as you select the people you choose to call your team,
do so with intentionality and care.

Balancing the Needs of So Many

There are different community scopes for Extension educators. Some
educators view their workspace as encompassing both national and
international reaches; others see their target community as a whole state;
while yet others have a countywide or regional scope. No matter the size
of the target community you will inevitably be pulled in too many directions,
and without both a clear commitment to your overall objectives and an
administrative plan you may very well find yourself going from problem to
problem feeling very busy but not accomplishing much.

   So, how do you find the right balance when there are so many demands?
Your assessment of opportunities will need to be based on your overall Big
P Program objectives and capacity for easy implementation of your little
p. In theory this is easy to address, but it is incredibly hard to handle in
practice. When you are certain of your objectives and your administrative
plan you will have clear parameters to establish a framework for how to
assess your ability to meet those needs. The framework will help you choose
what opportunities you do want to get involved with or not when you are
asked to take on an additional project. The framework rooted in your
objectives and administrative plan will also give you language to explain

242 | Program Planning
why you are making this choice even as you are pushed and pulled by
stakeholders, clientele, administrators, and funders and even as you become
excited about the possibilities of other work.

   As you balance the needs of so many people do not lose the forest for
the trees. You will have a group of clients that become super users and will
want a lot of your attention; this is a sign your program is valued. You will
also want to ensure you are balancing the needs of both the many and the
elite few high-profile clients. In a different instance of balancing service to
different clients, we used the example of publishing. While publishing an
article in a top-tier journal will be valuable for your promotion and tenure
packet, if you have not also identified ways to ensure that new information
is valuable to your community then you may have achieved one of your
objectives, but you have lost sight of the long-range impacts of your work.

   The concept of program integrity, defined as the degree to which a
program is implemented as originally planned, is the core of your
programming implementation. As described by Dane & Schneider (1998),
program integrity consists of five main dimensions:

   Adherence refers to how closely program implementation matches
      operational expectations (Duerden & Witt, 2012).

   Dosage represents the amount of a provided service received by a
      participant (Duerden & Witt, 2012).

   Quality of delivery deals with the manner in which the service was
      provided (Dane & Schneider (1998).

   Participant responsiveness measures individuals' engagement and
      involvement in the program (Domitrovich & Greenberg, 2000).

   Program differentiation identifies program components in order to
      ascertain their unique contributions to the outcomes (Dusenbury et al.,
      2003)

                                                                                      Program Planning | 243
     Diversity

        Nonformal education program planning is about using intentional
     processes to ensure successful outcomes. Extension education is
     about extending the research-based information generated on
     campuses to community members. Therefore cross-cultural
     competency and understanding is fundamental to effective
     programming (Elliott-Engel, Westfall-Rudd, Seibel et al., 2021) and
     good program planning is essential. The Extension educator should
     be conscious of the many communities they are engaging with and
     take intentional steps to reduce barriers to information
     consumption (Intemann, 2009). Intentional interventions can
     include translating content and materials into appropriate
     languages in the communities they are reaching; ensuring graphics
     and other media are accessible to those with visual or hearing
     impairments; and tweaking program design to address the cultural
     characteristics of the communities you are working in (Farella et al.,
     2021). Extension educators also need to establish expectations
     within their programming to ensure a welcoming environment for
     all participants. Gonzalez et al. (2020) identify that to be inclusive, in
     their case LGBTQ+ youth, Extension educators will need to focus
     inclusion efforts at multiple levels, including: systemic advocacy,
     guidance and protocols, programming, and professional
     development and dispositions.

244 | Program Planning
Bringing the Science to the People

Extension (both service and outreach) education connects research and
teaching missions of the land-grant university to the citizens of the state.
The Extension educator can, and should, serve as the conduit for not only
your own research, but also that of others from campus. The larger your
Extension education appointment the more likely you will be in a role of
helping extend someone else's research to the community. When others
are conducting research or submitting grants, Extension educators can be
brought in as key partners. You want to position yourself with faculty across
campus in your role of expert--both in your content knowledge and your
skills as a translational communicator.

   Our universities are large bureaucracies, filled with many boundaries (or
silos) between individuals. As Extension educators we should be trying to
eliminate duplication of effort in extending research. Extension education
work is translating research to the layperson, yet because individuals across
our institutions are so often unaware of the land-grant mission, or the
specifics of Extension, they end up reinventing the wheel. Do not recreate
the wheel for extending knowledge. If you are an Extension educator, then
keep up the advocacy for your mission and the value of the work you offer.
Broader impacts are important, and Extension education can deliver these to
communities across your state.

   Also, as an Extension educator, Extension is the original open access
content. Extension materials can be adapted, updated, and used with your
new audiences. Of course, make sure you give attribution for the original
work and make sure it is updated for your purposes.

                                                                                      Program Planning | 245
Evaluation, Metrics, Defining Impact, and Use of
Results

It will be no surprise to anyone that evaluation is an important aspect of
your Extension program. Evaluation is often overlooked, yet it should be the
foundation of your program planning. You will not be surprised to learn that
evaluation is regularly viewed as a chore, an afterthought, or the follow-up
work. This is unfortunately the case for far too many educators; Extension
educators are not exempt despite a considerable focus on evaluation by
administrators and in program-planning training. This section of the chapter
will not teach you how to evaluate, but it will give you a framework to think
about how to implement and use evaluation data.

   By ensuring you have great learning experiences that are linked to learning
outcomes, program conceptualization is the start of evaluation. Yet,
Extension education has many different ways of measuring and
conceptualizing impacts. While the Extension educator is of course
interested in the learners' knowledge change, there are also considerations
for long-term behavior change, and the societal results when many
individuals make similar changes.

   In order to build support for Extension, "public value stories and
statements" (Chazdon & Paine, 2014; Franz, 2013) or "public good" (Franz,
2011, 2013, 2015) are often used in place of the word "impact." To measure
indicators associated with impacts, an emphasis has been placed on
evaluation (Cummings & Boleman, 2006; Franz et al., 2014). This is not a
movement solely in Extension--it is also occurring across the public and not-
for-profit sectors.

   The impact on the individual learner is a private value. Private values
(Lukes, 1973; Franz, 2011) are products and services that directly benefit
private individuals and are consumed by those individuals. People typically
access these products and services as paying customers in direct, voluntary
economic exchanges. To evaluate private values, a pre- and post-survey
strategy is effective at the point of delivery. Understanding learner
knowledge change is the first evaluation building block. Follow-up to
measure behavior change is needed after the training.

246 | Program Planning
   The impact on the broader community is a public value. Public value is
consumed collectively by the citizenry rather than individually by clients or
customers. It includes things that economists call "public goods" which are
"jointly consumed," "non-rivalrous," and "non-excludable" (Donovan, 2019).
This means that one person can consume them without reducing their
availability to another person, and also that nobody is excluded from
consuming them--for example,e public parks, clean air, and national defense
(Alford & Hughes, 2008; Moore, 1995). Metrics to measure public value
(Franz, 2013) are needed. To communicate public value effectively you will
need to find metrics that connect the individual knowledge change to impact
(Haskell et al., 2019; Place et al., 2019). It is not uncommon for knowledge
change and outcomes to be connected only theoretically (see Logic Model;
Travis et al., 2018).

   The data we collect implicates the perceived value of our Extension
education efforts. Figure 11.4 highlights that both individual and public value
data can support public value perception, yet for stakeholders (in this case
government funders) public value is placed above individual experience and
individual good.

Figure 11.4 Data value to increased public value perception change.

                                                                                       Program Planning | 247
Evaluation is important in communicating the "why" of your program to
funders and stakeholders. Figure 11.4 illuminates the importance of empirical
data for supporting the relevance argument. Yet, as an Extension educator
you will need to critically assess your own programming using evaluation
data to inform the effectiveness of a program. You can use these data to
adapt your program to ensure goals are being met or you can choose to
discontinue a program because you are not seeing the returns you would
expect or the return on investment that makes it worth the expenditure of
time or money.

   Evaluation is a tool, one that should be embedded into your program
model; the sooner you start incorporating an embedding evaluation into
your program the more effective you will be. The quality of your program
will increase, and you will be more able to share how and why your
programming is valuable.

   An excellent resource for a deeper dive into program evaluation and
      assessment of public value is Program Evaluation Theory and Practice
      by Donna M. Mertens and Amy T. Wilson.

   An excellent resource for assessing learner outcomes is The Reflective
      Educator's Guide to Classroom Research by Nancy Fichtman Dana and
      Diane Yendol-Hoppey.

   An excellent resource on understanding broader impacts is chapter 24,
      "Assessing the broader impacts of publicly funded research" by Claire
      Donovan in Handbook on Science and Public Policy.

Focused Excellence and Impact

After reading this chapter and this book, you may be completely
overwhelmed with the many aspects of developing effective teaching,
research, and Extension efforts. This is where your focused excellence
comes in. Focused excellence is a framework for you to narrow, screen,
and assess the many opportunities you are offered (Parrott et al., 2020).
Only you can determine what your focused excellence will be, but your
focused excellence should be the topic on which you want to be considered
the expert, and the area you build support for through your research and

248 | Program Planning
Extension efforts. Focused excellence is targeted at a program in the
Extension education context, such as childhood nutrition, 4-H youth civic
engagement, or parasitic insects in livestock. These are examples of discrete
categories that an Extension educator may choose as their area of focused
excellence. Within this area you will use the program planning development
model and establish focused objectives. To achieve focused excellence you
will concentrate your attention on building depth and program quality in
your programming rather than flitting from task to task and project to
project. To achieve your own focused excellence you will develop strategies
to maximize every effort for integrating research, teaching, and community
education (a.k.a., Extension). The key to success is finding efficiency and
optimizing opportunities to serve a dual role; this will not only benefit you,
but will affect the impact and involvement of others. Extension education is
a rewarding career path, where your work and effort directly impacts the
community which you serve.

     Reflection Questions

          Are you using an intentional program planning process in
             your community education efforts?

          Who are your current stakeholders and what feedback do
             you use to establish your research and teaching priorities?

          What do you do to maximize your efforts to spread your
             research to the community? And, how do you maintain
             focused excellence?

                                                                                      Program Planning | 249
Resources

Barry, B. W. (1997). Strategic Planning Workbook for Nonprofit Organizations.

Amherst H. Wilder Foundation.

Caffarella, R. S., & Daffron, S. R. (2013). Planning Programs for Adult Learners:

A Practical Guide. John Wiley & Sons.

Dana, N. F., & Yendol-Hoppey, D. (2008). The Reflective Educator's Guide

to Professional Development: Coaching Inquiry-Oriented Learning

Communities. Corwin Press.

Donaldson, J. L., & Franck, K. L. (2016). Needs Assessment Guidebook for

Extension  Professionals.         UT   Extension          Publication.

https://extension.tennessee.edu/eesd/PublishingImages/PB1839.pdf.

Donovan, C. (2019). Assessing the broader impacts of publicly funded

research. In D. Simon, S. Kuhlman, J. Stamm, and W. Canzler (Eds.)

Handbook on Science and Public Policy (pp. 488-501). Edward Elgar

Publishing. https://doi.org/10.4337/9781784715946.00036.

Fenwick, T. J. (2003). Learning through Experience: Troubling Orthodoxies and

Intersecting Questions. Krieger.

Gupta, K. (2011). A Practical Guide to Needs Assessment. John Wiley & Sons.

Mertens, D. M., & Wilson, A. T. (2018). Program Evaluation Theory and

Practice. Guilford Publications.

Taylor-Powell, E., & Henert, E. (2008). Developing a logic model: Teaching

and training guide. Benefits, 3(22), 1-118. https://ou-

webserver01.alaska.edu/ianre/internal/reporting/logicmodel/

logicmodeltrainingguide.pdf

References

Aggarwal, I., Woolley, A. W., Chabris, C. F., & Malone, T. W. (2019). The impact
   of cognitive style diversity on implicit learning in teams. Frontiers in
   Psychology, 10, 112. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00112.

Alessi, S. M., & Trollip, S. R. (2001). Multimedia for Learning: Methods and
   Development (3rd ed.). Allyn & Bacon.

250 | Program Planning
Alford, J., & Hughes, O. (2008). Public value pragmatism as the next phase of
   public management. The American Review of Public Administration, 38(2),
   130-148. https://doi.org/10.1177/0275074008314203.

Angima, S., Etuk, L., & King, D. (2014). Using Needs Assessment as a Tool to
   Strengthen Funding Proposals. The Journal of Extension, 52(6), Article 33.
   https://tigerprints.clemson.edu/joe/vol52/iss6/33.

Arnold, M. E. (2015). Connecting the dots: Improving Extension program
   planning with program umbrella models. Journal of Human Sciences and
   Extension, 3(2). https://www.jhseonline.com/article/view/685.

Arnold, M. E., & Nott, B. D. (2010). What's going on? Developing program
   theory for evaluation. Journal of Youth Development, 5(2), 71-82.
   https://doi.org/10.5195/jyd.2010.222.

Brown, J. (2002). Training needs assessment: A must for developing an
   effective training program. Public personnel management, 31(4), 569-578.
   https://doi.org/10.1177/009102600203100412.

Bryson, J. M. (2004). What to do when stakeholders matter: stakeholder
   identification and analysis techniques. Public management review, 6(1),
   21-53. https://doi.org/10.1080/14719030410001675722.

Burns, J. M. (1978). Leadership. Harper & Row.
Caffarella, R. S. (2002). Planning Programs for Adult Learners: A Practical

   Guide For Educators, Trainers, and Staff Developers (2nd ed.). Jossey-Bass.
Caffarella, R. S., & Daffron, S. R. (2013). Planning Programs for Adult Learners:

   A Practical Guide. Wiley & Sons.
Cervero, R. M., & Wilson, A. L. (2001). Power in Practice: Adult Education and

   the Struggle for Knowledge and Power in Society. John Wiley & Sons.
Chazdon, S. A., & Paine, N. (2014). Evaluating for public value: Clarifying

   the relationship between public value and program evaluation. Journal of
   Human Sciences and Extension, 2(2). https://www.jhseonline.com/article/
   view/670.
Cummings, S. R., Andrews, K. B., Weber, K. M., & Postert, B. (2015). Developing
   Extension professionals to develop Extension programs: A case study for
   the changing face of Extension. Journal of Human Sciences and Extension,
   3(2), 132-155. https://www.jhseonline.com/article/view/689/593.
Cummings, S. R., & Boleman, C. T. (2006). We identified issues through
   stakeholder input: Now what? The Journal of Extension, 44(1), Article
   1TOT1. https://www.joe.org/joe/2006february/tt1.php.

                                                                                       Program Planning | 251
Dane, A. V., & Schneider, B. H. (1998). Program integrity in primary and

early secondary prevention: are implementation effects out of control?

Clinical Psychology Review, 18(1), 23-45. https://doi.org/10.1016/

S0272-7358(97)00043-3.

Domitrovich, C. E., & Greenberg, M. T. (2000). The study of implementation:

Current findings from effective programs that prevent mental disorders

in school-aged children. Journal of Educational and Psychological

Consultation,           11(2),  193-221.      https://doi.org/10.1207/

S1532768XJEPC1102_04.

Donovan, C. (2019). Assessing the broader impacts of publicly funded

research. In D. Simon, S. Kuhlman, J. Stamm, and W. Canzler (Eds.)

Handbook on Science and Public Policy (pp. 488-501). Edward Elgar

Publishing. https://doi.org/10.4337/9781784715946.00036.

Duerden, M. D., & Witt, P. A. (2012). Assessing Program Implementation: What

It Is, Why It's Important, and How to Do It. The Journal of Extension, 50(1),

Article 5. https://tigerprints.clemson.edu/joe/vol50/iss1/5.

Dusenbury, L., Brannigan, R., Falco, M., & Hansen, W. B. (2003). A review

of research on fidelity of implementation: Implications for drug abuse

prevention in school settings. Health Education Research, 18(2), 237-256.

https://doi.org/10.1093/her/18.2.237.

Elliott-Engel, J. (2018). State Administrators' Perceptions of the Environmental

Challenges of Cooperative Extension and the 4-H Program and Their

Resulting Adaptive Leadership Behaviors (Doctoral dissertation), Virginia

Tech. https://vtechworks.lib.vt.edu/handle/10919/98002.

Elliott-Engel, J., Westfall-Rudd, D. M., Seibel, M., & Kaufman, E. (2020).

Extension's response to the change in public value: Considerations for

ensuring financial security for the Cooperative Extension System. Journal

of Human Sciences and Extension, 8(2), 69-90.

https://www.jhseonline.com/article/view/868.

Elliott-Engel, J., Westfall-Rudd, D., & Corkins, C. (2021). Engaging

Stakeholders in Extension Strategic Planning. The Journal of Extension,

59(4), Article 3. https://doi.org/10.34068/joe.59.04.03.

Elliott-Engel, J., Westfall-Rudd, D., Kaufman, E., Seibel, M., & Radhakrishna,

R. (2021). A Case of Shifting Focus Friction: Extension Directors and State

4-H Program Leaders' Perspectives on 4-H LGBTQ+ Inclusion. The Journal

of Extension, 59(4), Article 14. https://doi.org/10.34068/joe.59.04.14

252 | Program Planning
Elliott-Engel, J., Westfall-Rudd, D. M., Seibel, M., Kaufman, E., &
   Radhakrishna, R. (2021). Extension administrators' perspectives on
   employee competencies and characteristics. Journal of Extension, 59(3),
   Article 7. https://doi.org/10.34068/joe.59.03.03.

Farella, J., Moore, J., Arias, J., & Elliott-Engel, J. (2021). Framing Indigenous
   Identity Inclusion in Positive Youth Development: Proclaimed Ignorance,
   Partial Vacuum, and the Peoplehood Model. Journal of Youth Development,
   16(4), 1-25. https://doi.org/10.5195/jyd.2021.1059.

Fields, N. (2020). Exploring the 4-H thriving model: A commentary through
   an equity lens. Journal of Youth Development, 15(6), 171-194.
   https://doi.org/10.5195/jyd.2020.1058.

Fordham, P. (1979). The interaction of formal and non-formal education.
   Studies in Adult Education, 11(1), 1-11. https://doi.org/10.1080/
   02660830.1979.11730384.

Franz, N. K. (2011). Advancing the public value movement: Sustaining
   Extension during tough times. Journal of Extension, 49(2), Article
   v49-2comm2. https://www.joe.org/joe/2011april/comm2.php.

Franz, N. K. (2013). Improving Extension programs: Putting public value
   stories and statements to work. Journal of Extension, 51(3), Article 9.
   https://tigerprints.clemson.edu/joe/vol51/iss3/9/.

Franz, N. K. (2015). Programming for the public good: Ensuring public value
   through the Extension Program Development Model. Journal of Human
   Sciences and Extension, 3(2), 13. http://media.wix.com/ugd/
   c8fe6e_7c4d46d779db4132943d4fae8f1d9021.pdf.

Franz, N. K., Arnold, M., & Baughman, S. (2014). The Role of Evaluation in
   Determining the Public Value of Extension. The Journal of Extension, 52(4),
   Article 32. https://tigerprints.clemson.edu/joe/vol52/iss4/32.

Gagnon, R., Franz, N., Garst, B. A., & Bumpus, M. F. (2015). Factors impacting
   program delivery: The importance of implementation research in
   Extension. Journal of Human Sciences and Extension, 3(2), 68-82.
   https://www.jhseonline.com/article/view/686.

Gonzalez, M., White, A. J., Vega, L., Howard, J., Kokozos, M., & Soule, K. E.
   (2021). "Making the Best Better" for Youths: Cultivating LGBTQ+ Inclusion
   in 4-H. The Journal of Extension, 58(4), Article 3.
   https://tigerprints.clemson.edu/joe/vol58/iss4/3.

                                                                                      Program Planning | 253
Haskell, J. E., Baker, B. A., Olfert, M. D., Colby, S. E., Franzen-Castle, L. D.,
   Kattlemann, K. K., & White, A. A. (2019). Using ripple effects maps to
   identify story threads: A framework to link private to public value. Journal
   of Human Sciences and Extension, 7(3), 1-23. https://www.jhseonline.com/
   article/view/899.

Houle, C. O. (1996). The Design of Education. Jossey-Bass Higher and Adult
   Education Series. Jossey-Bass.

Intemann, K. (2009). Why diversity matters: Understanding and applying the
   diversity component of the National Science Foundation's broader impacts
   criterion. Social Epistemology, 23(3-4), 249-266. https://doi.org/10.1080/
   02691720903364134.

Israel, G. D. (2001). Using Logic Models for Program Development. University
   of Florida Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and
   Agricultural Sciences, EDIS.

Kaufman, R. A., Rojas, A. M., & Mayer, H. (1993). Needs Assessment: A User's
   Guide. Educational Technology.

Lukes, S. (1973) Individualism. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
McLaughlin, J. A., & Jordan, G. B. (2004). Using Logic Models. Handbook of

   Practical Program Evaluation, p. 7-32. In Handbook of Practical Program
   Evaluation, J. S. Wholey, H. P. Hatry, & K. E. Newcomer (Eds.). Jossey-Bass.
Mehta, A., & Mehta, N. (2018). Knowledge integration and team effectiveness:
   A team goal orientation approach. Decision Sciences, 49(3), 445-486.
   https://doi.org/10.1111/deci.12280.
Moore, M. (1995). Creating Public Value: Strategic Management in
   Government. Harvard University Press.
Morell, J. A. (2010). Evaluation in the Face of Uncertainty: Anticipating
   Surprise and Responding to the Inevitable. Guilford Press.
Moseley, C., Summerford, H., Paschke, M., Parks, C., & Utley, J. (2019). Road
   to collaboration: Experiential learning theory as a framework for
   environmental education program development. Applied Environmental
   Education & Communication, 19(3), 238-258. https://doi.org/10.1080/
   1533015X.2019.1582375.
Netting, F. E., O'Connor, M. K., & Fauri, D. P. (2008). Comparative Approaches
   to Program Planning. John Wiley & Sons.
Olson, B. J., Parayitam, S., & Bao, Y. (2007). Strategic decision making: The
   effects of cognitive diversity, conflict, and trust on decision outcomes.
   Journal of Management, 33(2), 196-222. https://doi.org/10.1177/
   0149206306298657.

254 | Program Planning
Parrott, A., Hauser, M., & Farella, J. (2020). Applying Focused Excellence: The

Program Area Framework [Unpublished Extension Publication]. Arizona

Cooperative Extension, The University of Arizona.

Patton, M. Q. (2008). Utilization-Focused Evaluation. Sage.

Place, N. T., Klemme, R. M., McKinnie, M. R., Baker, C., Parrella, J., &

Cummings, S. R. (2019). Credible and actionable evidence across

stakeholder levels of the Cooperative Extension System. Journal of Human

Sciences and Extension, 7(2), 124-143. https://www.jhseonline.com/

article/view/827.

Sork, T. J., & Newman, M. (2004). Program development in adult education

and training. In G. Foley (Ed.), Dimensions of Adult Learning: Adult

education and Training in the Global Era (pp. 96-117). Open University

Press.

Taylor-Powell, E., & Henert, E. (2008). Developing a Logic Model: Teaching

and Training Guide. University of Wisconsin Extension, Cooperative

Extension,       Program  Development              and       Evaluation.

https://fyi.Extension.wisc.edu/programdevelopment/files/2016/03/

lmguidecomplete.pdf.

Travis, E., Alwang, A., & Elliott-Engel, J. (2018). Developing a Holistic

Assessment for Land Grant University Economic Impact Studies: A Case

Study. In 2018 Annual Meeting of the Southern Agricultural Economics

Association, Jacksonville, Florida (No. 266789). https://doi.org/10.22004/

ag.econ.266789.

Wang, C., & Burris, M. A. (1997). Photovoice: Concept, methodology, and use

for participatory needs assessment. Health Education & Behavior, 24(3),

369-387. https://doi.org/10.1177/109019819702400309.

Wlodkowski, R. J. (2008). Enhancing Adult Motivation to Learn: A

Comprehensive Guide for Teaching All Adults (3rd ed.). Jossey-Bass.

Figure and Table Attributions

   Figure 11.1 Adapted under fair use from From Needs Assessment to
      Action: Transforming Needs into Solution Strategies, by J. W. Altschud
      and B. Witkins, 2000, Sage. Graphic by Kindred Grey.

   Figure 11.2 Adapted under fair use from Taylor-Powell, E., & Henert, E.

                                                                                      Program Planning | 255
      (2008). Developing a Logic Model: Teaching and Training Guide.
      University of Wisconsin Extension, Cooperative Extension, Program
      Development and Evaluation. https://fyi.Extension.wisc.edu/
      programdevelopment/files/2016/03/lmguidecomplete.pdf. Graphic by
      Kindred Grey.
   Figure 11.3 Kindred Grey. CC BY 4.0.
   Figure 11.4 Adapted under fair use from Figure 1.0 in Elliott-Engel et al.
      (2020). Extension's response to the change in public value:
      Considerations for ensuring the Cooperative Extension System's
      financial security. Journal of Human Sciences and Extension, 8(2), 69-90.
      https://www.jhseonline.com/article/view/868. Graphic by Kindred
      Grey.

256 | Program Planning
12. Personalized Advising that Is
Purposely Inconsistent: The
Constants of Great Advisors and
the Variability that Demands
Adaptability

  WILLIAM MOORE

 Introduction

  Congratulations! You've earned your graduate degree and landed a job in
  academia. This in itself is quite a feat! Your mentors have helped prepare
  you to conduct your own research, secure extramural funding, and speak
  publicly about your research. Perhaps you've even had teaching experience
  or better yet, received some formal training in pedagogy. Your new
  supervisor mentioned in passing that you would be expected to serve as an
  academic advisor for some of your students. Piece of cake, you thought, all
  you need is a course catalog and a list of degree requirements, right? How
  hard can it be?

     A couple of weeks prior to the first day of class, you receive a list of
  advisees and appointment times from the registrar's office. Reality sets in.
  You are in the hot seat. Maybe you're confident. Maybe you're a nervous

How to cite this book chapter:
  Moore, W. 2022. Personalized Advising that Is Purposely Inconsistent: The Constants
  of Great Advisors and the Variability that Demands Adaptability. In: Westfall-Rudd,
  D., Vengrin, C., and Elliott-Engel, J. (eds.) Teaching in the University: Learning from
  Graduate Students and Early-Career Faculty. Blacksburg: Virginia Tech College of
  Agriculture and Life Sciences. https://doi.org/10.21061/universityteaching. License:
  CC BY-NC 4.0.
                                                                                    Personalized Advising | 257
wreck as the weight of responsibility rests heavily on your shoulders. If you
find yourself even somewhat in the latter category, allow me to remind you
of the adversity you've already overcome. Your success to this point means
that you have a recipe for success in your toolbelt, but perhaps you've been
too busy writing your dissertation to think about it.

     This chapter will discuss...

          Skills and characteristics of effective advisors.
          How to develop and hone your own advising philosophy.
          The merits and drawbacks of various advising techniques

             and strategies.

The purpose of this chapter is not to provide an exhaustive explanation
of advising techniques and sociological defenses for each one, but rather
to help bring your recipe for success to the front of your mind; to serve
as a companion as you take time to ponder the contents of and begin to
articulate your recipe. Finally, I am here to offer some research-based advice,
from a "been-there-done-that" standpoint, to help strengthen your advising
philosophy and explore the merits of other techniques and strategies as you
learn to tweak your recipe for success to meet the needs of an infinitely
diverse student population.

   Before we dive into the content of this chapter, consider the following
questions: What interpersonal skills and styles facilitate great advising? At
which of these skills are you particular adept? Which of these skills could
admittedly use work? How do you present yourself in such a way that your
advisees recognize your warm, caring advisor heart? How do you train your
ear to be one that listens and hears your students? Are any of the thoughts
that have just crossed your prefrontal cortex more important than others?

258 | Personalized Advising
An entire book could be written on any of these topics. However, the goal not
being to provide an exhaustive list, I urge you to consider these questions as
you read these next few pages.

Behaviors and Characteristics of an Effective
Advisor

While it has been reported that students tend to be most satisfied with the
advising administered by an advising center staff compared to that offered
by individual faculty (Belcheir, 1999a), it is understood that some readers
work at institutes of higher education that do not provide their faculty
with such an asset. Before moving on to discuss the various aspects of this
section, note that personal experience has so far found it to be true that
"you can only lead a horse to water," so to speak. Research supports this
observation in that extraverted students have reported to have perceived
higher quality and more satisfying advising experiences than introverted
students (Mottarella et al., 2004). The study also found that a majority of
students, regardless of their personality, desire to establish warm and
supportive relationships (Mottarella et al., 2004). This supports the rationale
that advisors should take time to reflect on their own interpersonal skills and
relationship-building approach, such that they are best suited to facilitate
this warm and supportive environment. Thus, this chapter will focus on
things that can be done and should not be done to strengthen the ability to
"lead the horse to the water."

Approachability

The introduction to this chapter mentions the weight of responsibility
placed upon advisors. The purpose of its mention is twofold; (1) to strengthen
their confidence by serving as a reminder that they've already overcome
great adversity to get to the position they're in and (2) to reiterate that
advising is not a task to be taken lightly as it is critical for the academic
success and personal development of the students (Amenkhienan & Kogan,

                                                                                 Personalized Advising | 259
2004; Latopolski, 2018). Student success is very much associated with the
quality of advising. In a meta-analysis of studies on doctoral student attrition
and persistence, the single most frequently occurring finding was that
successful program completion is related to the degree and quality of
contact between students and advisors (Centra, 2004). Warmth and support
from the advisor have also been shown to be important factors in advisee
satisfaction (Mottarella et al., 2004). For a warm and supportive interaction
to occur, advisors must first position themselves in a way that invites
interaction; in other words, advisors should consciously do everything in
their power to make themselves approachable.

Age Doesn't Matter... But If It Does, New Faculty Have
an Advantage

While some advising techniques might require extensive time, dedication,
and practice to master, rest assured that neither youth nor inexperience
hinder approachability. One common misconception about advising is that
those who have extensive teaching experience tend to make the best
advisors. This can be refuted by noting that freshly minted products of
higher education are more likely to be able to empathize with the students
compared to more seasoned faculty. A study (Eberdt, 1968) aimed at defining
selection criteria for secondary school counselors studied characteristics of
secondary teachers who had been rated as most and least approachable by
their students. Interestingly, the data indicate that teaching experience and
even intellectual ability tend to impede approachability. In fact, personality
factors are suggested to be as important, if not more so, than academic
ability (Eberdt, 1968). More recently, it has been shown that student
satisfaction with an advisor is more likely be dependent on the advisor's
interpersonal skills and style than on their advising approach (Mottarella et
al., 2004). Indeed, research has shown that the advising climate is dependent
on the extent to which an advisor provides facilitative conditions such as
listening and hearing (Whiteley et al., 1975).

260 | Personalized Advising
Relationship Building Requires a Time Commitment

Regardless of the advising approach, the establishment of a warm and
supportive relationship can be foundational (Mottarella et al., 2004). Even an
intrusive and/or prescriptive approach to advising (discussed later) does not
require cold, unsupportive, uncaring advising (Mottarella et al., 2004). Also,
despite it having been reported that students who have previously received
academic advising tend to indicate that female advisors are typically more
empathetic (Nadler & Nadler, 1993), this may be because female faculty have
been shown to devote more time to advising than their male colleagues
(Bennett, 1982). Thus, in addition to facilitating a warm and supportive
advising environment, it is of paramount importance that an appropriate
amount of time is devoted to advising.

   This begs the question, what sort of advising tasks should merit a
significant time investment? An advising appointment can be likened to an
exam. Time should be spent in preparation in order to ensure success;
however, regardless of time spent preparing, if the actual process is rushed,
it is easy to leave points on the table. In other words, it is important to
allow ample time to engage with advisees. During an advising appointment,
the advisee should be the focus of the advisor's undivided attention. The
following remarks by John Dewey (Dewey, 1938 p. 79) support this rationale:

       Once more, it is part of the educator's responsibility to see equally
       two things: First, that the problem grows out of the conditions of the
       experience being had in the present and that it is within the range of
       the capacity of students; and, secondly, that it is such that it arouses
       in the learner an active quest for information and for production of
       new ideas.

To put Dewey's remarks in the context of advising, students/advisees exist
in a certain social environment, and time should be taken to be cognizant of
this in anticipation of the advising interaction. Further, it would be beneficial
to spend a few minutes allowing the student to engage in a dialogue with
the advisor about this context. Advisors must also take the time to ensure
that any prescriptive tasks are within their advisees' capacity to succeed.
Finally, time should be spent helping students see the relationships between
their academic milieu as well as the relationships that exist between this

                                                                                 Personalized Advising | 261
milieu and their goals. Such attention contributes to the intellectual growth
of the student by pushing them to strive to be active learners and productive
scholars in a broader context.

   If the reader is anything like the author of this chapter, this seems a
daunting task. This work is being written from the perspective of a person of
admittedly poor memory, especially pertaining to faces, names, and details
about the lives of other people. Further, the author's office epitomizes
disorder. These personal flaws require extra steps to ensure that the
approach to advising is organized so that time allocated for advising can be
maximally invested in the advisee.

   First, I recommend that advising files/folders have a distinct color. It is
helpful to only use this color folder for advising. There should also be a
special place for advising folders and for all things advising. The contents
of advising folders don't have to be anything extraordinary. Keep it simple.
Academic records, an updated program of study, and some minute profile
information (i.e. career goals, extracurricular activities, likes/dislikes) is
generally sufficient. However, a typically disorganized person might find it
helpful to have a place in the folder to take notes that can be used to interact
with the student both personally and academically. For example, seeing a
student's name in a school publication about some meritorious endeavor
could be noted so that congratulations can be extended. If a student
discloses any likes/dislikes (e.g., they hate art), make note of that. Further,
interview notes regarding students' career goals (this likely will be updated
multiple times for most students) can be recorded here. This information
can be used to build a personal relationship with each student, serving as a
cornerstone for the Deweyan-inspired approach to guiding student learning
during advising.

   Certainly, these things require an initial time investment, but they are
incredibly valuable. Before every advising appointment, time should be spent
reading through these notes, and jotting down any thoughts/concerns that
should be discussed during the next appointment. Regardless of the
method(s) used, it is imperative that enough time is allowed in the advising
appointment to be able to engage with the student personally, allow the
advisee to discuss their concerns and reason for the appointment, allow
the advisor to discuss their concerns with the advisee, and emphasize how
everything that has been discussed points towards the greater goal of the
advisee's calling.

262 | Personalized Advising
Disposition/Demeanor: "Why don't you smile?"

The word "approachable" is a descriptor for someone who is friendly,
welcoming, and pleasant. What are some features of people who are
"approachable"?

   Research in behavioral psychology has shown that there is a fundamental
motivation to approach environmental aspects that apparently confer
benefit and a fundamental motivation to withdraw from those that are
apparently harmful (Schneirla, 1959). Rotteveel & Phaf (2004) showed that
the perception of happy expressions resulted in arm flexion, which has been
associated with positive information (Rotteveel & Phaf, 2004). In layman's
terms, this literature can be summarized with a common interrogative from
a wise great aunt, often directed at her great nephew as a child; In her thick
Southern accent, she'd ask "Honey, why don't you smile?"

   The tendency to gravitate toward and away from certain facial demeanors
is deeply ingrained in human nature. Even infants have been shown to
gravitate toward their mothers when they are smiling, but not when they are
frowning (Sorce et al., 1985). Assuming this primitive tendency is continuous
throughout the human lifespan, it is certainly a worthwhile topic to cover
in the pursuit of becoming more approachable to postsecondary students.
Indeed, it has been suggested that smiles are useful in establishing and
maintaining effective interpersonal relationships as they are indicators of
trustworthiness and cooperative intent (Owren & Bachorowski, 2001). A
more recent study showed that movement toward an approaching target
was more likely when the target displayed a positive emotional state (Miles,
2009), thus supporting the rationale that there is an active primitive
tendency to gravitate toward facial expressions perceived as positive.

   Though initiating contact with a certain demeanor is a good starting point,
please note that this is NOT a suggestion to always smile or put on any
one set of "approachable" facades, but to rather consider them during
interactions with people. For one, it is not inherent in everyone's personality
to always be cheerful or otherwise able to put themselves in a good mood
on command. A cheerful demeanor can be forced to some extent, but human
biochemistry is simply often not conducive to being in a good mood 24/7/
365. Further, it could be perceived as "fake" by students. Worse, this might
inadvertently lead a student to pursue academia under the false pretense
that such a career is all positive.

                                                                                 Personalized Advising | 263
   As important as all of these things are, it must be recognized that cultural
differences must also be considered and accounted for. What is perceived
as "approachable" may very well differ from person to person based on their
background. For example, one study showed that Chinese participants relied
more on the eyes to represent facial expressions while Western Caucasians
tended to rely more on the mouth and eyebrows, suggesting that cultural
distinctions might indeed cause a misinterpretation of an emotional
portrayal during cross-cultural communication (Jack et al., 2011). In short,
advisors should take time to get to their students in order to put themselves
in the position to facilitate an environment that best supports their
educational pursuits.

Availability

A study cited earlier in this chapter noted that students tend to prefer
advising centers over peer counselors largely because the students
perceived peer counselors as not being either proactive or available when
needed (Belcheir, 1999b). It has been further shown that committed,
purposeful communication with an advisor is associated with increased
student motivation and involvement (Astin, 1999). Fielstein (1987) showed
that 28.9% of students, when interviewed about their advising experiences,
noted that their advisor's personal acquaintance with them was a high
priority (Fielstein, 1987). Not surprisingly, research collectively suggests that
students tend to be most pleased with faculty advisors who are available and
accessible (Alexitch, 1997).

   Access to and availability of faculty advisors is an area of concern as
advising is an additional item on a plate already filled with quality teaching,
research, committee work, outreach, and so on (Gnepp et al., 1980; Habley
& Others, 1988). Complicating the issue is the fact that advising tends to
be of low priority in tenure and promotion consideration processes (Habley
& Others, 1988; Spencer et al., 1982). All of these things understandably
culminate in reasonable faculty members simply NOT placing advising at
the top of their priority lists. A 1987 ACT survey indicated that most faculty
spent 1-5% of their time advising and that most faculty have contact with
their advisees two or fewer times in an academic term (Habley & Others,
1988). Sadly, this is a disservice to the students, resulting in many institutes

264 | Personalized Advising
of higher learning falling short of student expectations. Admittedly, one of
the reasons for mentioning this seemingly obvious characteristic is based
on personal conversations with students regarding their description of an
ideal advisor. Almost all of them note some variation of "the advisor must
be available" as the number one factor of importance in their assessment of
advising.

   A student whose advisor is not accessible is missing out on the wealth
of information and experience that the faculty advisor could provide if they
were available/accessible. For example, a faculty member can usually
provide detailed information about courses, programs, and (cough cough)
other professors. They can also provide a rationale for a requirement and
point students toward otherwise unknown career opportunities (Habley &
Others, 1988).

   Education would be a far greater experience for students if only advisors
who wanted to advise were allowed to serve in that capacity, and if those
advisors were given some sort of relief of other duties to provide reasonable
incentive for diligently serving in this highly important capacity.

   An individual tasked with academic advising is highly encouraged to recall
their importance in the students' success and to do everything they can to
take an interest in their students. This includes taking the time to strengthen
their advising skills. Perhaps the most simple thing that can be done is to BE
AVAILABLE. This is not saying that every hour outside of the classroom has
to be spent in the office, but that there is merit in being proactive about this.
Advisors should post and keep office hours, and bend over backward to make
sure their advisees (and their students for that matter) know the schedule
or can easily find it. Advisors should encourage advisees to drop by for an
informal chat. One method I use is to keep a single-serve coffee maker in
the office that students are always free to use; if the advisor isn't available in
person, they should provide some means for student access. If nothing else,
simply checking email once an hour during regular business hours is helpful.
Social media accounts can also be employed, for example by having a page
set aside where students can interact with their advisor.

   To take availability a step further, active mental availability should be
considered in addition to physical availability. A former chemistry professor
would literally sit in his office chair, facing the door, during office hours and
do nothing else (maybe twiddle his thumbs) but wait for students to stop by.
His students knew that he was there to actively listen, understand, and to
provide feedback based on their needs because the sole purpose of his office

                                                                                 Personalized Advising | 265
hours was not to catch up on work, watch videos on YouTube, or read a book
for leisure, but to provide them help. The intention of this example is not
to suggest that such extreme measures are necessary for everyone, but if a
student is to be helped, their needs must be understood. If advisors are to
understand the needs of their students, they must actively listen--listen in
such a way that the student isn't just heard, but that they also feel heard,
seen, and understood (Ranglund et al., 2017).

   When a student visits an advisor in their office, that student should have
the advisor's undivided attention until they can confidently leave with a
solution or a plan for whatever the concern might have been.

Adaptability

Generally speaking, most approaches to teaching and advising can be
categorized as "teacher-centered," "student-centered," or some combination
of the two. This section will give some examples of advising strategies. As the
shift is made to those descriptions, it is important to understand that all of
these ideas (as well as others) should be in the "advising tool-belt" to be used
or neglected as each occasion calls for it. However, the most important tool
in the belt should be an adaptor that allows for the ability to adjust to the
individual needs of the students.

   A purist approach, in most any field, is likely to end in disaster. This will
be a recurring theme in the coming sections. As highly adored as student-
centered teaching (and advising) is, it is obvious that even these approaches
require some aspect of teacher-centered guidance. If that were not so,
teachers would be overpriced and obsolete relics of antiquity. Indeed, Dewey
was somewhat critical of this approach in isolation (Dewey, 1938) as is a more
recent article arguing that allowing students the absolute freedom to learn
in an unguided environment is antithetical to the psychological principles
encompassing working memory (Kirschener et al., 2006). This brings to
memory an inspirational quotation: "The best teachers are those who show
you where to look, but don't tell you what to see." This quotation beautifully
encompasses both sides of the teacher-/student-centered paradigm by
serving as a reminder that teachers and advisors should be guides--coaches
on the sidelines, but that as coaches, must be flexible enough to know not
only where to look, but how to inspire students to look until they've found

266 | Personalized Advising
the answer. If every student is unique in terms of experience, personality,
and level of academic achievement (most are), this implies that an advisor
must be limitlessly and existentially adaptable in order to inspire and
motivate each individual student to press on towards the goal.

What Advisors Can Learn From Other
Disciplines

Ascertaining and Admitting a Circle of Competence

The ability of a person to know what they don't know is arguably as
important, if not more so, than what they do know. Being able to honestly
divulge personal strengths and limitations falls under the category of
personal competency and integrity. To some extent, this defines who a
person is (Ranglund et al., 2017). Students are incredibly perceptive. With
respect to advising, a former department chair at Averett University gave a
piece of simple yet wise advice. He said, "If you don't know something, don't
act like you do; they can see right through that. Tell them that you will find
the answer and get back to them." This advice nicely parallels the concept
of "circle of competence," which was originally intended as a principle of
investing developed by Warren Buffet and Charlie Munger (Chairman/CEO
and Vice Chairman of Berkshire Hathaway, respectively). The crux of the
model is that everyone has the ability to make intelligent decisions in some
area(s), but no one is an expert on everything (Parrish, 2013), and only people
who are arrogant, foolish, or purposely deceptive pretend to be. As Charlie
Munger put it, "A money manager with an IQ of 160 and thinks it's 180 will
kill you. Going with a money manager with an IQ of 130 who thinks it is 125
could serve you well."

   Munger's words could be adapted to derive an equally wise advising
principle by replacing "money manager" with "academic advisor." This is true
for several reasons, the most obvious being the plethora of elective courses
(even at small liberal arts universities). Students have quite a bit of agency
in exploring fringe interests as they pursue their primary goals (Thelin &
Hirschy, 2009). This is great for students, and given the personal opportunity

                                                                                 Personalized Advising | 267
to impart change, more choices would be advocated for. However, so many
options pose a challenge for advisors. At some point advisors will need to be
guided as they guide their students. Advising does not afford the option to
quarantine in a niche circle of competence; advisors don't have the luxury
of picking pitches; in fact, doing so would be antithetical to adaptability.
However, they do have the responsibility to be open with their pupils about
what they do and do not know. This is of paramount importance because
transparent humility will foster trust in the advisor/advisee relationship.
It is essential to develop a pattern of giving advice that advisees find to
be trustworthy as this will foster the expectation that the given advice is
always from an informed position. Because advisors do have a circle of
competence, it is critical that advisees trust their advisors enough to know
that professional remarks with respect to advice, feedback, criticism,
commendations, etc., are credible and trustworthy.

More Than an Advisor: A Coach

To build on the coaching analogy, we will use pieces of a previously published
coaching model for advising (McClellan & Moser, 2011). Thus far the
importance of being available (physically and mentally), adaptable, and
transparent about a circle of competence has been discussed. Together,
application of these ideas builds rapport and assists the student to begin to
both identify their own path to success and to devise a plan to achieve it.
A good coach doesn't stop there, but intently watches so as to be able to
evaluate the success (or lack thereof) of the plan. The coach offers feedback
regarding the mishaps and helps to identify steps that aid the future
direction towards success.

   Evaluation of the success of the plan requires the advisor to pose questions
that allow the students to reflect on their efforts (McClellan & Moser, 2011).
Such questions help the advisor become more aware of the student's thought
process; the answers might identify details of the situation of which the
advisor might not have been previously aware, and should be considered
as future directions are proposed (McClellan & Moser, 2011). Questions also
serve as a means of assessment of the student's problem-solving ability
(McClellan & Moser, 2011) thus directing the advisor to move toward a more
"hands-on" or "hands-off" advising approach (Intrusive/Proactive Advising).

268 | Personalized Advising
   Considering future directions from which to attack a problem involves
brainstorming. The advisor should be prepared to ask questions that
encourage the activity. Though there are a number of questions that could
be useful, one of particular personal appeal is, "If our positions were
reversed, and you were offering me advice, what would you tell me?" Follow-
up questions may similarly draw from what the student anticipates another
involved party might recommend (McClellan & Moser, 2011). It is perfectly
acceptable for the advisor to offer ideas as well, however, it is best to do so
after the student has had an opportunity to think, so as to avoid intrusive
advising. This is also to be done with humility: An advisor should not
arrogantly insist or imply that their ideas are better than any others, but
rather offer them as additional ideas that might be of value (McClellan &
Moser, 2011).

   Once several viable ideas have been presented, the coaching model of
advising suggests that the advisor help the student evaluate and choose an
approach to be molded into a plan with which to address the problems
(McClellan & Moser, 2011). Finally, advising as a coach requires seeing the
plan through. The student must be encouraged to stick to the plan and to
give an account of their progress (McClellan & Moser, 2011).

More Than an Advisor: A Counselor

This chapter has alluded to the fact that advising entails much more than
the academic milieu. With the personal development of students being
dependent on advising to some extent, part of the time used to prepare
for advising sessions should be spent considering that an advisor may be
called upon to assist students with interpersonal relationships, personal
challenges, work/life balance, co-curricular activities, and so on (Kuhn et
al., 2006). Having served as an advisor for only a few years, I will attest
to what more experienced advisors have noted for decades: Students often
have complicated personal issues that, if left on their own, will be barriers
to success (Kuhn et al., 2006). Any barrier to the success of the students
is a barrier to the success of an advisor. Thus, the academic component
of advising must happen in the context of advisees' personal needs, values,
goals, and circumstances (Kuhn et al., 2006).

                                                                                 Personalized Advising | 269
   Discernment can be aided by active listening skills, however, such
challenges call for advisors to demonstrate empathy. That is, compassion
must be shown in times of stress, the cause of which can vary greatly in its
range of severity. Placing a high value on education tends to be accompanied
by an innate concern about students, and as previously noted, active
listening is an exemplary fruit of empathy. Actively listening to students'
concerns (big or small) lends emotional support (Hybels & Weaver, n.d.).
Emotional support as it pertains to extracurricular affairs can move
perilously close to the line of most academic advisors' competency circles.
While crossing the boundaries of certain competencies may not be
particularly harmful, crossing this boundary can be. Most advisors are not
mental health counselors. However, psychology literature suggests that
empathy is associated with positive prognoses in therapeutic environments
(Laska et al., 2014). Therefore, it stands to reason that empathetic listening,
as the best source of outside help is deductively determined, can be helpful.

   The focus of this section is clearly not as enjoyable as the rest of the
chapter. However, the responsibility to help early career faculty brace
themselves for an occasional encounter with a student who has a need
in which they are unable and/or unqualified to intervene must be
acknowledged. Indeed, there are scenarios that may very well surface in an
advising meeting that should be referred to other campus resource offices
including student success and/or counseling. The reader is encouraged to
introduce themself to the folks who work in these offices so that they are
prepared to turn to them when situations arise that call for their expertise.
Seeking help from another office (or another faculty member) is the advisor's
responsibility. By seeking help, the discipline required of the advisor to admit
her/his circle of competence is demonstrated as part of the fulfillment
of duty to ensure that the students' personal and academic success is as
attainable as it possibly can be. Kuhn et al. (2006) presents an excellent list
of issues with which an advisor might be confronted along with an indicator
that generally indicates whether the issue is addressable by most academic
advisors (Figure 12.1).

270 | Personalized Advising
Figure 12.1 Categorization of responsibility in potential advising issues.

General Approaches to Advising

The purpose of this section is to describe some practical approaches to
advising. To preface, it has been argued since the 1960s, by those conducting
psychotherapy research, that the nature of the professional relationship,
as opposed to any specific approach or technique, is most contributive to
client satisfaction (Beutler et al., 1994; Rogers, 1992; Truax & Carkhuff, 1967).
Thus, any of the following approaches to advising might be beneficial at
some point. However, it suggested that these ideas be kept as tools in a
toolkit to be deployed when the situation calls for it, and further, that these
ideas be considered to exist on a sliding scale--that is, there are varying
degrees of implementation. The approach taken and the degree to which
it is taken will differ depending on the individual needs of the student.
For instance, students may prefer aspects of either a developmental or
prescriptive approach to advising so far as certain relational elements are
demonstrated by the advisor (Mottarella et al., 2004).

Developmental Advising

Many advisees in science departments approach their advisors with an
interest in pursuing careers in medicine. Thus, from this perspective, it
would be remiss if the concept of osteopathic medicine weren't mentioned

                                                                                  Personalized Advising | 271
somewhere in this chapter. A short justification clause for developmental
advising seems to be the perfect place. Many people are not aware that there
are two doctoral degrees in the United States that allow for full licensure
to practice as a physician in any area of medicine. A Doctor of Osteopathic
Medicine (DO) is trained to practice medicine from the perspective that
the human body is a three-part being--an integrated whole comprised of
mind, body, and spirit. It is often noted that a broken spirit can be every
bit as painful as a broken bone. Further, a DO recognizes the paramount
importance of the reciprocal relationship between structure and function
and that wellbeing is often affected by factors outside of what is purely
physical. This holistic approach to medicine is somewhat analogous to a
holistic approach to advising that is developmental in nature. Developmental
advising recognizes that the academic pursuits of the student can't be
completely understood without seeing the whole student.

   Together, developmental and prescriptive advising have historically
dominated the field of advising (Barbuto et al., 2011; Crookston, 1972).
Developmental advising is a controversial topic as the literature defines it
in several different ways. Further, it has been criticized as aiming toward
goals that are outside the realm of the traditionally held outcomes of higher
education (Bloland et al., 1994; Hemwall & Trachte, 1999). Indeed,
developmental advising is typically depicted as a model of counseling to the
end of personal growth (Hemwall & Trachte, 2005). Though some academics
are critical of such an approach, as this chapter has noted, this author
believes that academic advising is far more than an occupation that
promotes mere intellectual growth, but that intellectual growth is only
achievable so long as personal growth is the cornerstone that supports
the intellectual pursuit. Developmental advising supports this rationale as it
allows advisors to embrace advising as a practice that recognizes students as
multidimensional and should be supported emotionally, physically, morally,
economically, and vocationally as well as intellectually (Boyle et al., 2012).
Thus, despite criticism of the approach, developmental advising has been
shown to be the ideal advising approach for university students (Gordon,
1994; Winston & Sandor, 1984).

   To advise a student with such a goal, the student-advisor relationship
should allow the advisor to pose questions whose answers will reveal the
students' goals. To approach advising with a developmental focus, awareness
of the students' current state is necessary (Grites, 2013). As mentioned
earlier, it is helpful to note these goals on the inside of advising files so

272 | Personalized Advising
that time can be taken to discuss progress during each meeting. These
goals include those directly related to education, but also include career
and personal goals (Winston et al., 1982). These broader goals might require
a student to acquire a skill or seek professional experience outside of the
institution.

   Once those goals have been noted, advisors should help their students
put together a plan of action that aims to accomplish these goals while
promoting both intellectual and personal development. Keep in mind that
the students may need the advisor to help find and use institutional,
community, and perhaps personal resources to realize those goals (Winston
& Sandor, 1984). It should also be understood by both parties that this is a
shared commitment (Grites, 2013). The student must be honest and direct;
the advisor must be tolerant and able to inspire; both student and advisor
must be trustworthy, adaptable, and dependable (Grites, 2013).

   The argument that developmental advising involves extracurricular
factors, and falls outside the scope of most job descriptions is well taken.
However, most educators have an intrinsic understanding of human dignity
and the fact that their brothers and sisters of humanity are far from cookie-
cutter and are incredibly complex. It is thus natural that a developmental
approach would be at the core of every other practical or theoretical
approach to academic advising.

Prescriptive Advising

Prescriptive advising is somewhat of a contrasting approach to
developmental advising. While the latter recognizes the art of advising as
a broad discipline that requires some degree of care for aspects of student
life that go beyond academics, prescriptive advising mostly limits advising
to matters that are directly related to academics. The advisor-advisee
relationship in prescriptive advising has been compared to the physician-
patient relationship in that the patient/student is given information
necessary for progression of health/intellect (Barbuto et al., 2011). Such an
approach uses advising sessions explicitly for course selection, registration,
degree requirements, discussions of curriculum, and so on (Drake, 2011).

                                                                                 Personalized Advising | 273
   It has been noted that prescriptive advising is only a theoretical concept
(Crookston, 1972). When considering the physician-patient relationship, it
is nearly impossible to imagine the field of medicine without compassion,
which by definition comes from some degree of personal concern.
Regardless of whether it is ever practiced in the purest sense, the philosophy
of prescriptive advising is incredibly important as the academic pursuits of
students are at the heart of the student-advisor relationship. Service as an
advisor requires accurate knowledge of the degree requirements (Crosbie,
2005) or at the very least, where to find them. While it is not typically
in the nature of a teacher's heart to default to prescriptive advising, there
are students who frankly want, and in some sense demand, prescriptive
advising. Indeed, a recent study showed that 17 out of 429 surveyed students
preferred prescriptive advising (Hale et al., 2009). While prescriptive advising
is obviously not the most commonly preferred approach, it should always
be kept in mind that different students find value in different advising
techniques, and advisors should be ready to employ the technique that is
most conducive to each student's success.

   Burn Crookston's work (1972) provides an accurate depiction of
prescriptive advising. Personal experience has shown that students who
prefer this approach view their academic advisors as a source of information
about the university. They want a cut-and-dried answer or plan to answer
a question about an academic topic. A prescriptive advisor would
hypothetically answer the specific questions, but would not address more
comprehensive concerns (Crookston, 1972). To reiterate, such an approach is
not the personal default, and the literature supports the rationale that pure
prescriptive advising is not a viable option in the modern era (White, 2020).

   Even students who seem to seek a prescriptive advising session should
be challenged to at least be inwardly inquisitive about their own questions,
and should be pressed to consider their rationale for certain questions. For
example, if a student were to inquire about the process of adding a minor,
changing a major, or enrolling in an elective that is outside of their field, the
inquiry could be justifiably met with a question that is on the cutting-edge of
advising: "Why?" While there is often solid reasoning for students to ask such
questions, occasionally, a student has simply made a rash and/or illogical
decision, and they need to be protected from themself.

   In this respect, while prescriptive advising might be the elemental
approach for some students, it might be more appropriate to view such an
advisor-advisee relationship as that between a client and a financial advisor.

274 | Personalized Advising
Dave Ramsey, who is a radio personality specializing in personal finance,
often says with respect to investing that "the only way to get hurt on a roller
coaster is to jump off." All three of the professions mentioned in this section
(physician, financial advisor, academic advisor) call for a compassionate
professional with genuine care for the success and well-being of those who
are dependent on their advice. It would be next to impossible to ask a
compassionate person to be so emotionally withdrawn as to allow someone
under their care to jump off the metaphorical roller coaster without at least
trying to prevent such a catastrophe. Thus, despite being mostly theoretical,
this section addresses prescriptive advising as it entails some fundamental
concepts at least and handful students will likely be encountered during the
career of an advisor who need or prefer prescriptive direction. However,
both the literature and personal experience suggest that it would be unwise
(perhaps careless) to become a prescriptive purest.

Intrusive/Proactive Advising

Regardless of whether an approach is developmental, instructive, or a
combination of the two, students might also be well-served by varying
degrees of intrusiveness. Touted as a means of reaching at-risk students
(Heisserer & Parette, 2002), intrusive advising involves proactively
anticipating problems before they arise (Varney, 2007).

   Natural inclination would be to divide this section into two by labeling one
"hands-on advising" and the other "hands-off advising." However, there is
little to no literature discussing the effects of a purely "hands-off" approach
to academic advising. And, to be clear, it is also well noted that intrusive/
proactive advising should not be construed as "hand-holding" (Upcraft &
Kramer, 1995). In fact, it is based on the idea that the advisor and student
have shared responsibility for success. Thus, my personal contention is that
most students require some balance of "hands-on" and "hands-off" advising;
or as will be considered here, some degree of intrusiveness.

   Truly "hands-on" advising would in essence be "hand-holding" as it would
point out every possible roadblock, offer a set of instructions describing how
to avoid/get around the roadblocks, and not allow a student to make a move
that is likely to result in failure of any sort. Such an approach would likely
be disadvantageous because it devalues the learning process by withholding

                                                                                 Personalized Advising | 275
valuable teachable moments that strengthen character and discipline. In
fact, being too intrusive can negatively affect a student's attitude toward
advising, causing them to eschew help (Herget, 2017). The opposite extreme
of this sort of advising would allow a student to encounter every problem
on their own without any warning and then perhaps work with the student
to solve the issues once they arise. This "hands-off" approach would also
be problematic because there are some situations that are not so easily
remedied.

   Intrusive advising nicely balances these two ideas. That is, advisors should
aim to be inviting, friendly, and warm while still implementing the touch
of tough love that students need for optimal growth (Cannon, 2013). For
example, as obvious as it might seem to you, many new college students
aren't inclined to contact their advisors. Being aware of this common pitfall
allows the advisor to avoid it by proactively making the initial contact with
the students. This can be as simple as providing a personal introduction,
briefly noting what is expected from the advisees and what the advisees
should expect from their advisor (Cannon, 2013). The students might also be
encouraged to reply with their own introduction (Cannon, 2013). It is also
appropriate to ask the students if there is anything that the advisor should
know about them and whether there is anything that they would like to know
about the advisor.

   To give an example of the balance between "hands-on" and "hands-off"
advising that intrusive advising offers, consider advising a student with
respect to course load. First, regardless of the ratio of "hands-on" to "hands-
off" used, the importance of being prepared for advising appointments has
already been noted. To reiterate, it is wise to use the prior afternoon to
review any notes about the student and their grades, extracurricular
activities, and personal situations. With that, the advisor should be prepared
to pose questions that allow for some degree of intrusiveness. It is well-
known that there is a bit of finesse to class scheduling, and varying degrees
of intrusiveness can be used to help students avoid potential pitfalls.

   Generally, a full-time course load can range from 12-18 credit hours.
Information gathered from these intrusive questions can be used to offer
students advice based on experience. For example, a student who holds a
full-time job outside of school and has historically struggled academically
might benefit more from a course load of about 12 hours whereas someone
who has a history of academic excellence and has no job outside of school

276 | Personalized Advising
might be able to handle a heavier course load. Perhaps it is also typical for
students who take course X along with course Y to perform better or worse
compared to those who take them separately.

   A "hands-off" approach to advising would tell the students where to find
the degree requirements, perhaps show them a sample 4-year schedule
leading to degree completion, and have them select and enroll in classes
on their own. The only intervention that a "hands-off" advisor might make
would be to keep a student from taking a course for which they have not met
a prerequisite. On the other hand, an exclusively intrusive advisor might go
so far as to not approve a schedule that they believe to be less than optimal.

   A perfect balance of intrusive advising as it is intended would provide
students with all the information and warnings of historical areas of struggle,
but still allow them to make their own decisions. With this approach, both
the advisor and the student share the responsibility for success.

Concluding Remarks

I hope that you are now keenly aware that academic advising is a
multifaceted art. Unfortunately, there is no one right way to advise students.
There is no one right way to advise any "category" of students because every
student has a unique set of life experiences, needs, priorities, and goals.
If you are ever (un)fortunate enough to advise students at more than one
institution, you'll also find that advising differs quite drastically depending on
the structure of the institution (e.g., community college, liberal arts schools,
technological institutes).

   Regardless of where you are in preparation for your first/next advising
appointment, my advice to you is to be prepared to show your students how
much you care. Take some time to get to know your advisees. Students have
argued that interest in students' personalities, recognition of their merits,
and trust in them tend to contribute to the improvement of the advisor-
advisee relationship, which translates to increased student satisfaction and
subsequently to improvement in academic performance (Fielstein, 1989).
Regardless of how well you know your advisees, observe them as
multidimensional human beings (they are). Approaching advising with this

                                                                                 Personalized Advising | 277
mindset will push you to be adaptable regarding the needs of your students.
Perhaps most importantly, remember to be available to your students both
physically and mentally.

   I suggest that you spend some time in mental preparation for the fact
that you will inevitably be called upon to coach students through
problems--some of which are emotionally taxing to say the least. Regardless
of the circumstances that arise in your world of advising, I hope that this
work has encouraged you to reflect on your advising persona. Further, I hope
that it has given you some ideas/tools that might be useful as you begin to
master the exhilarating art of advising.

   Finally, I implore you to not be afraid of advising. With confidence and a
spirit of humility, embrace it, enjoy it, and rest assured that you are very
much up to the task.

     Reflection Questions

          What personal changes could you make to improve advising
             quality?

          Does the physical and emotional environment in which you
             advise inspire trust in the advisor/advisee relationship? What
             steps can you take to improve this?

          Without considering any particular student, what advising
             approach(es) are you most likely to implement?

          Despite your tendency to gravitate towards certain
             approaches to advising, what steps might you take to embrace
             methods that are outside your comfort zone?

278 | Personalized Advising
References

Alexitch, L. R. (1997). Students' educational orientation and preferences for
   advising from university professors. Journal of College Student
   Development, 38, 333-342.

Amenkhienan, C., & Kogan, L. (2004). Engineering students' perceptions of
   academic activities and support services: Factors that influence their
   academic performance. College Student Journal, 38, 18.

Astin, A. W. (1999). Student involvement: A developmental theory for higher
   education. Journal of College Student Development, 40(5), 518-529.

Barbuto, J., Story, J., Fritz, S., & Schinstock, J. (2011). Full range advising:
   Transforming the advisor-advisee experience. Journal of College Student
   Development, 52, 656-670. https://doi.org/10.1353/csd.2011.0079

Belcheir, M. (1999a). ERIC - ED433772--Student Satisfaction and Academic
   Advising. AIR 1999 Annual Forum Paper, 1999-Jun.
   https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED433772

Belcheir, M. (1999b). Student Satisfaction and Academic Advising. AIR 1999
   Annual Forum Paper. https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED433772

Bennett, S. K. (1982). Student perceptions of and expectations for male and
   female instructors: Evidence relating to the question of gender bias in
   teaching evaluation. Journal of Educational Psychology, 74, 170-179.

Beutler, L. E., Machado, P. P., & Neufeldt, S. A. (1994). Therapist variables. In A.
   E. Bergin & S. L. Garfield (Eds.), Handbook of Psychotherapy and Behavioral
   Change (4th ed.). Wiley.

Bloland, P., Stamatakos, L., & Rogers, R. (1994). Reform in student affairs:
   A critique of student development. ERIC Counseling and Student Services
   Clearinghouse.

Boyle, K. M., Lowery, J., & Mueller, J. (2012). Reflections on the 75th
   Anniversary of the Student Personnel Point of View (Vol. 1). ACPA -- College
   Student Educators International.

Cannon, J. (2013). Intrusive advising 101: How to be intrusive without
   intruding. Academic Advising Today, 36(1). https://nacada.ksu.edu/
   Resources/Academic-Advising-Today/View-Articles/Intrusive-
   Advising-101-How-to-be-Intrusive-Without-Intruding.aspx

Centra, J. A. (2004). Higher Education: Handbook of Theory and Research (vol.
   19). Kluwer Academic Publishers.

                                                                                 Personalized Advising | 279
Crookston, B. (1972). A developmental view of academic advising as teaching.
   NACADA Journal, 29(1), 78-82.

Crosbie, R. (2005). Learning the soft skills of leadership. Industrial and
   Commercial Training, 37(1), 45-51.

Dewey, J. (1938). Experience & Education (First Touchstone Ed. 1997). Kappa
   Delta Pi. http://www.schoolofeducators.com/wp-content/uploads/
   2011/12/EXPERIENCE-EDUCATION-JOHN-DEWEY.pdf

Drake, J. (2011). The role of academic advising in student retention and
   persistence. About Campus, 16(3), 8-12. https://doi.org/10.1002/abc.20062

Eberdt, M. (1968). A study of most approachable and least approachable
   teachers as rated by high school students. The School Counselor, 15(3),
   209-214.

Fielstein, L. L. (1987). Student preferences for personal contact in a student-
   faculty advising relationship. NACADA Journal, 7(2), 34-40.

Fielstein, L. L. (1989). Student priorities for academic advising. Do they want
   a personal relationship? NACADA Journal, 9(1), 33-38.

Gnepp, J., Keating, D. P., & Masters, I. C. (1980). A peer system for academic
   advising. Journal of College Student Personnel, 21.

Gordon, V. (1994). Developmental advising: The elusive ideal. NACADA
   Journal, 14(2), 71-75.

Grites, T. J. (2013). Developmental academic advising: A 40-year context.
   NACADA Journal, 33(1), 5-15. https://meridian.allenpress.com/nacada-
   journal/article/33/1/5/139404/Developmental-Academic-Advising-
   A-40-Year-Context

Habley, W. R., & Others. (1988). The Status and Future of Academic Advising:
   Problems and Promise (p. 275) [RIE]. American Coll. Testing Program.
   National Center for the Advancement of Educational Practices.

Hale, M., Graham, D., & Johnson, D. (2009). Are students more satisfied
   with academic advising when there is congruence between current and
   preferred advising styles? College Student Journal, 43, 313-324.

Heisserer, D., & Parette, P. (2002). Advising at-risk students in college and
   university settings. College Student Journal, 36(1), 69-84.

Hemwall, M. K., & Trachte, K. C. (1999). Learning at the core: Toward a new
   understanding of academic advising. NACADA Journal, 19(1), 5-11.

Hemwall, M. K., & Trachte, K. C. (2005). Academic advising as learning: 10
   organizing principles. NACADA Journal, 25(2), 74-83.

Herget, A. (2017, January 9). Intrusive academic advising: A proactive
   approach to student success. HigherEd Jobs.

280 | Personalized Advising
Hybels, S., & Weaver, R. L. (n.d.). Communicating Effectively (11th ed.). McGraw

Hill Education.

Jack, R. E., Caldara, R., & Schyns, P. G. (2011). Internal representations reveal

cultural diversity in expectations of facial expressions of emotion. Journal

of Experimental Psychology, 141(1), 19-25. https://doi.org/10.1037/

a0023463

Kirschener, P., Sweller, J., & Clark, R. (2006). Why minimal guidance during

instruction does not work: An analysis of the failure of constructivist,

discovery, problem-based, experiential, and inquiry-based teaching.

Educational Psychologist, 41(2), 75-86. https://doi.org/10.1207/

s15326985ep4102_1

Kuhn, T., Gordon, V. N., & Webber, J. (2006). The advising and counseling

continuum: Triggers for referral. NACADA Journal, 26(1), 24-31.

Laska, K. M., Gurman, A. S., & Wampold, B. E. (2014). Expanding the lens of

evidence-based practice in psychotherapy: A common factors perspective.

Psychotherapy, 51, 467-481. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0034332

Latopolski, K. S. (2018). Students' Experiences of Mattering in Academic

Advising Settings [Doctoral dissertation]. The University of Alabama.

McClellan, J., & Moser, C. (2011). A practical approach to advising as coaching.

NACADA Clearinghouse of Academic Advising Resources Website.

http://www.nacada.ksu.edu/Resources/Clearinghouse/View-Articles/

Advising-as-coaching.aspx

Miles, L. K. (2009). Who is approachable? Journal of Experimental Social

Psychology, 45(1), 262-266.

Mottarella, K. E., Fritzsche, B. A., & Cerabino, K. C. (2004). What do students

want in advising? A policy capturing study. NACADA Journal, 24(1 & 2),

48-61.

Nadler, M. K., & Nadler, L. B. (1993). The influence of student sex and

instructor sex on academic advising communication. Journal on Excellence

in College Teaching, 4, 119-130.

Owren, M. J., & Bachorowski, J.-A. (2001). The evolution of emotional

experience: A "selfish-gene" account of smiling and laughter in early

hominids and humans. In Emotions: Current Issues and Future Directions.

T.J. Mayne and G.A. Bonanno (Eds.) (pp. 152-191). Guilford Press.

Parrish, S. (2013). The "Circle Of Competence" theory will help you make

vastly    smarter                 decisions.  Business             Insider.

https://www.businessinsider.com/the-circle-of-competence-

theory-2013-12

                                              Personalized Advising | 281
Ranglund, O. J. S., Danielsen, A., Kionig, L., & Vold, T. (2017). Securing trust,
   roles and communication in e-advising--Theoretical inputs. Electronic
   Journal of E-Learning, 5(3), 211-219.

Rogers, C. R. (1992). The necessary and sufficient conditions of therapeutic
   personality change. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 60,
   827-832.

Rotteveel, M., & Phaf, R. H. (2004). Automatic affective evaluation does not
   automatically predispose for arm flexion and extension. Emotion, 4(2),
   156-172. https://doi.org/10.1037/1528-3542.4.2.156

Schneirla, T. C. (1959). An evolutionary and developmental theory of biphasic
   processes underlying approach and withdrawal. In Nebraska Symposium
   on Motivation, M.R. Jones (Ed.), 1-42. University of Nebraska Press.

Sorce, J. F., Emde, R. N., Campos, J. J., & Klinnert, M. D. (1985). Maternal
   emotional signaling: Its effect on the visual cliff behavior of 1-year-olds.
   Developmental Psychology, 21(1), 195-200. https://doi.org/10.1037/
   0012-1649.21.1.195

Spencer, R. W., Peterson, E. D., & Kramer, G. L. (1982). Utilizing college
   advising centers to facilitate and revitalize academic advising. NACADA
   Journal, 2(1).

Thelin, J. R., & Hirschy, A. S. (2009). College students and the curriculum: The
   fantastic voyage of higher education, 1636 to the present. NACADA Journal,
   29(2), 9-17.

Truax, B. B., & Carkhuff, R. R. (1967). Toward Effective Counseling and
   Psychotherapy. Aldine Atherton.

Upcraft, M., & Kramer, G. (1995). Intrusive advising as discussed in the first-
   year academic advising: Patterns in the present, pathways to the future.
   Academic Advising and Barton College, 1-2.

Varney, J. (2007). Intrusive advising. Academic Advising Today, 30(3).
White, E. R. (2020). The professionalization of academic advising: A

   structured literature review--A professional advisor's response. NACADA
   Journal, 40(1), 5-9.
Whiteley, J. M., Brukhart, M. Q., Harway-Herman, M., & Whiteley, R. M. (1975).
   Counseling and student development. Annual Reviews of Psychology, 26,
   337-366.
Winston, R. B., Ender, S. C., & Miller, T. K. (1982). Developmental Approaches
   to Academic Advising. New Directions for Student Services. Jossey-Bass.
Winston, R. B., & Sandor, J. A. (1984). Developmental academic advising: What
   do students want? NACADA Journal, 4(1), 5-13.

282 | Personalized Advising
Figure and Table Attributions

   Figure 12.1 Adapted under fair use from Kuhn, T., Gordon, V. N., &
      Webber, J. (2006). The advising and counseling continuum: Triggers for
      referral. NACADA Journal, 26(1), 24-31. Graphic by Kindred Grey.

                                                                                 Personalized Advising | 283
13. Engaging the Fear: How to
Utilize Student Evaluations,
Accept Feedback, and Further
Teaching Practice

  COURTNEY VENGRIN

 Introduction

  While nearly every campus and class conduct evaluations of teaching in
  some capacity, the effect and use of these evaluations vary widely. The
  majority of these evaluations are done at the end of the semester, and if
  any changes are made, these only impact future students. This feedback
  is also difficult for faculty to digest. It can be scary and uncomfortable to
  "look under the hood" and see what is working and what is going wrong.
  Furthermore, these evaluations are often discussed in high-stakes contexts,
  such as annual reviews. In this chapter, we dissect the evaluation of the
  teaching process and ask critical questions: Are these evaluations helping us
  become better educators? How are these data used? Is this process equitable
  for students and instructors? How should evaluations be framed? Should
  students be trained? What about the mid-semester evaluation process? Are
  there other options? What improvements can we make?

How to cite this book chapter:
  Vengrin, C. 2022. Engaging the Fear: How to Utilize Student Evaluations, Accept
  Feedback, and Further Teaching Practice. In: Westfall-Rudd, D., Vengrin, C., and
  Elliott-Engel, J. (eds.) Teaching in the University: Learning from Graduate Students
  and Early-Career Faculty. Blacksburg: Virginia Tech College of Agriculture and Life
  Sciences. https://doi.org/ 10.21061/universityteaching. License: CC BY-NC 4.0.

  284 | Engaging the Fear
   Teaching evaluations are useful but have to be structured, reviewed, and
administered in the appropriate context to garner maximum value both for
the time of the educator and of the student. The research will be discussed
on both end-of-the-semester and mid semester evaluation processes. A
variety of instruments and approaches will be presented, and an outline for
training students will be included.

     This chapter will discuss...

          The history of student evaluations of teaching
          The collection process for student evaluation data
          How to create a plan for utilizing your student evaluation

             data

History of Student Evaluation of Teaching (SETs)

The methods by which we determine what "good teaching" looks like have
been the topic of much debate for almost as long as the field of education
has existed. As such, there are a multitude of techniques for evaluating
the effectiveness of one's teaching, ranging from peer evaluations and
committee reviews to the Student Evaluation of Teaching (SET). Teaching
evaluations take many forms throughout K-12 and higher education
classrooms and are often used to determine improvements to be made and
even in discussing promotion and advancement (Dodeen, 2013). One of the
most common metrics by which teaching is judged is the SET.

   Much of the current literature discusses appropriate use of the SET, but
there is not one clear, uniform means by which to assess and utilize student
evaluations of teaching (Braga et al., 2014; Dodeen, 2013). Traditional

                                                                                      Engaging the Fear | 285
evaluations of teaching are often done at the end of the semester, collected,
and left unread until an official review by administration or other outside
impetus forces us to confront how our students felt. It's all too easy to
put reading and reflecting on these evaluations off as we typically get the
information near holiday or summer break. We have other things to do,
family to see, grants to write. Additionally, we question the usefulness of
these evaluations, wondering, for example, whether it is just a popularity
contest. Students also question how these evaluations are used, if at all
(Brown, 2008).

   In addition to the traditional end of semester SET, mid semester
evaluations are a burgeoning topic in higher education. Through using a
mid semester evaluation faculty are able to make adjustments to teaching
practice to better address current student needs and thereby provide a
better educational experience (Blash et al., 2018). Quality teaching means
constant improvement. This improvement should not just come at the end of
the semester but can and should be a continual process of reflection.

   Finally, we would be remiss to not acknowledge the place of equity in the
subjective nature of student evaluations of teaching. Research has shown
that SETs tend to favor the white male instructor archetype (Boring, 2017;
Dodeen, 2013). One study in particular used an online class where students
did not have face to face time with the instructor but were given an
instructor name that sounded either traditionally female or male (MacNell
et al., 2015). The course content was identical but the (presumably) male
instructor received higher ratings. Female-presenting instructors are also
more likely to get comments on their appearance than male presenting
instructors.

   Any subjective measure is open to implicit bias. Causes of bias also vary
widely, from implicit bias to bias stemming from an expected grade (Boring,
2017; Nasser-Abu Alhija, 2017). We must recognize that these measures are
imperfect and utilize the data accordingly. The appropriate use of SET data
is discussed further later in this chapter, taking into account these factors of
bias. We will also review some potential methods of mitigating bias in SETs.

286 | Engaging the Fear
Collecting SETs

Almost every institution uses some form of teaching evaluation. These
processes are often driven by a top-down approach, resulting in less-than-
ideal feedback for the instructor. As a new instructor, a good practice is
to look into the form or forms available, understand the process, and see
what options exist. Are you able to add additional questions? Are there
department-specific questions? What is the review process like for these
forms? Can you conduct your own "off cycle" evaluation? Become involved in
the process so that you can advocate for evaluations that will benefit your
teaching and your students.

   Understanding the form, knowing what questions are on it, knowing the
timing of when it will be available to students, when you as an instructor
receive the results, and who receives the results are all important. In some
cases, departments or colleges may limit the number of evaluations or who
is evaluated. For example, if you are a veterinary faculty member specializing
in dentistry, you may only guest lecture two hours all semester with the
rest of your teaching done in a clinical setting. In some cases, due to the
survey burden, there may be rules in place that say instructors with fewer
than five hours of teaching time are not evaluated. Or perhaps you are a
graduate student doing some guest lecturing; you only have one hour of
teaching time, but you need evaluations of your teaching to add to your
job packet for future employment. Seek out assistance from departments to
see if exceptions can be made. Additionally, with "off cycle" evaluations, it is
important to know the timing. If you guest lecture in the third week of the
course but the evaluations do not become available to students until week
12, they are likely to not remember you well, and are therefore more likely to
give inaccurate information.

   While nearly every campus and class conduct evaluations of teaching in
some capacity, the effect and use of these evaluations varies widely. Most
of these evaluations are done at the end of the semester and if any changes
are made in the teaching, these only impact future students. Mid-semester
evaluations offer an alternative. By "taking the temperature" of a class at the
midpoint of the semester, faculty are able to check in and see what students
are enjoying and what changes may need to be made. Students also respond
positively to the use of mid-semester evaluations given that they can directly
benefit from the results and are therefore more inclined to respond to the

                                                                                      Engaging the Fear | 287
evaluation whereas at the end of the semester they are more apt to skip
the survey, get their grade, and head on to the next course (Brown, 2008;
Frick et al., 2009). Providing assessment and feedback opportunities during a
course rather than at the end, students are given the power to advocate for
their own educational experiences and faculty are more empowered to make
changes to better the educational environment for all involved.

Engaging with SET Data

Once we have collected some form of SET data, either through our own
means or that of external forces, the next step is to engage with our data.
Half the time it will sit there for a long while, ignored as we go into the
summer holiday or summer research venue. But eventually you have to look
at it.

   Engaging with our feedback data as part of reflexive teaching practice is
one of the most beneficial things we can do, but it is often one of the most
difficult. Looking at our evaluations and feedback often brings up feelings of
judgement, apprehension, and inadequacy. To push past this discomfort, it is
important to remember that the data are not there to sit in judgement of you.
It's there to help you. It's there for you to respond to as well. No, not directly
to those students, but to the next class, in most cases. Your response comes
in the changes you make, the ways you continue to improve over the course
of your career. Sometimes the feedback is painful. Sometimes it's funny.
Sometimes it could be more constructive, but it's feedback, nonetheless. It's
an assessment. And those data need to be used. Not just by administration
and end of semester reports, but by you. How will you respond? How will you
use YOUR data?

   Sometimes, ripping off the Band-Aid is the best approach. Just sit down
with a strong cup of coffee and skim through it. You may be surprised. Often,
you will find at least one compliment or positive note to move forward with.
Sometimes it's even just a simple "Thank you" that helps us feel appreciated.
Find those and hold on to them.

288 | Engaging the Fear
   We know that if given no incentive, typically the most satisfied and most
dissatisfied individuals respond to evaluations. They love you or they hate
you. So don't go in expecting all sunshine and daisies. Expect to get feedback
that is less than pleasant and know that you have room to improve. We all do.

   When scoring SETs, especially at the departmental or program level,
ranking is not advised (Sachs & Parsell, 2014; Schmelkin et al., 1997). This
includes ranking within a course for which you are instructor in charge. The
scores are typically on a Likert scale and when these scores are reported
to faculty, typically they have been mean scored, which in some
recommendations is inappropriate for Likert-scaled items. To further
extrapolate this score into a ranking is not appropriate. Furthermore,
ranking employees, faculty, or staff in general lowers morale and is
inadvisable (Sachs & Parsell, 2014). Additionally, it is important to recall the
bias present in SETs when reviewing these as a department or program
review. Given these issues with SETs, the data gathered from these
subjective measures are most useful as formative feedback for the instructor
and course, and not for making personnel- or department-related decisions.

   However, scores, even those that are mean scored, can be useful if we
first work to understand the score in context. What was going on during
this time? What occurred this semester? Were there any abnormalities or
issues that arose? Were there any large-scale world or campus events that
may have impacted students? What bias may be present within the data?
Additionally, how was the SET distributed? Was it available for a long period
of time, or a short time period? Was it discussed in class or only sent out
via link? Research indicates that all of these variables can impact the score.
In one article, the weather significantly impacted the teaching effectiveness
scores (Braga et al., 2014).

   Moving past the somewhat arbitrary score, the bulk of the SET tends to be
in the nebulous comments section. The comments can be the most daunting
and analytically confusing section for individuals to engage with, given that
students' responses vary widely from constructive feedback to inappropriate
comments on appearance. So how do you examine the comments?

   There are two methods for examining the comments: in-depth analysis,
and a surface-level view. The end use of the insight gained should be
considered when determining which approach to take. Did you try
something new with students and want to see how it went? Was there a
specific question about a portion of your teaching that you added to the

                                                                                      Engaging the Fear | 289
evaluation form? What level of data would be most useful for your purposes?
Answering these questions will help determine how to go about breaking
down the comment section.

Surface analysis

In order to do a surface analysis, all you will need to do is a quick read-
through of each comment. See where the majority of student opinion is
falling. Get a blank piece of paper (or spreadsheet) and divide it in three
columns labeled "theme," "positive," and "negative." Do a quick scan of the
comments. Read each one and write the general theme down in the first
column, and then place a check or tally mark for either positive or negative.
Each time you come across the same theme, add a new mark in that theme's
section. Create new themes as you go through the comments. Using this
method, it should not take very long to paint a concise picture of what is
going well and what changes you may want to make. See table 13.1 for an
example.

         Table 13.1 Example of comment analysis.

Comment                                                               Code
                                                                      Pace &
Not give as much time for questions.                                  Timing
                                                                      Engagement
She was very enthusiastic and eager to improve my education. She
also presented the material in a way that was accessible to me.       Engagement

Overall, the instructor did a great job. She was very passionate and  PowerPoints
knowledgeable about the material which made learning more             Pace &
interesting and enjoyable.                                            Timing

The PowerPoints were hard to follow. The font was too small from
where I was sitting

You talk really fast sometimes and it was hard for me to keep up as
English is not my first language.

290 | Engaging the Fear
In-depth analysis

In some cases, an in-depth analysis will be more useful. You may be just
starting out in your teaching career and want to better understand how
things are going, or maybe you tried a new technique like flipped classroom
and want to use the feedback to decide if changes are needed. Similar to
the surface analysis, you can create an Excel spreadsheet of your comments.
Often, you can get the comments already loaded into Excel from your
evaluation software or the entity that does the evaluation data collection.
Mirroring the technique of the surface analysis, you will create additional
columns beside the comment column--however instead of positive and
negative, you will create two to three theme categories. Often, there are
lengthy comments that address several elements, so use a column for each
theme. As you read through your comments, note the themes. Once you
have completed this, use Excel's "sort" function and sort the themes
alphabetically. You can then create summaries of all the comments in that
theme and determine what is working well and what you may need to
change. Make additional notes on which areas you want to focus on moving
forward. It is sometimes useful to do an additional calculation of the
percentages of the themes, thereby quantifying the data for further review.
In doing this you may find that 40% of students commented that the pace of
the course was too slow, while 10% found it too fast. See what changes can
be made and save this file for comparison against your next SET. This can be
useful in your annual review as metrics of your efforts and changes made to
better your teaching practice.

   However, when engaging with this process, remember to take all the
feedback with a grain of salt. Not just the bad parts, but the good, too.
You may be perfect in one student's eyes, the one who got an A, loves the
discipline, knew you from another class, and thinks you walk on water. But
are you really all that that student makes you out to be? No. And are you
really a horrible, terrible, mean, imbecile like the other student said? Also
no. Where are you? Probably in between. So be humble and self-reflective.
Know that you aren't perfect but know that by reading and analyzing your
feedback, you can make your teaching practice better. Remember that it's
your data. The assessment of your efforts (but not of you as a person,
remember that). So, use it to your advantage.

                                                                                      Engaging the Fear | 291
Using SET Data

There are several ways you can use your SET data once you've gone over
it. One potential option is to add it to your teaching portfolio, as a way to
add detail to your teaching effectiveness. You can use your SET data in the
form of summarized student evaluations of teaching, including response rate
and relationship to departmental average. You may also want to include a
select number of written comments from students on class evaluations. To
supplement these, you can also include comments from a peer observer or a
colleague teaching the same course.

   Another use of your SET data is for course improvement. This will take
some additional searching and analysis to determine what data you have
access to. Many institutions use two forms of evaluations, a teaching
evaluation and a course evaluation. If you are the lead instructor for the
course, you most likely will receive both. However, if you are a secondary
instructor within the course, you may not receive the course evaluation. It
would be a good idea to reach out to the lead instructor to ask if you might
see the course-level data. Sometimes this data will need to be amended to
remove comments about other faculty members. Once you have access to
these data you can analyze them for the comments regarding your teaching
as well as the comments regarding the course structure. What changes can
you make? What are reasonable suggestions? What worked well? These data
also serve as a great opportunity to demonstrate to future students that you
are listening! You may wish to take a few comments and add them to your
syllabus or go over them on the first day of class and let students know about
the changes you have made based on last year's class comments. Remember,
this is YOUR data to help you improve your teaching as well as your course.
Use it! Don't just let it go to waste!

   A final use for this evaluation data is as a component of an overarching
programmatic improvement. This will often be at the department or college
level. The process for this involves reviewing the data as a whole. As stated
earlier, this department-level review process should not rely solely on data
from SETs, but should provide a full picture of the program, including
interviews, observations, and document analysis. Once the data are
collected, areas for improvement can be pinpointed, much the same as
with a smaller, classroom-level evaluation. Once these areas are identified,
leadership should meet with teaching teams as well as individuals to discuss

292 | Engaging the Fear
the findings and agree upon a forward direction. If done correctly, this
should be a positive experience. Evaluations and evaluation data should not
be used to punish or shame departments, programs, or individuals.

Conclusion

In summary, remember that your SET data are just that, yours! You can use
it to help you improve your teaching, your course, and your department.
As with all subjective measures, not all of your evaluators will agree. Find
the evaluation comments and sections that you feel are the most true and
applicable for your teaching. Harness your data and make improvements
where you can. Never stop growing as an educator!

     Reflection Questions

          How can you make better use of your SET data?
          If you could ask your former students for feedback on any

             one thing related to your teaching, what would it be?
          What parts of your current SET process are working well for

             you? Which parts could be improved?

                                                                                      Engaging the Fear | 293
References

Blash, A., Schneller, B., Hunt, J., Michaels, N., & Thorndike, J. (2018). There's
   got to be a better way! Introducing faculty to mid-course formative
   reviews as a constructive tool for growth and development. Currents in
   Pharmacy Teaching and Learning, 10(9), 1228-1236. https://doi.org/
   10.1016/j.cptl.2018.06.015.

Boring, A. (2017). Gender biases in student evaluations of teaching. Journal of
   Public Economics, 145, 27-41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2016.11.006.

Braga, M., Paccagnella, M., & Pellizzari, M. (2014). Evaluating students'
   evaluations of professors. Economics of Education Review, 41, 71-88.
   https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econedurev.2014.04.002.

Brown, M. J. (2008). Student perceptions of teaching evaluations. Journal of
   Instructional Psychology, 35(2), 177-182.

Dodeen, H. (2013). Validity, reliability, and potential bias of short forms of
   students' evaluation of teaching: The case of UAE University. Educational
   Assessment, 18(4), 235-250. https://doi.org/10.1080/10627197.2013.846670.

Frick, T. W., Chadha, R., Watson, C., Wang, Y., & Green, P. (2009). College
   student perceptions of teaching and learning quality. Educational
   Technology Research and Development, 57(5), 705-720.

MacNell, L., Driscoll, A., & Hunt, A. N. (2015). What's in a name: Exposing
   gender bias in student ratings of teaching. Innovative Higher Education,
   40(4), 291-303. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10755-014-9313-4.

Nasser-Abu Alhija, F. (2017). Teaching in higher education: Good teaching
   through students' lens. Studies in Educational Evaluation, 54, 4-12.
   https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stueduc.2016.10.006.

Sachs, J., & Parsell, M. (2014). Introduction: The place of peer review in
   learning and teaching. In J. Sachs & M. Parsell (Eds.), Peer Review of
   Learning and Teaching in Higher Education (pp. 1-9). Springer Netherlands.
   https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-7639-5_1.

Schmelkin, L. P., Spencer, K. J., & Gellman, E. S. (1997). Faculty Perspectives on
   Course and Teacher Evaluations. 18.

294 | Engaging the Fear
VIGNETTE: So You've Landed
the Job... (or Surviving Your First
Semester)

  LAURA HANZLY

  During my last semester at Virginia Tech, I was instructor for a course I had
  helped teach as either co-instructor or Teaching Assistant for the past two
  years. Three months later I would be at a brand-new university and the
  instructor for two courses that were completely new to me. My time at VT
  had lulled me into a false sense of confidence and security in my teaching;
  I knew my lessons plans front and back and by the time I was instructor of
  record I also knew what wouldn't work in the classroom. This was in stark
  contrast to my first semester as a newly hired lecturer fresh out of graduate
  school. I had almost no time to plan lessons before the semester began, was
  unfamiliar with the courses I was teaching, and most importantly had to find
  a way to deal with the realization I had no way of knowing what would and
  wouldn't work for my courses.

     To help deal with these feelings of being overwhelmed and imposter
  syndrome that may come with your first semester of teaching, I found mid-
  semester course evaluations vitally important. I already knew the benefits
  of mid-semester evaluations in terms of students having a voice in the
  classroom and feedback for teaching style and course design, but I did not
  realize how hearing students' feedback would instantly reduce my imposter
  syndrome feelings and eliminate my constant second guessing of the lesson
  plans I created.

How to cite this vignette:

  Hanzly, L. 2022. So You've Landed the Job... (or Surviving Your First
  Semester). In: Westfall-Rudd, D., Vengrin, C., and Elliott-Engel, J. (eds.)
  Teaching in the University: Learning from Graduate Students and Early-Career
  Faculty. Blacksburg: Virginia Tech College of Agriculture and Life Sciences.
  https://doi.org/ 10.21061/universityteaching. License: CC BY-NC 4.0.

                                                                                Vignette: First Semester | 295
