Teaching in a Digital Age - Second Edition
Teaching in a Digital Age - Second Edition

Guidelines for designing teaching and learning

A.W. (Tony) Bates

TONY BATES ASSOCIATES LTD.
VANCOUVER, B.C.
Teaching in a Digital Age - Second Edition by Anthony William (Tony) Bates is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.
© 2019 Anthony William (Tony) Bates
The CC licence permits you to retain, reuse, copy, redistribute, and revise this book--in whole or in part--for non-commercial purposes
providing the author is attributed as follows:

       Teaching in a Digital Age - Second Edition by A.W. (Tony) Bates is used under a CC BY-NC 4.0
       Licence.

Sample APA-style citation:
This textbook can be referenced. In APA citation style, it would appear as follows:
This book was produced using Pressbooks.com, and PDF rendering was done by PrinceXML.

       Bates, A.W. (2019). Teaching in a Digital Age - Second Edition. Vancouver, B.C.: Tony Bates
       Associates Ltd. Retrieved from https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/
Contents

Scenario A: A university professor addresses change                                xi

About the book - and how to use it                                                 1

About the author                                                                   9

Other books by the author                                                          11

Updates and revisions                                                              13

Chapter 1: Fundamental Change in Education

1.1 Structural changes in the economy: the growth of a knowledge society           17

1.2 The skills needed in a digital age                                             23

1.3 Should education be tied directly to the labour market?                        33

1.4 Change and continuity                                                          37

1.5 The impact of expansion on teaching methods                                    41

1.6 Changing students, changing markets for higher education                       45

1.7 From the periphery to the center: how technology is changing the way we teach  51

1.8 Navigating new developments in technology and online learning                  57

Chapter 2: The nature of knowledge and the implications for teaching

Scenario B: A pre-dinner party discussion                                          61

2.1 Art, theory, research, and best practices in teaching                          65

2.2 Epistemology and theories of learning                                          67

2.3 Objectivism and behaviourism                                                   71

2.4 Cognitivism                                                                    75

2.5 Constructivism                                                                 81

2.6 Connectivism                                                                   85

2.7 Is the nature of knowledge changing?                                           89

2.8 Summary                                                                        97

Chapter 3: Methods of teaching: campus-focused

Scenario C: A stats lecturer fights the system                                     103

3.1 Five perspectives on teaching                                                  105

3.2 The origins of the classroom design model                                      107
3.3 Transmissive lectures: learning by listening                            111

3.4 Interactive lectures, seminars, and tutorials: learning by talking      119

3.5 Learning by doing: Experiential learning                                125

3.6 Learning by doing: Apprenticeship                                       137

3.7 Learning by being: The nurturing and social reform models of teaching:  143

3.8 Main conclusions                                                        149

Chapter 4: Methods of teaching with an online focus

Scenario D: Developing historical thinking                                  155

4.1 Online learning and teaching methods                                    157

4.2 Old wine in new bottles: classroom-type online learning                 159

4.3 The ADDIE model                                                         165

4.4 Online collaborative learning                                           169

4.5 Competency-based learning                                               179

4.6 Communities of practice                                                 187

Scenario E: ETEC 522: Ventures in e-Learning                                195

4.7 `Agile' Design: flexible designs for learning                           199

4.8 Making decisions about teaching methods                                 205

Chapter 5: MOOCs

5.1 Brief history                                                           213

5.2 What is a MOOC?                                                         215

5.3 A Taxonomy of MOOCs                                                     219

5.4 Strengths and weaknesses of MOOCs                                       229

5.5 Political, social and economic drivers of MOOCs                         249

5.6 Why MOOCs are only part of the answer                                   255

Scenario F: How to cope with being old                                      259

Chapter 6: Building an effective learning environment

6.1 Integrating design principles within a rich learning environment        267

6.2 What is a learning environment?                                         271

6.3 Learner characteristics                                                 275

6.4 Managing content                                                        279

6.5 Developing skills                                                       285

6.6 Learner support                                                         289

6.7 Resources                                                               295
6.8 Assessment of learning                                                          299

6.9 Culture and learning environments                                               305

6.10 Conclusions                                                                    311

Chapter 7: Understanding technology in education

7.1 Choosing technologies for teaching and learning: the challenge                  317

7.2 A short history of educational technology                                       321

7.3 Media or technology?                                                            331

7.4 Assessing media affordances: the SAMR model                                     343

7.5 Broadcast vs communicative media                                                347

7.6 The time and space dimensions of media                                          353

7.7 Media richness                                                                  359

7.8 Understanding the foundations of educational media                              363

Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

8.1 Thinking about the pedagogical differences of media                             369

8.2 Text                                                                            375

8.3 Audio                                                                           383

8.4 Video                                                                           389

8.5 Computing                                                                       397

8.6 Social media                                                                    405

8.7.a Emerging technologies: serious games and gamification                         413

8.7.b. Emerging technologies: virtual and augmented reality                         423

8.7c Emerging technologies: artificial intelligence                                 433

8.7.d Emerging technologies: conclusion and summary                                 447

8.8 A framework for analysing the pedagogical characteristics of educational media  451

Chapter 9: Choosing and using media in education: the SECTIONS model

9.1 Models for media selection                                                      457

9.2 Students                                                                        461

9.3 Ease of Use                                                                     469

9.4 Cost                                                                            475

9.5 Teaching and media selection                                                    485

9.6 Interaction                                                                     491

9.7 Organisational issues                                                           501

9.8 Networking (and novelty)                                                        507
9.9 Security and privacy                                                           511

9.10 Deciding                                                                      515

Chapter 10: Modes of delivery

10.1 The continuum of technology-based learning                                    523

10.2 Comparing modes of delivery                                                   529

10.3 Which mode? Student needs                                                     535

10.4 Choosing between face-to-face and online teaching on campus                   541

10.5 The future of the campus                                                      551

Chapter 11: Trends in open education

Scenario H: Watershed management                                                   561

11.1 Open learning                                                                 565

11.2 Open educational resources (OER)                                              571

11.3 Open textbooks, open research and open data                                   579

11.4 Open pedagogy                                                                 587

11.5 The implications of `open' for course and program design: towards a paradigm  597

shift?

Chapter 12: Ensuring quality teaching in a digital age

12.1 What do we mean by quality when teaching in a digital age?                    611

12.2 Nine steps to quality teaching in a digital age                               619

12.3 Step One: Decide how you want to teach                                        621

12.4 Step two: what kind of course or program?                                     625

12.5 Step three: work in a team                                                    627

12.6 Step four: build on existing resources                                        631

12.7 Step five: master the technology                                              635

12.8 Step six: set appropriate learning goals                                      641

12.9 Step seven: design course structure and learning activities                   647

12.10 Step eight: communicate, communicate, communicate                            657

12.11 Step nine: evaluate and innovate                                             665

12.12 Building a strong foundation of course design                                671

Chapter 13: Supporting teachers and instructors in a digital age

13.1 Are you a super-hero?                                                         679
13.2 The development and training of teachers and instructors in a digital age        681

13.3 Learning technology support                                                      689

13.4 Conditions of employment                                                         693

13.5 Team teaching                                                                    699

13.6 An institutional strategy for teaching in a digital age                          703

13.7 Building the future                                                              707

Scenario I: Stopping the flu                                                          713

Appendix 1: Questions to guide media selection and use

S: Who are your students?                                                             719

E: Ease of use                                                                        721

C: What is the cost in money and time?                                                723

T: Teaching and other pedagogical factors                                             725

I: Interaction                                                                        727

O: Organisational issues                                                              729

N: Networking                                                                         731

S: Security and privacy                                                               733

Appendix 2 Online learning quality standards, organisations and research

Appendix 3: Independent reviews

A review from a faculty perspective: Professor James Mitchell                         741

A review from an open and distance education perspective: Sir John Daniel             743

A review from a digital education perspective: Digital Education Strategies, Ryerson  745

University

MERLOT II Peer Review                                                                 747

Feedback on Activities

Appendix 4: Feedback on Activity 1.8 Main conclusions from Chapter 1                  751

Appendix 4: Feedback on Activity 7.1 How many technologies can you see in Figure      753

7.1?

Appendix 4: Feedback on Activity 7.5 Broadcast or communicative                       755

Bibliography                                                                          757

Index                                                                                 767
Scenario A: A university professor addresses change

   Overheard in a coffee shop near campus:

   Hey, Frank, you don't look too happy.

   Yeah, I'm mad as hell. Our Dean called a meeting yesterday of all faculty to discuss the university's new
   academic plan, and what it means for all the academic departments in the Faculty. I knew there had been
   meetings earlier in the year, a few of which I'd attended, but it seemed to be the same old waffle about building
   a university fit for a new age, and revolutionizing the way we teach. But those discussions didn't seem to affect
   the courses I'm teaching - it was clear early on that there was no threat to the department being closed down.
   If anything, it looked like my classes would be getting even bigger, with the usual statements about having to
   do more with less. My research is going well, and there was no talk this time round about having to take on an
   increased teaching load. At that point, I'd switched off: I'd been through all this many times before.

   But as soon as the dean started yesterday, I sensed trouble. He started talking about the need for the department
   to be more `flexible' in its teaching. What the hell does that mean - yoga exercises at the beginning of each
   lecture? Then he went on to talk about `defining clear learning outcomes' and `personalizing learning.' Well,
   that's stupid. Anyone knows that you have to internalize what you learn or it doesn't happen. And my courses
   are changing all the time - if I set outcomes even at the beginning of a course, they'll probably be different by
   the time we get to the end.

   But then the real kicker, when I knew things were going to be difficult. `We want to have at least 50 per cent of
   all classes taught in a blended or hybrid manner within the next five years.' OK, I guess I could handle that -
   I've been using the LMS to back up my lectures already, but when he said that means offering the same content
   across different courses, and getting rid of most lectures, I really started to worry. He started rambling on
   about needing to serve all kinds of learners from high school entrants to lifelong learners, and for us all to
   teach in teams, with the senior faculty member as a teaching consultant. Now if he thinks I'm going to let some
   of the other idiots in this department decide what I'm going to teach, he's out of his mind. The scary part is that
   I think the Dean really believes all this claptrap.

   But when I really started to panic is when he said we would all have to start taking courses on how to teach.
   Now I get pretty good student ratings for my lectures - they just love my jokes - and I'm NOT having anyone
   telling me how to teach my subject. I'm one of the top people in my area of research in this country, and what
   the hell does the administration know about how to teach it? And when am I going to find the time, anyway, to
   take courses? I'm already working flat out. Why don't they just leave us alone, and trust us to get on with the
   job we're paid to do?'

If any of that rings a bell, this is the book for you.

                                                                    xi
xii A.W. (Tony) Bates

                       For my comments
                       on the scenario,
                       click on the
                       podcast below
About the book - and how to use it

This is the second edition of Teaching in a Digital Age. The first edition was published in April 2015.
All changes to the first edition are in this green colour text.

i. Why this book?

Teachers, instructors and faculty are facing unprecedented change, with often larger classes, more
diverse students, demands from government and employers who want more accountability and the
development of graduates who are workforce ready, and above all, we are all having to cope with ever
changing technology. To handle change of this nature, teachers and instructors need a base of theory and
knowledge that will provide a solid foundation for their teaching, no matter what changes or pressures
they face.

   Although the book contains many practical examples, it is more than a cookbook on how to teach.
It addresses the following questions:

         · is the nature of knowledge changing, and how do different views on the nature of
            knowledge result in different approaches to teaching?

         · How do I balance the demands of my discipline with developing the skills that students will
            need in a digital age?

         · what is the science and research that can best help me in my teaching?
         · how do I decide whether my courses should be face-to-face, blended or fully online?
         · what strategies work best when teaching in a technology-rich environment?
         · what methods of teaching are most effective for blended and online classes?
         · how do I make choices among all the available media, whether text, audio, video, computer,

            or social media, in order to benefit my students and my subject?
         · how do I maintain high quality in my teaching while managing my workload?
         · what are the real possibilities for teaching and learning using MOOCs, OERS, open

            textbooks?

In summary, the book examines the underlying principles that guide effective teaching in an age when
everyone, and in particular the students we are teaching, are using technology. A framework and a set
of guidelines are suggested for making decisions about your teaching, while understanding that every
subject is different, and every teacher and instructor has something unique and special to bring to their
teaching.

   In the end, though, the book isn't really about teachers and instructors, although you are the target
group. It's about helping your students to develop the knowledge and skills they will need: not so much
digital skills, but the thinking and knowledge that will bring them success in a digital age. For that to
happen, though, your students need you to be on top of your game. This book is your coach.

                                                                     1
2 A.W. (Tony) Bates

ii. The audience for the book

The audience I am reaching out for are primarily college and university instructors anxious to improve
their teaching or facing major challenges in the classroom, such as very large numbers of students or
rapidly changing curricula, and also to many school teachers, particularly in secondary or high schools
anxious to ensure their students are ready for either post-secondary education or a rapidly changing and
highly uncertain job market. In particular the book is aimed at teachers and instructors anxious to make
the best use of technology for teaching.

   I draw many of my examples from post-secondary education, but many of the principles will also
apply to teachers in the school or k-12 sector. However, as a former elementary/primary school teacher,
I am well aware that schools have far fewer resources and less technology support than colleges or
universities.

   Throughout this book, I have struggled with the term `instructor', because I argue that we need to
move from a transmission model of education (`instruction') to the facilitation of learning (`teaching'),
even or especially in post-secondary education. However, the term `instructor' is often used to
distinguish between post-secondary and school or k-12 systems, with `teachers' being used for the latter,
so throughout the book, I've tended to use both terms almost inter-changeably. However, my hope is that
we will all eventually become teachers rather than instructors.

   Lastly, although technology is a core focus of this book, I am not advocating ripping up the current
human-based educational system and replacing it with a highly computerised model of teaching. I
believe that although there is a great need for substantial reform, there are many enduring qualities of a
well funded and publicly supported education system based on well trained and highly qualified teachers
that will be hard if not impossible to replace by technology. The focus here is in making technology
work for both learners and teachers.

iii. Why an `open' textbook?

Although I retain the copyright through a Creative Commons CC BY-NC license, this book is `open' in
all five ways described in Chapter 11, Section 2:

         · re-usable: you are allowed to use all or part of the work for your own purposes (for example,
            you can download any part or the whole of the book, and use it in your own teaching or
            studies, without needing to ask for permission or to pay anything);

         · re-distributable: you can share the work with others (for example, you can e-mail a section of
            the book to a colleague or fellow student);

         · revisable: you can take any part of the book, and change it for your own purposes, or
            translate bits of it or all of it into another language, again without needing to ask for
            permission;

         · re-mixable: you can take parts of this book and combine them with other `open source'
            material or resources to create a new resource (for example, take some of the podcasts from
            this book and combine them with text from another open textbook to create a new work);

         · retainable, which means there are no digital rights management restrictions (DRM), the
            content is yours to keep, whether you're a teacher or student.

There is only one restriction on all five activities, and that is that you acknowledge me as the source
                                                                                                                             Teahing in a Digital Age - 2e 3

(unless I am quoting someone else, or using someone else's material, of course). Full attribution
is particularly important as an example for your students, who need to acknowledge their sources! Also,
if you do find the material in this book useful, I would appreciate your sending an e-mail to
tony.bates@ubc.ca with any feedback about how you are using the content, and how the book could be
improved, but this is just a request, so I can improve the book and track how it is being used.

   The first edition was published as I wrote it, a chapter at a time. I published the first draft of most
sections in my blog, Online Learning and Distance Education Resources, to get feedback. I did the same
for the new sections of this edition. This book is published as an open textbook for many reasons, but
the main one being that I see open publishing as the future for education. In a way, this book is a proof
of the concept of open publishing. I could not have done this without excellent support from BCcampus,
which at the time of writing is leading a major open education initiative for the provincial government
of British Columbia in Canada, and without additional support from Contact North, Ontario.

iv. Independent reviews of the book

Shortly after publication of the first full draft of the book, I requested three independent experts in the
field to review the book. The process that was followed, and the full, unedited reviews, can be seen in
Appendix 3. This book was also independently selected and reviewed by MERLOT.

v. Different ways to use the book

If you have found your way to this book website, you can read it off the screen at any time and anywhere.
Just bookmark the home page (https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/) then click on
any chapter heading or any section in the content list.

   The book will download in pdf and ebook versions, so you can print out or download the whole
book if you wish, for straightforward reading. In general, it is best to read the book online direct from
this website, if you can, as when it exports to different versions, sometimes the illustrations get moved
around to fit the page or screen layout. Also reading on the small screen of a mobile phone may be
somewhat frustrating as the graphics will be very small. Reading on tablets should not be a problem,
except the graphics may not always fit as intended.

   You can also buy a print copy - just click on the relevant button. However, if your institution has
print-on-demand facilities, it will be cheaper to download the pdf version and print locally.

   The book can also be cloned, so you can edit or adapt the book or parts of the book for your own use.
   You will see from the book website that the book is now available in at least seven languages. More
are being added. All these translations have been done by volunteers in their own language, again
demonstrating the power of open publishing. If you wish to do a translation, please let me know but
otherwise you are free to do so. Just remember though that the book cannot be sold commercially under
the terms of the license, even in translation.
   The book is written on the assumption (based on research) that most reading will be done in chunks
of one hour or less, so each section of a chapter can be completed in one hour at the maximum (some
sections will be much shorter).
   Many of the sections will have suggested activities, which mainly require you to reflect on how what
you have read relates to your own work or context. These activities will usually take no more than 30
minutes each.
   Each chapter begins with a set of learning goals for the chapter, the topics covered, a list of activities
for the chapter, and the key takeaways or main points made. To access this, just click the chapter heading
4 A.W. (Tony) Bates

(e.g. Chapter 1: Structural Changes in the Economy). [Note that text in red indicates a live link/url - just
click on it to activate it. This doesn't always show clearly on screens under certain conditions so run
your cursor - or finger on mobile devices - over the text to see where the links are.] The arrows in the
red section at the bottom of the page will take you either to the previous page or the next page.

There are many different ways this book could be used. Here are some suggestions:

         · straight read through (over several days) for personal use: this is probably the least likely, but
            there is a logical sequence and a continuous, coherent argument that builds up through the
            book;

         · read a specific chapter or section that is useful for you, and come back later to other sections
            or chapters as you need them (use this preface and/or the list of contents on the home page as
            a guide);

         · do the activities that follow most sections;
         · use the book as the core reading for a course (or part of a course) on how to teach in a digital

            age. You can use the activities I have suggested, or, if you clone the book, you can edit it and
            replace the activities with your own.
         · at the time of writing it is NOT possible to clone just sections of the book, but you can use
            the Pressbooks XML file to import specific chapters.

There are also:

         · podcasts and occasionally a video giving my personal spin on each chapter,
         · a search facility at the top right corner of each page - just type in the word or phrase you are

            looking for,
         · a full bibliography containing all the references in the book
         · there is no index: use the search engine [Search in book (Q)] located at the top right of each

            section. Type in the term or name you are looking for. It will provide a list of the sections
            where this term or name is used..

This book - as indeed are open textbooks in general - is a work in progress, so keep checking back to
see what new features are being added over time. As new developments occur, I will try to ensure that
they are incorporated so that the book stays up to date (also you can follow my blog). I will also make
changes based on feedback from readers.

vi. An overview of the content

Chapter 1 Fundamental change in Education

This sets the stage for the rest of the book. Chapter 1 looks at the key changes that are forcing teachers
and instructors to reconsider their goals and methods of teaching, In particular it identifies the key
knowledge and skills that students need in a digital age, and how technology is changing everything,
including the context in which we teach.
                                                               Teahing in a Digital Age - 2e 5

Chapters 2-4: Epistemology and teaching methods

These chapters address the more theoretical and methodological aspects of teaching and learning in a
digital age.

   Chapter 2 covers different views on the nature of knowledge and how these understandings of
knowledge influence theories of learning and methods of teaching.

   Chapter 3 analyses the strengths and weaknesses of different campus-based methods of teaching and
   Chapter 4 does the same for blended and fully online methods. These chapters form a theoretical
foundation for what follows.

Chapters 5-9: Media and technology

The focus in these five chapters is on how to choose and use different media and technologies in
teaching, with a particular focus on the unique pedagogical characteristics of different media.

   Chapter 5 looks at the strengths and weaknesses of MOOCs.
   Chapter 6 looks at the main components of an effective learning environment (this was Appendix 1 in
the first edition).
   Chapter 7 examines the difference between `media' and `technology' in educational contexts and
provides an analytical framework for understanding the differences between media.
   Chapter 8 then applies the analytical framework to identify the educational `affordances', the strengths
and weaknesses, of different media, then examines three emerging technologies (artificial intelligence,
virtual/augmented reality, and serious/educational games).
   Chapter 9 offers a set of criteria and a model (SECTIONS) for making decisions about different media
and technologies for teaching.

Chapters 10-11: Modes of delivery and open education

These two chapters look at the impact of recent digital learning developments for the design of teaching
and learning in a digital age.

   Chapter 10 addresses the question of how to determine what mode of delivery should be used:
campus-based, blended or fully online.

   Chapter 11 examines the potentially disruptive implications of recent developments in open content,
open publishing, open data and open research. This chapter above all is a messenger of the radical
changes to come to education.

Chapters 12-13: Ensuring quality in teaching in a digital age

These take two different but complementary approaches to the issue of ensuring high quality teaching in
a digital age.

   Chapter 12 suggests nine pragmatic steps for designing and delivering quality teaching in a highly
digital teaching context.

   Chapter 13 very briefly examines the policy and operational support needed from schools, colleges
and universities to ensure relevant and high quality teaching in a digital age.
6 A.W. (Tony) Bates

Appendices

Appendix 1 is a set of questions, to be used in conjunction with the SAMR and SECTIONS models, to
help you make decisions about the choice and use of media within your own teaching context.

   Appendix 2 is a list of different online learning quality standards, organisations and research
   Appendix 3 includes three independent peer reviews commissioned at the completion of the first
edition of this book, as well as an unsolicited review for MERLOT by its Teacher Education Editorial
Board.
   Finally, there is a section that provides feedback on activities set at the end of several sections of the
book.

Scenarios

There are nine `what if' scenarios scattered throughout the book. These are semi-fictional, `semi-`,
because in almost every case, the scenario is based on an actual example. However, I have sometimes
combined one or more cases, or extended or broadened the original case. The purpose of the scenarios is
to stimulate imagination and thinking about both our current `blocks' or barriers to change, and the real
and exciting possibilities of teaching in the future.

Other features

Each chapter ends with a set of key `takeaways' from the chapter, and a complete set of references. Most
chapter sections end with an activity. For many of these I have provided a podcast to give my views on
the topics of the activities.

vii. Acknowledgments and thanks

This book could not have been done without tremendous support from a number of people and
institutions. First of all, I am truly indebted to BC campus. BCcampus hosts the site and has allowed me
to use their own version of Pressbooks. In particular Clint Lalonde, assisted by Brad Payne, and with
the support of Mary Burgess, has provided wonderful help and support. I was completely new to the
technology of open publishing, and Clint and Brad held my hand through all my struggles. I could not
have done this without them. BCcampus's help desk also provided essential support in setting up this
second edition.

   Open textbooks may be free to end users but they do not become a reality without professional
technical support. As part of its mandate to support innovation in education and learning, Contact
North | Contact Nord, Ontario's Distance Education & Training Network, provided essential support
and help with instructional design/editing, graphics, copyright clearance and is assisting with marketing
and promotion. Contact North | Contact Nord has also made it possible to make the first edition of the
textbook available in French.

   I also received unexpected but very welcome assistance from Leonora Zefi and her instructional
design team at the Digital Education Strategies, The G. Raymond Chang School of Continuing
Education, Ryerson University, Toronto, who volunteered to read the drafts of each chapter and provided
incredibly valuable feedback. Katherine McManus provided instructional design and copy editing
advice, and Elise Gowen did all the dirty work in checking copyright and getting permissions. For the
                                                                                                                             Teahing in a Digital Age - 2e 7

second edition I drew heavily on the work of Naza Djafarova and her colleagues on serious games at the
Chang School at Ryerson University.

   I also want to acknowledge the huge influence of my colleagues from the Open University UK, the
Open Learning Agency, and the University of British Columbia, who did much of the research and
innovation from which I have drawn. Throughout my career, I have been immensely supported by two
overlapping communities of practice: distance educators; and educational technologists/instructional
designers. This is really their book; I'm merely a spokesperson for all their ideas and work. I just hope I
have represented their knowledge accurately and clearly.

   Lastly, there was all the valuable feedback I received from my blog readers. I published the first draft
of most sections of the book in my blog as I wrote them. Instead of a peer review team of two or three, I
had a review team of many hundreds - indeed thousands - of readers of my blog. The advice I received
from everyone was really helpful and much appreciated. However, I didn't always follow all the advice
I got, and I take full responsibility for any errors or misjudgements you may come across.

viii. Over to you

The great thing about an open textbook is that is is a dynamic, living project. Changes can be made
immediately. I would really like to hear from you, by e-mail to tony.bates@ubc.ca. Constructive
criticisms and feedback will be very welcome.

   Above all, I hope you find this book interesting and helpful and that it inspires you and/or your
colleagues to develop the knowledge and skills our students need in this challenging age.
About the author

   I graduated from the University of Sheffield, U.K, with a B.A. (Hons.) in psychology in 1962,
obtained a post-graduate certificate in education from Goldsmiths College, the University of London,
and a Ph.D. in educational administration from the Institute of Education, the University of London (now
part of University College, London).

   On leaving university, I taught a class of 42 children aged between 8 and 11 in a small rural school,
then went on to teach students with special needs in a large urban secondary (high) school in England.
I was then recruited to work on a government research project looking at the administration of very large
high schools.

   When this contract ended in 1969, I was appointed the 20th member of staff at the newly created Open
University in the United Kingdom, where I spent 20 years, ending as a Professor of Educational Media
Research, primarily evaluating first the learning effectiveness of the television and radio programs made
for the OU by the BBC, then other new media as they became adopted by the Open University. During
that period, I was also a course author/instructor on several courses on social science and technology

   At the end of 1989, I emigrated to Canada, where I worked for five years as Executive Director
of Strategic Planning at the Open Learning Agency in British Columbia. I left to become Director of
Distance Education and Technology at the University of British Columbia, where I designed, developed
and taught their first online courses and then helped initiate the first fully online degree programs
at UBC. In 2003, I took mandatory retirement from UBC and set up my own consultancy company
specialising in advising universities, colleges and government agencies on strategies for online and
blended learning. I have worked with more than 50 universities and colleges, and several governmental
agencies, in Canada, the USA, and Europe, and undertaken other contracts worldwide with the World
Bank, UNESCO and the OECD.

                                                                     9
10 A.W. (Tony) Bates

   I decided to retire from paid work in 2014 in order to write this book. (That retirement didn't last for
long.) I am also the author of 11 other books on educational technology, online and distance learning,
some of which have been translated into French, Spanish, Chinese, Korean, Arabic and Serbo-Croat.

   I have also been awarded honorary degrees by the Open University of Portugal, the Open University
of Catalonia, the Open University of Hong Kong, Athabasca University, and Laurentian University.

   I have a private pilot's licence, and have flown across Canada and back in a Cessna 172, and I play
golf badly but regularly. I am married, with two sons and four grandchildren, all living in England.
Other books by the author

Bates, T. and Robinson, J. (eds.) (1977) Evaluating Educational Television and Radio Milton Keynes
UK: The Open University Press

   Bates, A.W. (ed.) (1984) The Role of Technology in Distance Education London: Croom Helm
(reprinted in 2015 by Routledge)

   Bates, A. (1984) Broadcasting in Education: An Evaluation London: Constable
   Bates, A.W. (ed.) (1990) Media and Technology in European Distance Education Heerlen,
Netherlands: The European Association of Distance Teaching Universities
   Bates, A.W. (1995) Technology, Open Learning and Distance Education London: Routledge
   Bates, A.W. (2000) Managing Technological Change: Strategies for College and University Teachers
San Francisco: Jossey Bass
   Epper, R. and Bates, A.W. (2001) Teaching Faculty How to Use Technology: Best Practices from
Leading Institutions Westport CT: American Council on Education
   Bates, A.W. (2002) National Strategies for E-Learning Paris: International Institute for Educational
Planning
   Bates, A.W. and Poole, G. (2003) Effective Teaching with Technology in Higher Education San
Francisco: Jossey Bass
   Bates, A.W. (2005) Technology, e-Learning and Distance Education New York: Routledge
   Bates, A.W. and Sangrà, A. (2011) Managing Technology in Higher Education: Strategies for
Transforming Teaching and Learning San Francisco: Jossey-Bass

                                                                    11
12 A.W. (Tony) Bates
Updates and revisions

An open textbook is a dynamic project. New developments, such as relevant new publications, can be
added, urls go dead and new ones have to be found, and reader feedback in the form of comments to
sections of the book get added almost on a daily basis. This second edition includes the changes made to
the first edition.

   Here I will keep track of changes, using 10 October 2019, when this second edition was first made
available in its `final' form, as the baseline.

                                                                    13
14 A.W. (Tony) Bates
Chapter 1: Fundamental Change in Education

                                                                   The purpose of this chapter

      When you have read this chapter you should be able to:
              · describe and discuss some of the structural social and economic changes that
                 are affecting education in a digital age
              · describe and discuss some of the key skills that are needed in a digital age
              · identify and discuss some of the ways technology is leading to changes in teaching and learning
              · discuss the extent to which contemporary developments require changes in how we teach and
                 how students learn

What is covered in this chapter

In this chapter, I will be discussing the pressures that are mounting on post-secondary institutions to
change, particularly with regard to the way they deliver one of their core activities, teaching. I will be
arguing that although our institutions will need to change if they are to survive, it is important to maintain
and strengthen their core values. Thus it's not a question of throwing out everything and starting afresh,
but managing that change in such a way that the core values are protected.

   In particular, this chapter covers the following topics:
         · 1.1 Structural changes in the economy: the growth of a knowledge society
         · 1.2 The skills needed in a digital age
         · 1.3 Should education be tied directly to the labour market?
         · 1.4 Change and continuity
         · 1.5 The impact of expansion on teaching methods
         · 1.6 Changing students, changing markets for higher education
         · 1.7 From the periphery to the center: how technology is changing the way we teach
         · 1.8 Navigating new developments in technology and online learning
         · Key takeaways

Also in this chapter you will find the following activities:
         · Activity 1.1 Thinking about skills
         · Activity 1.2 What skills are you developing in your students? Part 1

                                                                    15
16 A.W. (Tony) Bates

         · Activity 1.3 What skills are you developing in your students? Part 2

         · Activity 1.4 Change and continuity

         · Activity 1.5 How much wriggle room do you have?

         · Activity 1.6 Dealing with diversity

         · Activity 1.7 The consequences of change

         · Activity 1.8 Your main conclusions from Chapter 1.

                                                                Key Takeaways from the Chapter

              · Teaching methods need to be used that help to develop and transfer specific skills that serve both
                 the purposes of knowledge development and dissemination, while at the same time preparing
                 graduates for work in a knowledge-based society

              · As student numbers have increased, teaching has regressed for a variety of reasons to a greater
                 focus on information transmission and less focus on questioning, exploration of ideas,
                 presentation of alternative viewpoints, and the development of critical or original thinking. Yet
                 these are the very skills needed by students in a knowledge-based society.

              · The wide diversity of the student body is a major challenge for institutions. This requires more
                 focus on teaching methods that provide support for learners, more individualization of learning,
                 and more flexible delivery.

              · Online learning is a continuum; every instructor and every institution now needs to decide: where
                 on this continuum of teaching should a particular course or program be?

              · As more academic content becomes openly and freely available, students will look increasingly to
                 their local institutions for support with their learning, rather than for the delivery of content. This
                 puts a greater focus on teaching skills and less on subject expertise.

              · Faculty and instructors need a strong framework for assessing the value of different technologies,
                 new or existing, and for deciding how or when these technologies make sense for them (and/or
                 their students) to use.
1.1 Structural changes in the economy: the growth of a knowledge
society

Figure 1.1.1 Learning in a digital age
Image: © CC Duncan Campbell, 2012

1.1.1 The digital age
In a digital age, we are surrounded, indeed, immersed, in technology. Furthermore, the rate of
technological change shows no sign of slowing down. Technology is leading to massive changes in the
economy, in the way we communicate and relate to each other, and increasingly in the way we learn. Yet

                                                                    17
18 Chapter 1: Fundamental Change in Education

our educational institutions were built largely for another age, based around an industrial rather than a
digital era.

   Thus teachers and instructors are faced with a massive challenge of change. How can we ensure
that we are developing the kinds of graduates from our courses and programs that are fit for an
increasingly volatile, uncertain, complex and ambiguous future? What should we continue to protect in
our teaching methods (and institutions), and what needs to change?

   To answer these questions, this book:

         · discusses the main changes that are leading to a re-examination of teaching and learning;
         · identifies different understandings of knowledge and the different teaching methods

            associated with these understandings;
         · analyses the key characteristics of technologies with regard to teaching and learning;
         · recommends strategies for choosing between media and technologies;
         · recommends strategies for high quality teaching in a digital age.

In this chapter I set out some of the main developments that are forcing a reconsideration of how we
should be teaching.

1.1.2 The changing nature of work

Of the many challenges that institutions face, one is in essence a good one, and that is increased demand,
particularly for post-secondary education. Figure 1.1.2 below represents the extent to which knowledge
has become an increasingly important element of economic development, and above all in job creation.
                                                             1.1 Structural changes in the economy: the growth of a knowledge society 19

Figure 1.1.2: The knowledge component in the workforce

   The figure is symbolic rather than literal. The pale blue circles representing the whole work force in
each employment sector may be larger or smaller, depending on the country, as too will be the proportion
of knowledge workers in that industry, but at least in developed countries and also increasingly in
economically emerging countries, the knowledge component is growing rapidly: more brains and
less brawn are required (see OECD, 2013a). Economically, competitive advantage goes increasingly
to those companies and industries that can leverage gains in knowledge (OECD, 2013b). Indeed,
knowledge workers often create their own jobs, starting up companies to provide new services or
products that did not exist before they graduated.

   From a teaching perspective the biggest impact is likely to be on technical and vocational instructors
and students, where the knowledge component of formerly mainly manual skills is expanding rapidly.
Particularly in the trades areas, plumbers, welders, electricians, car mechanics and other trade-related
workers are needing to be problem-solvers, IT specialists and increasingly self-employed business
people, as well as having the manual skills associated with their profession.

   Artificial intelligence (AI) is another development that is already affecting the workforce. Routine
work, whether clerical or manual, is being increasingly replaced by automation. Although all kinds of
jobs are likely to be affected by increased automation and applications of AI, those in the workforce with
lower levels of education are likely to be the most impacted. Those with higher levels of education are
likely to have a better chance of finding work that machines cannot do as well - or even creating new
work for themselves.
20 Chapter 1: Fundamental Change in Education

1.1.3 Knowledge-based workers

There are certain common features of knowledge-based workers in a digital age:

         · they usually work in small companies (less than 10 people);

         · they sometimes own their own business, or are their own boss; sometimes they have created
            their own job, which didn't exist until they worked out there was a need and they could meet
            that need;

         · they often work on contract or are self-employed, so they move around from one job to
            another fairly frequently (the gig economy);

         · the nature of their work tends to change over time, in response to market and technological
            developments and thus the knowledge base of their work tends to change rapidly;

         · they are digitally smart or at least competent digitally; digital technology is often a key
            component of their work;

         · because they often work for themselves or in small companies, they play many roles:
            marketer, designer, salesperson, accountant/business manager, technical support, for
            example;

         · they depend heavily on informal social networks to bring in business and to keep up to date
            with current trends in their area of work;

         · they need to keep on learning to stay on top in their work, and they need to manage that
            learning for themselves;

         · above all, they need to be flexible, to adapt to rapidly changing conditions around them.

It can be seen then that it is difficult to predict with any accuracy what many graduates will actually be
doing ten or so years after graduation, except in very broad terms. Even in areas where there are clear
professional tracks, such as medicine, nursing or engineering, the knowledge base and even the working
conditions are likely to undergo rapid change and transformation over that period of time. However, we
shall see in Chapter 1 Section 2 that it is possible to predict many of the skills they will need to survive
and prosper in such an environment.

   This is good news for the higher or post-secondary education sector overall (universities and colleges)
as the knowledge and skill levels needed in the workforce increases. It has resulted in a major expansion
of post-secondary education to meet the demand for knowledge-based work and higher levels of skill.
The post-secondary enrolment rate of 19-year-olds across all Canadian provinces increased steadily
from 53% in 2001 to 64% in 2014, equivalent to a 21% rise over the 13-year period (Frenette, 2017).
This means more students for universities and colleges, even where population trends are flat or even
declining.
                                                             1.1 Structural changes in the economy: the growth of a knowledge society 21

Figure 1.1.3 A video animator: a typical knowledge worker. Photograph: Elaine Thompson/Associated Press, 2007.

References
OECD (2013a) OECD Skills Outlook: First Results from the Survey of Adult Skills Paris: OECD

   OECD (2013b) Competition Policy and Knowledge-Based Capital Paris: OECD
   Frenette, M. (2017) Postsecondary Enrolment by Parental Income: Recent National and Provincial
Trends Ottawa: Statistics Canada

                                                                Activity 1.1 Thinking about skills

      1. What kind of jobs are graduates in your subject discipline likely to get? Can you describe the kinds of
   skills they are likely to need in such a job? To what extent has the knowledge and skills component of such
   work changed over the last 20 years?

      2. Look at the family members and friends outside your academic or educational field. What kind of
   knowledge and skills do they need now that they didn't need when they left school or college? (You may need
   to ask them this!)

      3. Exactly how are you assisting your students develop such skills through your teaching? Is this centre or
   peripheral to your work? Is this part of your job - or someone else's?

      There is no feedback on this activity.
1.2 The skills needed in a digital age

Figure 1.2.1 Using social media for communication is an essential skill for a digital age
                                                                    23
24 Chapter 1: Fundamental Change in Education

1.2.1 The growing importance of skills development

Knowledge involves two strongly inter-linked but different components: content and skills. Content
includes facts, ideas, principles, evidence, and descriptions of processes or procedures. Most instructors,
at least in universities, are well trained in content and have a deep understanding of the subject areas in
which they are teaching. Expertise in skills development though is another matter. The issue here is not
so much that instructors do not help students develop skills - they do - but whether these intellectual
skills match the needs of knowledge-based workers, and whether enough emphasis is given to skills
development within the curriculum.

1.2.2 The needs of a digital society

Prediction is always risky, but usually the big trends in the future can already be seen in the present. The
future will merely magnify these current conditions, or current conditions will result in a transformation
that we can see coming but is not here yet. Examples are many:

         · the Internet of Things where almost everything is digitally connected

         · autonomous vehicles and transportation

         · massive amounts of data about our personal lives being collected and analysed to anticipate/
            predict/influence our future behaviour

         · automation replacing and/or transforming human work and leisure

         · state agencies and/or commercial oligopolies controlling access to and use of data

         · lack of transparency, corruption of messaging, and magnification of these distortions, in
            digital communications.

One thing is clear. We can either as individuals throw up our hands and leave all these developments to
either state or commercial entities to manage in their own interests, or we can try to prepare ourselves so
that we can influence or even control how these developments are managed, for the greater good.

   This is what I mean when I talk about developing 21st century skills, or preparing for a digital society.
We have a responsibility for ensuring our students are educated sufficiently so that they understand these
issues and have the means by which to address them. This is a responsibility of every educator, because
it affects all areas of knowledge.

   For instance the science professor needs to instill in her students an ability to identify reliable and
unreliable sources of scientific data, and an ability to apply that knowledge in ethical ways that benefit
mankind. This is a particularly important responsibility for those teaching computer sciences. We need
to teach about the dangers of unintended or unknown consequences of artificial intelligence applications
and of automated analyses of mass data, potential biases in algorithms, and the need to audit and adjust
automated procedures to avoid unforeseen but harmful consequences before they do damage.

   Digital (rather than purely online) learning has a critical role to play, because in order to develop these
skills our students' learning itself needs to be digitally embedded. Only by mastering technology can we
control it.
                    1.2 The skills needed in a digital age 25

1.2.3 What skills?

The skills required in a knowledge society include the following (adapted from Conference Board of
Canada, 2014):

         · communications skills: as well as the traditional communication skills of reading, speaking
            and writing coherently and clearly, we need to add social media communication skills. These
            might include the ability to create a short YouTube video to capture the demonstration of a
            process or to make a sales pitch, the ability to reach out through the Internet to a wide
            community of people with one's ideas, to receive and incorporate feedback, to share
            information appropriately, to identify trends and ideas from elsewhere;

         · the ability to learn independently: this means taking responsibility for working out what you
            need to know, and where to find that knowledge. This is an ongoing process in knowledge-
            based work, because the knowledge base is constantly changing. Incidentally I am not talking
            here necessarily of academic knowledge, although that too is changing; it could be learning
            about new equipment, new ways of doing things, or learning who are the people you need to
            know to get the job done;

         · ethics and responsibility: this is required to build trust (particularly important in informal
            social networks), but also because generally ethical and responsible behaviour is in the long
            run more effective in a world where there are many different players, and a greater degree of
            reliance on others to accomplish one's own goals;

         · teamwork and flexibility: although many knowledge workers work independently or in very
            small companies, they depend heavily on collaboration and the sharing of knowledge with
            others in related but independent organizations. In small companies, it is essential that all
            employees work closely together, share the same vision for a company and help each other
            out. In particular, knowledge workers need to know how to work collaboratively,
            virtually and at a distance, with colleagues, clients and partners. The `pooling' of collective
            knowledge, problem-solving and implementation requires good teamwork and flexibility in
            taking on tasks or solving problems that may be outside a narrow job definition but necessary
            for success;

         · thinking skills (critical thinking, problem-solving, creativity, originality, strategizing, for
            example): of all the skills needed in a knowledge-based society, these are the most important.
            Businesses increasingly depend on the creation of new products, new services and new
            processes to keep down costs and increase competitiveness. Also, it is not just in the higher
            management positions that these skills are required. Trades people in particular are
            increasingly having to be problem-solvers rather than following standard processes, which
            tend to become automated. Anyone dealing with the public in a service function must
            identify needs and find appropriate solutions. Universities in particular have always prided
            themselves on teaching such intellectual skills, but the move to larger classes and more
            information transmission, especially at the undergraduate level, undermines this assumption;

         · digital skills: most knowledge-based activities depend heavily on the use of technology.
            However the key issue is that these skills need to be embedded within the knowledge domain
26 Chapter 1: Fundamental Change in Education

            in which the activity takes place. This means for instance real estate agents knowing how to
            use geographical information systems to identify sales trends and prices in different
            geographical locations, welders knowing how to use computers to control robots examining
            and repairing pipes, radiologists knowing how to use new technologies that `read' and
            analyze MRI scans. Thus the use of digital technology needs to be integrated with and
            evaluated through the knowledge-base of the subject area;

         · knowledge management: this is perhaps the most over-arching of all the skills. Knowledge is
            not only rapidly changing with new research, new developments, and rapid dissemination of
            ideas and practices over the Internet, but the sources of information are increasing, with a
            great deal of variability in the reliability or validity of the information. Thus the knowledge
            that an engineer learns at university can quickly become obsolete. There is so much
            information now in the health area that it is impossible for a medical student to master all
            drug treatments, medical procedures and emerging science such as genetic engineering, even
            within an eight year program. Thus knowledge management is the key skill in a knowledge-
            based society: how to find, evaluate, analyze, apply and disseminate information, within a
            particular context. Above all students need to know how to validate or challenge sources of
            information. Effective knowledge management is a skill that all graduates will need to
            employ long after graduation.

In 2018, the Royal Bank of Canada issued a report, called `Humans Wanted.' This was based on an
analysis of big data derived from job postings over a 12 month period on LinkedIn, in which the actual
skills being requested by employers were identified and analysed, and from which an analysis of the
demand for different types of labour was conducted.

   The main conclusion of the report was that there will be plenty of jobs in the future, but they will
require different skills from those generally required at the present. In particular, many of the new
skills needed will be what are perhaps confusingly called soft skills, such as attentive listening, critical
thinking, digital fluency, active learning, etc. (confusing, because these `soft skills' are often as difficult
to cultivate as `hard skills'.) These are skills that automation and AI cannot easily replicate or replace
but which will be needed in the new digital economy. The Royal Bank identified the following as key
skills that will be in high demand between 2018 and 2023 (dark blue = very important; lighter blue =
important):
                                                                                                                1.2 The skills needed in a digital age 27

              Figure 1.2.2 From `Humans Wanted', Royal Bank of Canada, 2018

Two of the main conclusions from the Royal Bank report were as follows:
28 Chapter 1: Fundamental Change in Education

         · Canada's education system, training programs and labour market initiatives are inadequately
            designed to help Canadian youth navigate this new skills economy.

         · Canadian employers are generally not prepared, through hiring, training or retraining, to
            recruit and develop the skills needed to make their organizations more competitive in a digital
            economy.

1.2.4 Developing skills

What methods of teaching are most likely to develop soft skills? In fact, we can learn a lot from research
about skills and skill development (see, for instance, Fischer, 1980, Fallow and Steven, 2000):

         · skills development is relatively context-specific. In other words, skills need to be embedded
            within a knowledge domain. For example, problem solving in medicine is different from
            problem-solving in business. First of all, of course, the content base used to solve problems is
            different. Less well understood though is that somewhat different processes and approaches
            are used to solve problems in these domains (for instance, decision-making in medicine tends
            to be more deductive, business more intuitive; medicine is more risk averse, business is more

          likely to accept a solution that will contain a higher element of risk or uncertainty).
          Embedding skills within a particular context such as a subject discipline is
          perhaps the biggest challenge for educational institutions in a digital age. How
          well does an ability to think critically about English literature transfer to other
          areas of critical thinking, such as political analysis or assessing the behaviour of
          a workplace colleague? In many cases, some elements of these soft skills do
          transfer well but other parts are more context specific. More attention needs to
          be paid to what is known about the transfer of skills, based on research, and to
          ensuring this evidence affects the way we teach.

         · learners need practice - often a good deal of practice - to reach mastery and consistency in a
            particular skill;

         · skills are often best learned in relatively small steps, with `jumps' increasing as mastery is
            approached;

         · learners need feedback on a regular basis to learn skills quickly and effectively; immediate
            feedback is usually better than late feedback;

         · although skills can be learned by trial and error without the intervention of a teacher, coach,
            or technology, skills development can be greatly enhanced or speeded up with appropriate
            interventions, which means adopting appropriate teaching methods and technologies for
            skills development;

         · we shall see later that although content can be transmitted equally effectively through a wide
            range of media, skills development is much more tied to specific teaching approaches and
            technologies.

What are the implications of this for not only teaching methods, but also curriculum design? It is
                                                                                                                1.2 The skills needed in a digital age 29

worth remembering that unlike competencies, many `high-level' soft skills such as critical thinking are
cumulative and do not have a clear end-point. Serena Williams keeps winning not because she continues
to get faster and stronger than younger players, but because she continues to hone her skills (including
strategy) to a level that compensates for her diminishing strength and speed.

   Soft skills need to be developed over a program (indeed a lifetime) rather than in a single course. How
do we identify then how to build critical thinking skills for example from first year through to graduation
in a particular discipline? How does the development of skills in later stages build on work done earlier
in a program?

1.2.5 Measuring skills

Another challenge is measuring skills. I was once questioned by a colleague when I said my students
were learning to think critically.

   `How do you know?' he said.
   My answer was: `I know it when I see it in their assessments.'
   `But how will your students know what you are looking for if you can't describe it in advance?'
   The Higher Education Quality Council of Ontario (HEQCO) published a report in 2018 that claimed
to be `one of the first major attempts to measure employment-related skills in university and college
students on a large scale.' The second study used a test designed to evaluate students' ability to analyse
evidence, understand implications and consequences, and develop valid arguments.
   The HEQCO study concluded that final-year students had somewhat higher scores in literacy and
numeracy than their first-year counterparts, although there was considerable variation among programs,
but little difference between the test scores of incoming and graduating students in critical-thinking
abilities, although critical thinking ability too showed considerable variation among programs.
   There are a number of possible criticisms of this study. One of the challenges that the HEQCO
study faced was finding valid and reliable ways to assess soft skills. The first study measured literacy,
numeracy and problem-solving abilities of adults using everyday scenarios.Why assess these skills
outside the knowledge domains in which they were taught, given the importance of context? Were the
measurements sensitive enough to really discriminate differences in skill development over time?
   Nevertheless, it is worrying that HEQCO found that after four years of post-secondary study there was
no noticeable difference in critical thinking skills. Is this because this is not being well taught, or because
the tests used were not valid? Any attempt to identify learning outcomes involving skills requires
consideration from the beginning of how these skills can validly be assessed. Instructors should not
complain about HEQCO's assessment methods if they cannot justify their own methods of identifying
and assessing skills.

1.2.6 Skills and learning outcomes

The Royal Bank of Canada and the HEQCO studies both highlight that it is becoming increasingly
important to define learning outcomes in terms of skills acquisition. Both these are valuable studies
that identify some of the issues around developing the knowledge and skills that students will need to
succeed, not just in the workforce, but in life generally in the last three quarters of this century. However,
the two reports have barely touched the tip of this particular iceberg. Neither for instance attempted to
suggest how students can develop these skills or what instructors need to do to help students develop
such skills.
30 Chapter 1: Fundamental Change in Education

   When developing curricular, in terms of deciding not only what but also how to teach, we need to ask
the following questions:

        (a) are programs identifying clearly the learning outcomes expected from a program of study?
        (b) do these learning outcomes sufficiently take into account skills as well as content/topics?
        (c) are these learning outcomes relevant for a digital society?
   In other words, we have a major pedagogical challenge in several parts:

         · identifying the most important soft skills that students will need (although the RBC report
            goes a little way in that direction)

         · identifying the best way to teach such soft skills

         · assessing students' ability in soft skills (although the HEQCO report similarly goes a little
            way in that direction)

         · identifying the extent to which soft skills are generalisable.

The key point here is that content and skills are tightly related and as much attention needs to be
given to skills development as to content acquisition to ensure that learners graduate with the necessary
knowledge and skills for a digital age.

1.2.7 Rethinking teaching and learning

These are essentially curriculum and pedagogical issues. It means rethinking not only the curriculum and
how we teach it, but also the role that technology can play in developing such skills. How can technology
increase empathy and understanding (for example, through creating virtual environments or simulations
where students play the role of others)? How can technology be used to provide scenarios that enable
skills development and testing in a safe environment? How can technology be used to enable students to
solve real world problems?

   There are a million possible answers to such questions and they need to be answered by instructors
and teachers - and by learners - with deep understanding of their subject matter. But subject knowledge
alone is not enough if we are to make the last three quarters of the 21st century a time when all people
can thrive and feel free.

   Chapters 2 and 3 explore different methods of teaching and will look at how well these methods
accommodate skills development. But in the next section I discuss the dangers of tying skills
development too closely to the immediate needs of the labour market.

References

The Conference Board of Canada (2014) Employability Skills 2000+ Ottawa ON: Conference Board of
Canada

   Fallow, S. and Stevens, C. (2000) Integrating Key Skills in Higher Education: Employability,
Transferable Skills and Learning for Life London UK/Sterling VA: Kogan Page/Stylus

   Finnie, R. et al. (2018) Measuring Critical-thinking Skills of Postsecondary Students Toronto ON:
HEQCO

   Fischer, K.W. (1980) A Theory of Cognitive Development: The Control and Construction of
Hierarchies of Skills Psychological Review, Vol. 84, No. 6

   Royal Bank of Canada (2018) Humans Wanted Toronto ON: Royal Bank of Canada
                                                                                                                1.2 The skills needed in a digital age 31

   Weingarten, H. et al. (2018) Measuring Essential Skills of Postsecondary Students: Final Report of
the Essential Adult Skills Initiative Toronto ON: HEQCO

                                            For my comments on why skills development
                                            is so important in a digital age, click on the
                                            podcast below

                       An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                    https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=34

                                         Activity 1.2 What skills are you developing in your students? Part 1

      1. Write down a list of skills you would expect students to develop as a result of studying your courses.
      2. Compare these skills to the ones listed above. How well do they match?
      3. What do you do as an instructor that enables students to practice or develop the skills you have identified?
      There is no feedback provided for this activity, but see podcast above..
1.3 Should education be tied directly to the labour market?

Figure 1.3.1 Knowledge workers
Image: Phil Whitehouse, 2009. Retrieved from https://www.flickr.com/photos/philliecasablanca/3344142642/.

   However, there is a real danger in tying university, college and schools programs too closely to
immediate labour market needs. Labour market demand can shift very rapidly, and in particular, in a
knowledge-based society, it is impossible to judge what kinds of work, business or trades will emerge in
the future. For instance, who would have predicted 20 years ago that one of the largest companies in the
world in terms of stock market valuation would emerge from finding ways to rank the hottest girls on
campus (which is how Facebook started)?

   The focus on the skills needed in a digital age raises questions about the purpose of universities in
particular, but also schools and two year community colleges to some extent. Is their purpose to provide
ready-skilled employees for the work-force? Is it really the job of historians or physicists to teach skills
such as attentive listening, time management or social perceptiveness?

   Certainly the rapid expansion in higher education is largely driven by government, employers and
parents wanting a workforce that is employable, competitive and if possible affluent. Indeed, preparing
professional workers has always been one role for universities, which have a long tradition of training

                                                                    33
34 Chapter 1: Fundamental Change in Education

for the church, law and much later, government administration. The goal here is to ensure that as well
as a deep understanding of the content and core values of a subject discipline, students can also develop
skills that enable them to apply such knowledge in appropriate contexts.

   Secondly, focusing on the skills required for a knowledge-based society (often referred to as 21st
century skills) merely reinforces the kind of learning, especially the development of intellectual
skills, for which universities have taken great pride in the past. Indeed in this kind of labour market, it
is critical to serve the learning needs of the individual rather than specific companies or employment
sectors. To survive in the current labour market, learners need to be flexible and adaptable, and should
be able to work just as much for themselves as for corporations that increasingly have a very short
operational life. The challenge then is not re-purposing education, but making sure it meets that purpose
more effectively.

   Thirdly, enabling students to live well and to feel some measure of control in a technology-rich society
is surely the responsibility of every educator. For instance, all students, whatever their discipline, need
to know how to find, evaluate, analyse and apply information within their specific subject discipline.
With so much content of varying quality now available at one's fingertips, such skills are essential for a
healthy society.

   Thus in some cases it is a language issue: instructors may be achieving some of these '21st century
skills' such as critical thinking within the requirements of a specific discipline without using this
terminology (for example, `compare and contrast...' is a critical thinking activity). However, the
HEQCO study (Weingarten et al., 2018) indicates that high-level soft skills are hard to measure
and probably need to be defined and communicated more clearly and purposefully by instructors. In
particular, development of such skills need to be considered at a program level so instructors can define
what level of skill they expect of students when they arrive, and to what level that skill has been
increased or improved by the end of a course or program.

   A good example of this is from the Faculty of Computer Science at Dalhousie University. The
department developed a map showing the inter-relatedness between specific learning outcomes, course
content, and course and learning outcome sequencing, so that each instructor understood what level of
skills and outcomes students would have from previous courses, and could identify what levels of skills
they were passing on when students left their course. One result of this was to move the theory courses
from the fourth year to the first year, as this helped students in the later stages of the program.

   These activities do not challenge in any way core disciplinary values, or make universities or colleges
merely preparatory schools for business, but they do ensure that students leave with skills that prepare
them well for living in a very challenging age.

Reference

Weingarten, H. et al. (2018) Measuring Essential Skills of Postsecondary Students: Final Report of the
Essential Adult Skills Initiative Toronto ON: HEQCO

                                         Activity 1.3: What are the skills you are developing? Part 2
                                                                             1.3 Should education be tied directly to the labour market? 35

The new Ontario provincial government in 2019 announced that it would link funding of its post-secondary
institutions to `performance outcomes'. Institutions would be encouraged to suggest their own performance
measures.

   Your institution has decided to focus on the development of '21st century skills' as a `key performance
indicator', and is asking all its academic departments to list the `core' skills that their programs are developing.

   If you were asked this, what would you suggest from looking not just at your teaching but the teaching of
the department or program as a whole? And what evidence would need to be provided to show such skills are
being achieved by your students?

   Would having to do this be an infringement of your academic freedom?
   No feedback is provided on this activity.
1.4 Change and continuity

Figure 1.4.1 Harvard University

     In the age of constant connectedness and social media, it's time for the monolithic, millennium-old,
     ivy-covered walls to undergo a phase change into something much lighter, more permeable, and
     fluid.

                                                                              Anya Kamenetz, 2010

Although this book is aimed at teachers and instructors in schools and colleges as well as universities, I
want to look particularly at how the digital age is impacting on universities. There is a widely held belief

                                                                    37
38 Chapter 1: Fundamental Change in Education

- even among those who have benefited from fine degrees at prestigious universities - that universities
are out of touch, that academic freedom is really about protecting professors in a comfortable career
that doesn't require them to change, and that the entire organization of the academy is better left to its
medieval past: in other words, universities are an artifact of the past and something new needs to replace
them.

   Nevertheless, there are very good reasons why universities have been around for more than 800
years, and are likely to remain relevant well into the future. Universities are deliberately designed
to resist external pressure. They have seen kings and popes, governments and business corporations,
come and go, without any of these external forces fundamentally changing the nature of the institution.
Universities pride themselves on their independence, their freedom, and their contribution to society. So
let's start by looking, very briefly, at these core values, because any change that really threatens these
core values is likely to be strongly resisted from professors and instructors within the institution.

   Universities are fundamentally about the creation, evaluation, maintenance and dissemination of
knowledge. This role in society is even more important today than in the past. For universities to
perform that role adequately, though, certain conditions are necessary. First they need a good deal
of autonomy. The potential value of new knowledge in particular is difficult to predict in advance.
Universities provide society with a safe way of gambling on the future, by encouraging innovative
research and development that may have no immediate apparent short-term benefits, or may lead to
nowhere, without incurring major commercial or social loss. Another critical role is the ability to
challenge the assumptions or positions of powerful agencies outside the university, such as government
or industry, when these seem to be in conflict with evidence or ethical principles or the general good of
society.

   Perhaps even more importantly, there are certain principles that distinguish academic knowledge from
everyday knowledge, such as rules of logic and reasoning, the ability to move between the abstract and
the concrete, ideas supported by empirical evidence or external validation (see for instance, Laurillard,
2001). We expect our universities to operate at a higher level of thinking than we as individuals or
corporations can do in our everyday lives.

   One of the core values that has helped to sustain universities is academic freedom. Academics who
ask awkward questions, who challenge the status quo, who provide evidence that contradicts statements
made by government or corporations, are protected from dismissal or punishment within the institution
for expressing such views. Academic freedom is an essential condition within a free society. However, it
also means that academics are free to choose what they study, and more importantly for this book, how
best to communicate that knowledge. University teaching then is bound up with this notion of academic
freedom and autonomy, even though some of the conditions that protect that autonomy, such as tenure
or a job for life, are increasingly under pressure.

   I make this point for one reason and one reason alone. If universities are to change to meet changing
external pressures, this change must come from within the organization, and in particular from the
professors and instructors themselves. It is the faculty that must see the need for change, and be willing
to make those changes themselves. If government or society as a whole tries to enforce changes from
outside, especially in a way that challenges the core values of a university such as academic freedom,
there is a grave risk that the very thing that makes universities a unique and valuable component of
society will be destroyed, thus making them less rather than more valuable to society as a whole.
However, this book will provide many reasons why it is also in the best interests of not only learners but
instructors themselves to make changes, in terms of managing workload and attracting extra resources
to support teaching.

   Schools and two-year colleges are in a somewhat different position. It is easier (although not that
easy) to impose change from above or through forces from outside the institution, such as government.
                                                                                                                              1.4 Change and continuity 39

However, as the literature on change management clearly indicates (see, for instance, Weiner, 2009),
change occurs more consistently and more deeply when those undergoing change understand the need
for it and have a desire to change. Thus in many ways, schools, two year colleges and universities face
the same challenge: how to change while preserving the integrity of the institution and what it stands for.

                                                               Activity 1.4 Change and continuity

      1. Do you think that universities are irrelevant today? If not, what alternatives are there for developing
   learners with the knowledge and skills needed in a digital age?

      2. What are your views on the core values of a university? How do they differ from the ones outlined here?
      3. Do you think schools, colleges and/or universities need to change they way they teach? If so, why, and
   in what way? How could this best be done without interfering with academic freedom or other core values of
   educational institutions?
      There are no right or wrong answers to these questions but you may want to return to your answers after
   reading the whole chapter.

References

Kamenetz, A. (2010) DIY U: Edupunks, Edupreneurs, and the Coming Transformation of Higher
Education White River Junction VT: Chelsea Green

   Laurillard, D. (2001) Rethinking University Teaching: A Conversational Framework for the Effective
Use of Learning Technologies New York/London: Routledge

   Weiner, B. (2009) A theory of organizational readiness for change Implementation Science, Vol. 4,
No. 67
1.5 The impact of expansion on teaching methods

Figure 1.5.1 More students means bigger lecture classes

   Governments in different provinces, states and countries have varied in their response to the need
for more highly educated people. Some (as in Canada) have increased state funding to post-secondary
education institutions to an extent that matches or even exceeds the increase in student numbers. Others
(particularly in the USA, Australia, and England and Wales) have relied mainly on steep cuts in direct
state funding for operating budgets, combined with massive increases in tuition fees.

   Whatever the government strategy, in every university and college I visit, I am told instructors have
more students to teach, class sizes are getting larger, and as a result, more and more classes are just
lectures with little interaction. Indeed, statistics support this argument. According to Usher (2013), the
overall full-time faculty:full time student ratio in Canadian universities increased from 1:18 in 1995 to
1:22 by 2011, despite a 40 per cent increase in per student funding (after inflation). In fact, a 1:22 ratio
means much larger class sizes, because in universities full-time faculty spend only a notional 40 per
cent of their time on teaching, and students may take up to 10 different courses a year. The fact is that

                                                                    41
42 Chapter 1: Fundamental Change in Education

especially in first and second year classes, class sizes are extremely high. For instance, one Introductory
Psychology class in a mid-sized Canadian university has one full-time professor responsible for over
3,000 students.

   Tuition fees though are very visible, so many institutions or government jurisdictions have tried
to control increases in tuition fees, despite cuts in operating grants, resulting in increased full time
instructor:student ratios. Also, as a result of higher tuition fees and increased student debt to finance
university and college education, students and parents are becoming more demanding, more like
customers than scholars in an academic community. Poor teaching in particular is both visible and less
and less acceptable to students paying high tuition fees.

   The general complaint from faculty is that government or the institutional administration has not
increased funding for faculty in proportion to the increase in student numbers. In fact, the situation is
much more complicated than that. Most institutions that have expanded in terms of student numbers
have handled the expansion through a number of strategies:

         · hiring more contract/sessional lecturers at lower salaries than tenured faculty

         · greater use of teaching assistants who themselves are students

         · increasing class sizes

         · increasing faculty workload.

All of these strategies tend to have a negative impact on quality, if the methods of teaching otherwise
remain unchanged.

   Contract instructors are cheaper to employ than full time professors but they do not usually have
the same roles such as choice of curriculum and reading materials as tenured faculty, and although
often well qualified academically, the relatively temporary nature of their employment means that their
teaching experience and their knowledge of students are lost when their contracts end. However, of all
the strategies, this is likely to have the least negative impact on quality. Unfortunately though it is also
the most expensive for institutions.

   Teaching assistants may be no more than a couple of years ahead in their studies than the students
they are teaching, they are often poorly trained or supervised with regard to teaching, and sometimes,
if they are foreign students (as is often the case), their English language skills are poor, making them
sometimes difficult to understand. They tend to be used to instruct parallel sections of the same course,
so that students studying the same course may have widely different levels of instruction. Employing and
paying teaching assistants can be directly linked to the way that post-graduate research is being funded
by government agencies.

   The increase in class size has tended to result in much more time being devoted to lectures and less
time to small group work. Lectures are in fact a very economical way of increasing class size (provided
that the lecture halls are large enough to accommodate the extra students). The marginal cost of adding
an extra student to a lecture is small, since all students are receiving the same instruction. However,
as numbers increase, faculty resort to more quantitative and less flexible forms of assessment, such as
multiple-choice questions and automated assessment. Perhaps more importantly, student interaction with
faculty decreases rapidly as numbers increase, and the nature of the interaction tends to flow between
the instructor and an individual student rather than between students interacting as a group. Research
(Bligh, 2000) has shown that in lectures with 100 or more students, less than ten students will ask
questions or provide comments over the course of a semester. The result is that lectures tend to focus
more heavily on the transmission of information as class size increases, rather than on exploration,
                                                                                              1.5 The impact of expansion on teaching methods 43

clarification or discussion (see Chapter 3, Section 3 for a more detailed analysis of the effectiveness of
lectures).

   Increasing faculty teaching load (more courses to be taught) is the least common of the four strategies,
partly because of faculty resistance, sometimes manifesting itself in collective agreement negotiations.
Where increased faculty teaching load does occur, quality again is likely to suffer, as faculty put in
less preparation time per class and less time for office hours, and resort to quicker and easier methods
of assessment. This inevitably results in larger classes if full-time faculty are teaching less but doing
more research. However, increased research funding results in more post-graduate students, who can
supplement their income as teaching assistants. As a result there has been a major expansion in the use
of teaching assistants for delivering lectures. However, in many Canadian universities, full-time faculty
teaching load has been going down (Usher, 2013), leading to even larger class sizes for those that do
teach.

   In other employment sectors, increased demand does not necessarily result in increased cost if that
sector can be more productive. Thus government is increasingly looking for ways to make higher
education institutions more productive: more and better students for the same cost or less (see for
instance Kao, 2019). Up to now, this pressure has been met by institutions over a fairly long period
of time by gradually increasing class size, and using lower cost labour, such as teaching assistants, but
there becomes a point fairly quickly where quality suffers unless changes are made to the underlying
processes, by which I mean the way that teaching is designed and delivered.

   Another side effect of this gradual increase in class size without changes in teaching methods is that
faculty and instructors end up having to work harder. In essence they are processing more students, and
without changing the ways they do things, this inevitably results in more work. Faculty usually react
negatively to the concept of productivity, seeing it as industrializing the educational process, but before
rejecting the concept it is worth considering the idea of getting better results without working as hard but
more smartly. Could we change teaching to make it more productive so that both students and instructors
benefit?

References

Bligh, D. (2000) What's the Use of Lectures? San Francisco: Jossey-Bass
   Kao, J. (2019) Ontario's 2019 budget reveals plan to significantly tie university funding to

performance outcomes The Varsity, University of Toronto
   Usher, A. (2013) Financing Canadian Universities: A Self-Inflicted Wound (Part 5) Higher Education

Strategy Associates, September 13

                                              Activity 1.5 How much wriggle room do you have?

             1. Are you in general satisfied with your working conditions regarding teaching? If not, what are
                 your main frustrations?

             2. What practical solutions (taking into account the financial situation of your institution, student
                 needs, and the time you have available for teaching) could perhaps alleviate some of the
                 frustration?
44 Chapter 1: Fundamental Change in Education

             3. If you could change the way you teach, what would be the main benefits to both yourself and
                 your students? What would need to change for this to happen?

      There is no feedback on this activity
1.6 Changing students, changing markets for higher education

                                                                    45
46 Chapter 1: Fundamental Change in Education

Figure 1.6.1 More diverse students
Image: © greatinternational students.blogspot.com, 2013

1.6.1 Greater diversity of students
Probably nothing has changed more in higher education over the last 50 years than the students
themselves. In `the good old days', when less than a third of students from high schools went on to
                                                                             1.6 Changing students, changing markets for higher education 47

higher education, most came from families who themselves had been to university or college. They
usually came from wealthy or at least financially secure backgrounds. Universities in particular could be
highly selective, taking students with the best academic records, and thus those most likely to succeed.
Class sizes were smaller and faculty had more time to teach and less pressure to do research. Expertise in
teaching, while important, was not as essential then as now; good students were in an environment where
they were likely to succeed, even if the prof was not the best lecturer in the world. This `traditional'
model still holds true for most elite private universities such as Harvard, MIT, Stanford, Oxford and
Cambridge, and for a number of smaller liberal arts colleges. But for the majority of publicly funded
universities and two year community colleges in most developed countries, this is no longer the case (if
it ever was).

   The student base has become much more diverse. For instance, in British Columbia, roughly
two-thirds of the full Grade 8 school cohort of 2007/2008 (67%) entered B.C. public post-secondary
education by Fall 2014 (Heslop, 2016). As state jurisdictions push institutions to participation rates of
around 70 per cent going on to some form of post-secondary education (Ontario, 2011), institutions must
reach out to previously underserved groups, such as ethnic minorities (particularly Afro-American and
Latinos in the USA), new immigrants (in most developed countries), aboriginal students in Canada, and
students with English as a second language. Governments are also pushing universities to take more
international students, who can be charged full tuition fees or more, which in turn adds to the cultural
and language mix. In other words, post-secondary institutions are expected to represent the same kind of
socio-economic and cultural diversity as in society at large, rather than being institutions reserved for an
elite minority.

   We shall also see that in many developed countries, university and college students are older than
they used to be and are no longer full-time students dedicated only to lots of study and some fun (or
vice versa). The increasing cost of tuition fees and living expenses forces many students now to take
part-time work, which inevitably conflicts with regular classroom schedules, even if the students are
formally classified as full-time students. As a result students are taking longer to graduate. In the USA,
the average completion time for a four year bachelor degree is now 5.1 years (Shapiro, et al., 2016).

1.6.2 The lifelong learning market

The Council of Ontario Universities (2012) noted that students NOT coming direct from high school
now constitute 24% of all new admissions, and enrolments from this sector are increasing faster than
those from students coming direct from high schools. Perhaps more significantly, many graduates are
returning later in their careers to take further courses or programs, in order to keep up in their ever-
changing knowledge domain. Many of these students are working full-time, have families and are fitting
their studies around their other commitments.
48 Chapter 1: Fundamental Change in Education

Figure 1.6.2 Lifelong learners are an increasingly important market for higher education
Image: © Evolllution.com, 2013

   Yet it is economically critical to encourage and support such students, who need to remain competitive
in a knowledge-based society. especially as with falling birthrates and longer lives, in some jurisdictions
lifelong learners, students who have already graduated but are coming back for more study, will soon
exceed the number of students coming directly from high school. Thus at the University of British
Columbia in Canada, the mean age of all its graduates students is now 31, and more than one third of all
students are over 24 years old. There is also an increase in students transferring from two year colleges
to universities - and vice versa. For instance, in Canada, at the British Columbia Institute of Technology
more than 20 per cent of its new enrolments each year already have a university degree.
1.6.3 Digital natives
Another factor that makes students somewhat different today is their immersion in and facility with
digital technology, and in particular social media: instant messaging, Twitter, video games, Facebook,
and a whole host of applications (apps) that run on a variety of mobile devices such as iPads and mobile
phones. Such students are constantly `on'. Most students come to university or college immersed in
social media, and much of their life evolves around such media. Some commentators such as Mark
Prensky (2001) argue that digital natives think and learn fundamentally differently as a result of their
immersion in digital media.
                                                                             1.6 Changing students, changing markets for higher education 49

   Many instructors too often see such technology as a distraction. Attentive listening is impossible if
students are scrolling through videos or Facebook pages. Many instructors would like to ban all mobile
phones and tablets from their classes. However, a ban on mobile phones is an attempt to deny the
reality of living in a digital age. We should be educating our students in the appropriate use of everyday
technology for learning and social purposes, not trying to deny the existence of the technology.

   Instead we should be encouraging students to use their technological devices to find, analyse, evaluate
and apply their knowledge. This means giving them engaging tasks in class time that require the use of
their phones. Yes, they will probably use their device to text other students but then that can be also used
for group work and social learning. In particular, mobile phones can be used to support the learning of
higher level skills, such as problem solving and critical thinking.

   But this means providing criteria and procedures for students that enable their learning - and also
learning when they need to put their phones down and switch off. These are skills and knowledge that
are essential for life in today's society and it is irresponsible for the education system to ignore such
needs. Students expect to use social media in all other aspects of their life. Why should their learning
experience be different? We shall explore this further in Chapter 8, Section 6.

1.6.4 From elitism to success

Many older faculty still pine for the good old days when they were students. Even in the 1960s, when
the Robbins' Commission recommended an expansion of universities in Britain, the Vice-Chancellors
of the existing universities moaned `More means worse.' However, for public universities, the
Socratic ideal of a professor sharing their knowledge with a small group of devoted students under the
linden tree no longer exists, except perhaps at graduate level, and is unlikely ever to return to public
post-secondary institutions (except perhaps in Britain, where the Conservative government seems to
be dialling back the clock to the 1950s). The massification of higher education has, to the alarm of
traditionalists, opened up the academy to the great unwashed. However, the massification of higher
education is needed as much for economic reasons as for social mobility.

   The implications of these changes in the student body for university and college teaching are
profound. At one time, German math professors used to pride themselves that only five to ten per
cent of their students would succeed in their exams. The difficulty level was so high that only the
very best passed. A tiny completion rate showed how rigorous their teaching was. It was the students'
responsibility, not the professors', to reach the level required. That may still be the goal for top level
research students, but we have seen that today universities and colleges have a somewhat different
purpose, and that is to ensure, as far as possible, that as many students as possible leave university
appropriately qualified for life in a knowledge-based society. We can't afford to throw away the lives of
95 per cent of students, either ethically or economically. In any case, governments are increasingly using
completion rates and degrees awarded as key performance indicators that influence funding.

   It is a major challenge for institutions and teachers to enable as many students as possible to succeed,
given the wide diversity of the student body. More focus on teaching methods that lead to student
success, more individualization of learning, and more flexible delivery are all needed to meet the
challenge of an increasingly diverse student body. These developments put much more responsibility on
the shoulders of teachers and instructors (as well as students), and require a much higher level of skill in
teaching.

   Fortunately, over the last 100 years there has been a great deal of research into how people learn, and
a lot of research into teaching methods that lead to student success. Unfortunately, that research is not
known or applied by the vast majority of university and college instructors, who still rely mainly on
50 Chapter 1: Fundamental Change in Education

teaching methods that were perhaps appropriate when there were small classes and elite students, but are
no longer appropriate today (see, for instance, Christensen Hughes and Mighty, 2010). Thus a different
approach to teaching, and a better use of technology to help instructors increase their effectiveness across
a diverse student body, are now needed.

References

Christensen Hughes, J. and Mighty, J. (2010) Taking Stock: Research on Teaching and Learning in
Higher Education Montreal and Kingston: McGill-Queen's University Press

   Council of Ontario Universities (2012) Increased numbers of students heading to Ontario universities
Toronto ON: COU

   Heslop, J. (2016) Education Pathways for High School Graduates and Non-Graduates Victoria BC:
Student Transitions Project, Government of British Columbia

   Prensky, M. (2001) `Digital natives, Digital Immigrants' On the Horizon Vol. 9, No. 5
   Robbins, L. (1963) Higher Education Report London: Committee on Higher Education, HMSO
   Shapiro, D., et al. (2016) Time to Degree: A National View of the Time Enrolled and Elapsed for
Associate and Bachelor's Degree Earners (Signature Report No. 11). Herndon, VA: National Student
Clearinghouse Research Center.

                                                               Activity 1.6 Dealing with diversity

      1. What changes if any have you noticed in the students you are teaching? How does this differ from my
   analysis?

      2. Whose responsibility is it to ensure students succeed? To what extent does the diversity of students place
   more responsibility on teachers and instructors?

      3. Do you agree that `More means worse'? If you do, what alternatives would you suggest for higher
   education? How would this be paid for?

      4. Does your country/state have the balance right between academic and vocational education? Do we put
   too much emphasis on universities and not enough on technical or vocational colleges?

      No feedback is provided for this activity.
1.7 From the periphery to the center: how technology is changing the
way we teach

Figure 1.7.1 Technology is changing the way we teach - and the way students learn Image: Vidyo.com

   We shall see in Chapter 7, Section 2 that technology has played an important role in teaching from
time immemorial, but until recently, it has remained more on the periphery of education. Technology has
been used mainly to support regular classroom teaching, or operated in the form of distance education,
for a minority of students or in specialized departments (often in continuing education or extension).

   However, in the last ten to fifteen years, technology has been increasingly influencing the core
teaching activities of universities and colleges. Some of the ways technology is moving from the
periphery to the centre can be seen from the following trends.
1.7.1. Fully online learning
Credit-based online learning in recent years has become a major and central activity of most academic departments
inuniversities, colleges andtosomeextent eveninschool/k-12education.

   Online learning enrolments increased by between 10-20 per cent per annum between 2002 and 2012 in North
American higher education institutions, compared with an increase in campus-based enrolments of around 2-3 per
cent perannum(Allen andSeaman, 2014).

                                                                    51
52 Chapter 1: Fundamental Change in Education

Figure 1.7.2 From Allen and Seaman, 2014

   In just the California Community College System alone, there are almost one million online course enrolments
(Johnson and Mejia, 2014). There are now at least seven million students in the USA taking at least one fully online
course, almost 30 per cent of all post-secondary students in the USA; and 14 per cent of all students are
taking only distance education courses. The majority of these fully online enrolments (just over two-
thirds) are in public institutions in the USA (online enrolments in for-profit institutions plunged after
2012 due to Obama-era regulation). At the same time, the number of students studying on a campus in
the USA dropped by almost one million (931,317) between 2012 and 2015 (Digital Learning Compass,
2017).

   The situation in Canada is somewhat similar. Most Canadian post-secondary institutions (83 per cent)
offered fully online courses for credit in 2017. Roughly 17 per cent of all students were taking at
least one online course; online course registrations totalled 1.3 million, accounting for eight per cent
of all credit course enrolments. This is equivalent in a system with roughly 70 universities and 150
public colleges to four additional universities of 27,000 students, and five additional colleges of 10,000
students. Online learning was considered by institutional leaders to be very or extremely important for
the institution's future in over two-thirds of all institutions (Bates et al, 2018)

   Thusfullyonline learning isnowakeycomponent ofmanyschoolandpost-secondary education systems.

1.7.2. Blended and hybrid learning
As more instructors have become involved in online learning, they have realised that much that has
traditionally been done in class can be done equally well or better online (a theme that will be explored
more in Chapter 10, Section 2). As a result, instructors have been gradually introducing more online
study elements into their classroom teaching. So learning management systems may be used to store
lecture notes in the form of slides or PDFs, links to online readings may be provided, or online forums
for discussion may be established. Thus online learning is gradually being blended with face-to-face
                                              1.7 From the periphery to the center: how technology is changing the way we teach 53

teaching, but without changing the basic classroom teaching model. Here online learning is being used
as a supplement to traditional teaching. Although there is no standard or commonly agreed definitions
in this area, I will use the term `blended learning' for this use of technology.

   More recently, though, lecture capture has resulted in instructors realising that if the lecture is
recorded, students could view this in their own time, and then the classroom time could be used for more
interactive sessions. This model has become known as the `flipped classroom'.

   An even more significant move, but still in a minority of classes, is the move to hybrid learning, where
some, but not all, of regular classroom time is replaced by online activities. This sometimes leads to a
complete re-design of the teaching experience for students.

   Some institutions are now developing plans to move a substantial part of their teaching into more
blended or flexible modes. Almost two-thirds of the institutions in the 2017 Canadian survey either
had a plan for online learning or were developing one, and another 30 per cent reported that they did
not have a plan but needed one. For instance in 2013 the University of Ottawa developed a plan to
have at least 20 per cent of its courses blended or hybrid within five years (University of Ottawa,
2013). The University of British Columbia has a plan to redesign most of its first and second year
large lecture classes into hybrid classes. Furthermore, some instructors are incorporating emerging
technologies such as simulations and educational or serious games, augmented and virtual reality, in
ways that fundamentally change the experience of learning. These are all indications of the growing
importance of digital learning.

1.7.3. Open learning

Another increasingly important development linked to online learning is the move to `open' education
that over the last 10 years has begun to impact directly on conventional institutions. The most immediate
is open textbooks - such as what you are reading now. Open textbooks are digital textbooks that can be
downloaded in a digital format by students (or instructors) for free, thus saving students considerable
money on textbooks. For instance, in Canada, the three provinces of British Columbia, Alberta, and
Saskatchewan are collaborating on the production and distribution of peer-reviewed open textbooks for
the 40 high-enrolment subject areas in their university and community college programs. By 2018 nearly
all post-secondary institutions in British Columbia (90 per cent) had adopted at least one open textbook
(Bates et al, 2018).

   Open educational resources (OER) are another recent development in open education. These are
digital educational materials freely available over the Internet that can be downloaded by instructors (or
students) without charge, and if necessary adapted or amended, under a Creative Commons license that
provides protections for the creators of the material. Probably the best known source of OER is
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology OpenCourseWare project. With individual professors'
permission, MIT has made available for free downloading over the Internet video lectures recorded with
lecture capture as well as supporting materials such as slides.

   The implications of developments in open learning will be discussed further in Chapter 11.

1.7.4. MOOCs

One of the main developments in online learning has been the rapid growth of Massive Open Online
Courses (MOOCs). In 2008, the University of Manitoba in Canada offered the first MOOC with just
over 2,000 enrolments, which linked webinar presentations and/or blog posts by experts to participants'
blogs and tweets. The courses were open to anyone and had no formal assessment. In 2012, two Stanford
54 Chapter 1: Fundamental Change in Education

University professors launched a lecture-capture based MOOC on artificial intelligence, attracting more
than 100,000 students, and since then MOOCs have expanded rapidly around the world.

   Although the format of MOOCs can vary, in general they have the following characteristics:

         · open to anyone to enroll and simple enrollment (just an e-mail address)

         · very large numbers (from 1,000 to 100,000)

         · free access to video-recorded lectures, often from the most elite universities in the USA
            (Harvard, MIT, Stanford in particular).

         · computer-based assessment, usually using multiple-choice questions and immediate
            feedback, combined sometimes with peer assessment

         · a wide range of commitment from learners: up to 50 per cent never do more than register, 25
            per cent never take more than the first assignment, less than 10 per cent complete the final
            assessment.

However, MOOCs are merely the latest example of the rapid evolution of technology, the over-
enthusiasm of early adopters, and the need for careful analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of new
technologies for teaching. They are evolving over time, and are beginning to find a more limited but still
important niche in the higher education market. MOOCs will be discussed more fully in Chapter 5.

1.7.5 Managing the changing landscape of education

These rapid developments in educational technologies mean that faculty and instructors need a strong
framework for assessing the value of different technologies, new or existing, and for deciding how or
when these technologies make sense for them and their students to use. Blended and online learning,
social media and open learning are all developments that are critical for effective teaching in a digital
age.

   However, these emerging technological developments need to be harnessed to the changing needs of
learners in a digital society, which means also looking at different ways of teaching and ensuring these
teaching methods and choices of technology are fully aligned with the needs of learners in a digital age.

References

Allen, I. and Seaman, J. (2014) Grade Change: Tracking Online Learning in the United States Wellesley
MA: Babson College/Sloan Foundation

   Bates, T. et al. (2018) Tracking Online and Distance Education in Canadian Universities and
Colleges 2018 Halifax: Canadian Digital Learning Research Association

   Digital Learning Compass (2017) Distance Education Enrolment Report 2017 Wellesley MA
   Johnson, H. and Mejia, M. (2014) Online learning and student outcomes in California's community
colleges San Francisco CA: Public Policy Institute of California
   University of Ottawa (2013) Report of the e-Learning Working Group Ottawa ON: University of
Ottawa: see also Report on the Blended Learning Initiative (2016), which reports on progress in
implementing the plan
                                       1.7 From the periphery to the center: how technology is changing the way we teach 55

                                             Activity 1.7 The consequences of change

      1. Have you in recent years moved to blended or online learning or used new technology in your
           teaching? If so, what was your reason?

      2. If not, what has stopped you trying a new approach with technology?
      3. If you have started to use technology in your teaching, what were the main difficulties you

           encountered? Did you get sufficient help from colleagues or the institution?
      4. Did you change your academic goals or did you try to achieve the same learning outcomes as in

           fully face-to-face teaching?
      5. Were there any unintended or unexpected consequences of moving towards the use of more

           technology in your teaching?
There is no feedback provided for this activity.
1.8 Navigating new developments in technology and online learning

Instructors in both universities and colleges now face the following challenges:

         · to teach in ways that help develop the knowledge and skills needed in today's society;
         · to handle increasingly large classes;
         · to develop teaching methods that are appropriate for an increasingly diverse student body;
         · to deal with a variety of different modes of delivery.

However, in general, teachers and instructors in post-secondary education have little or no training in
teaching, pedagogy or the research on learning. Even many school teachers lack adequate training to deal
with rapidly changing technologies. We wouldn't expect pilots to fly a modern jet without any training,
yet that is exactly what we are expecting of our teachers and instructors.

   This book then aims to provide a framework for making decisions about how to teach, and how best
to use technology, in ways that are true to the core values of universities, colleges, and schools, while
building on the large amount of research into learning and teaching, and into the use of technology for
teaching, that has been done over the last 50 years or so.

   The next chapter deals with the most important question of all: how do you want to teach in a digital
age?

                                                    Activity 1.8 Your main conclusions from Chapter 1

      Write down at least five conclusions you would draw from this chapter, in addition to the key takeaways
   below.

      Click here to compare your answers with mine.

                                                                            Key Takeaways

             1. Teaching methods need to be used that help to develop and transfer specific skills that serve both
                 the purposes of knowledge development and dissemination, while at the same time preparing
                 graduates for work in a knowledge-based society.

             2. As student numbers have increased, teaching has regressed for a variety of reasons to a greater
                 focus on information transmission and less focus on questioning, exploration of ideas,
                 presentation of alternative viewpoints, and the development of critical or original thinking. Yet
                 these are the very skills needed by students in a knowledge-based society.

             3. The wide diversity of the student body is a major challenge for institutions. This requires more
                 focus on teaching methods that provide support for learners, more individualization of learning,
                 and more flexible delivery.

                                                                    57
58 Chapter 1: Fundamental Change in Education

             4. Online learning is a continuum; every instructor and every institution now needs to decide: where
                 on this continuum of teaching should a particular course or program be?

             5. As more academic content becomes openly and freely available, students will look increasingly to
                 their local institutions for support with their learning, rather than for the delivery of content. This
                 puts a greater focus on teaching skills and less on subject expertise.

             6. Faculty and instructors need a strong framework for assessing the value of different technologies,
                 new or existing, and for deciding how or when these technologies make sense for them (and/or
                 their students) to use.
Chapter 2: The nature of knowledge and the
implications for teaching

                                                                      Purpose of the chapter

      This chapter discusses the relationship between our views on the nature of knowledge and the way we decide
   to teach.

      After reading this chapter you should be able to:
              · recognize your own epistemological/philosophical position that determines the way you are
                 currently teaching;
              · reflect on the similarities or differences between academic and everyday knowledge;
              · decide whether technology changes the nature of knowledge, and consider the implications for
                 teaching;
              · describe in broad terms the main theories of learning and discuss their implications for teaching;
              · identify different levels and types of learning and decide which is most appropriate for your
                 subject area/students;
              · integrate these ideas into a personal strategy or philosophy for the teaching of your subject;
              · decide on whether or not to change your overall approach to teaching in the light of the issues
                 raised in this chapter.

What is covered in this chapter

In this chapter, I will be discussing different beliefs about the nature of knowledge, and how that
influences teaching and learning. In particular, this chapter covers the following topics:

         · Scenario B: A pre-dinner party discussion
         · 2.1: Art, theory, research, and best practices in teaching
         · 2.2 Epistemology and theories of learning
         · 2.3 Objectivism and behaviourism
         · 2.4 Cognitivism
         · 2.5 Constructivism
         · 2.6 Connectivism
         · 2.7 Is the nature of knowledge changing?

                                                                    59
60 A.W. (Tony) Bates

         · 2.8 Summary

Also in this chapter you will find the following activities:

         · Activity 2.1 What do you think makes a good teacher?
         · Activity 2.2 Epistemologies at a dinner party
         · Activity 2.3 Defining the limits of behaviourism
         · Activity 2.4 Defining the limits of cognitivism
         · Activity 2.5 Defining the limits of constructivism
         · Activity 2.6 Defining the limits of connectivism
         · Activity 2.7 Epistemology and academic knowledge
         · Activity 2.8 Choosing a theory of learning

                                                                            Key Takeaways

      1. Teaching is a highly complex occupation, which needs to adapt to a great deal of variety in context,
   subject matter and learners. It does not lend itself to broad generalizations. Nevertheless it is possible to
   provide guidelines or principles based on best practices, theory and research, that must then be adapted or
   modified to local conditions.

      2. Our underlying beliefs and values, usually shared by other experts in a subject domain, shape our
   approach to teaching. These underlying beliefs and values are often implicit and are often not directly shared
   with our students, even though they are seen as essential components of becoming an `expert' in a particular
   subject domain.

      3. Different theories of learning reflect different views on the nature of knowledge.
      4. Every teacher starts from some epistemological or theoretical position, even if it is not explicit, or even if
   the teacher is not fully aware of their beliefs.
      5. With the possible exception of connectivism, there is some form of empirical evidence to support each of
   the theories of learning outlined here. The difference then is as much about values and beliefs about knowledge
   as it is about the effectiveness of each theory.
      6. It is argued that academic knowledge is different from other forms of knowledge, and is even more
   relevant today in a digital age.
      7. However, academic knowledge is not the only kind of knowledge that is important in today's society, and
   as teachers we have to be aware of other forms of knowledge and their potential importance to our students,
   and make sure that we are providing the full range of contents and skills needed for students in a digital age.
Scenario B: A pre-dinner party discussion

Figure 2.B The Dinner Party, from NBC's The Office

List of characters.
         · Peter and Ruth (hosts)
         · Stephen (a mechanical engineer and Peter's brother)
         · Caroline (a writer and Ruth's friend)

Peter to Stephen. I think Caroline's arrived. Now I know you've not met Caroline before, but for
goodness sake, do try to be polite and sociable this time. The last time you were here, you hardly said a
word.

                                                                    61
62 Chapter 2: The nature of knowledge and the implications for teaching

   Stephen. Well, nobody said anything that interested me. It was all about books and art. You know I'm
not interested in that sort of thing.

   Peter: Well, just try. Here she is. Caroline - lovely to see you again. Come and sit down. This is
Stephen, my brother. I don't think you've met, although I've told you about him - he's a professor of
mechanical engineering at the local university. But first, what would you like to drink?

   Caroline. Hi, Stephen. No, I don't think we have met. Nice to meet you. Peter, I'll have a glass of
white wine, please.

   Peter. While you're introducing yourselves, I'll go and get the drinks and give Ruth a hand in the
kitchen.

   Stephen. Peter says you're a writer. What do you write about?
   Caroline (laughing). Well, you do like to get straight to the point, don't you? It's a bit difficult to
answer your question. It depends on what I'm interested in at the time.
   Stephen. And what are you interested in at the moment?
   Caroline. I'm thinking about how someone would react to the loss of someone they love due to the
action of someone else they also love deeply. It was prompted by an item on the news of how a father
accidentally killed his two year old daughter by running her over when he was backing the car out of the
garage. His wife had just let the girl out to play in the front garden and didn't know her husband was
getting the car out.
   Stephen. God, that's awful. I wonder why the hell he didn't have a rear view video camera installed.
   Caroline. Well, the horrible thing about it is that it could happen to anyone. That's why I want to
write something around such everyday tragedies.
   Stephen. But how can you possibly write about something like that if you haven't experienced that
kind of thing yourself? Or have you?
   Caroline. No, thank goodness. Well, I guess that's the art of a writer - the ability to embed yourself in
other people's worlds, and to anticipate their feelings, emotions and consequent actions.
   Stephen. But wouldn't you need a degree in psychology or experience as a grief counsellor to do that
in that situation?
   Caroline. Well, I might talk to people who've undergone similar kinds of family tragedies, to see what
kind of people they are afterwards, but basically it's about understanding how I might react in such a
situation and projecting that and modifying that according to the kind of characters I'm interested in.
   Stephen. But how do you know it would be true, that people really would react the way you think they
would?
   Caroline. Well, what is `truth' in a situation like that? Different people are likely to act differently.
That's what I want to explore in the novel. The husband reacts one way, the wife another, and then there's
the interaction between the two, and all those round them. I'm particularly interested in whether they
could actually grow and become better people, or whether they disintegrate and destroy each other.
   Stephen. But how can you not know that before you start?
   Caroline. Well, that's the point, really. I don't. I want the characters to grow in my imagination, and
the outcome will inevitably be determined by that.
   Stephen. But if you don't know the truth, how those two people actually responded to that tragedy,
how can you help them or others like them?
   Caroline. But I'm a novelist, not a therapist. I'm not attempting to help anyone in such an awful
situation. I'm trying to understand the general human condition, and to do that, I have to start with
myself, what I know and feel, and project that into another context.
   Stephen. But that's nonsense. How can you possibly understand the human condition just by looking
inwards at yourself, and making up a fictional situation, that probably has nothing to do with what
actually happened?
                                                                                                         Scenario B: A pre-dinner party discussion 63

   Caroline (sighs). Stephen, you're a typical bloody scientist, with no imagination.
   Peter (arriving with the drinks). Well, how are you two getting along?

   Obviously at this point, not very well. The problem is that they have different world views on truth
and how it can be reached. They start from very different views about what constitutes knowledge, how
knowledge is acquired, and how it is validated. As always, the ancient Greeks had a word for thinking
about the nature of knowledge: epistemology. We shall see that this is an important driver of how we
teach.
2.1 Art, theory, research, and best practices in teaching

                                                For my comments on why this chapter
                                                is important for the rest of the book,
                                                please click on the podcast below

                       An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                    https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=57

   All teaching is a mix of art and science. It is an art because any teacher or instructor is faced with
numerous and constantly changing variables, which require rapid judgement and decision-making. Good
teachers usually have a passion for teaching so the emotional as well as the cognitive side is important.
In many cases, it's also about personal relationships, the extent to which an instructor can empathise
with students or appreciate their difficulties in learning, and the extent to which the instructor can
communicate effectively.

   There is also a science of teaching, based on theory and research. We shall see in fact there are
many, often conflicting theories, driven primarily by epistemological differences about the nature of
knowledge, and by different value systems. Then over the last 100 years there has been a great deal
of empirical research into how students learn, and effective teaching methods, which at its best is
driven by a strong, explicit theoretical base, and at its worse by mindless data-collection (such as
RateMyProfessor).

   As well as research-based practices, there are what are known as best practices, based on teachers'

                                                                    65
66 Chapter 2: The nature of knowledge and the implications for teaching

experience of teaching. While in many cases these have been validated by research or are driven by
theories of learning, this is not always the case. As a result, what some people see as best practices
are not always universally shared by others, even if best practices are seen in general as current
accepted wisdom. Teaching math in primary schools in one example. Lectures are another. In Chapter
3, Section 3, strong evidence is provided that lectures have many limitations, yet many instructors still
believe that this is the most appropriate way to teach their subject.

   However, even the most extensively trained teachers don't always make good teachers if they don't
have the talent and emotional connection with learners, and untrained teachers (which covers virtually
all university instructors), sometimes succeed, even with little experience, because they have a knack or
in-born talent. However, although such instructors are often held up as the triumph of art over science
in teaching, they are in practice very rare. Many of these untutored, brilliant instructors have learned
rapidly on the job by trial and error, with the inevitable casualties along the way.

   For all these reasons, there is no one best way to teach that will fit all circumstances, which is why
arguments over `modern' or `traditional' approaches to teaching reading or math, for example, are often
so sterile. Good teachers usually have an arsenal of tools, methods and approaches that they can draw
on, depending on the circumstances. Also teachers and instructors will differ over what constitutes good
teaching, depending on their understandings of what knowledge is, what matters most in learning, and
their priorities in terms of desirable learning outcomes.

   Nevertheless, these apparent contradictions do not mean that we cannot develop guidelines and
techniques to improve the quality of teaching, or that we have no principles or evidence on which to base
decisions about teaching, even in a rapidly changing digital age. The aim of this book is to provide such
guidelines, while recognizing that one size will not fit all, and that every teacher or instructor will need
to select and adapt the suggestions in this book to their own unique context.

   For this approach to work, though, we need to explore some fundamental issues about teaching and
learning, some of which are rarely addressed in everyday discussions about education. The first and
probably most important is epistemology.

                                                 Activity 2.1: What do you think makes a good teacher?

      1. Write down, in order of priority, what you consider to be the three most important characteristics of a
   good teacher.

      2. Explain why your answer differs from mine.

      For the reasons given above, I give no no feedback (and certainly no `right or wrong answers') to these
   questions.
2.2 Epistemology and theories of learning

Figure 2.2.1 Image: © Freethought Kampala, 2017, via Libguides, University of Pittsburgh

2.2.1 What is epistemology?
In the dinner party scenario, Stephen and Caroline had quite different beliefs about the nature of
knowledge. The issue here is not who was right, but that we all have implicit beliefs about the nature
of knowledge, what constitutes truth, how that truth is best validated, and, from a teaching perspective,
how best to help people to acquire that knowledge. The basis of that belief will vary, depending on the
subject matter, and, in some areas, such as social sciences, even within a common domain of knowledge.

   Our choice of teaching approaches and even the use of technology are absolutely dependent on
beliefs and assumptions we have about the nature of knowledge, about the requirements of our subject
discipline, and about how we think students learn. The way we teach in higher education will be driven

                                                                    67
68 Chapter 2: The nature of knowledge and the implications for teaching

primarily by our beliefs or rather, by the commonly agreed consensus within an academic discipline
about what constitutes valid knowledge in the subject area.

   The nature of knowledge centres on the question of how we know what we know. What makes us
believe that something is `true'? Questions of this kind are epistemological in nature. Hofer and Pintrich
(1997) state:

     Epistemology is a branch of philosophy concerned with the nature and justification of knowledge.

   The famous argument at the British Association in 1860 between Thomas Huxley and the Bishop of
Oxford, Samuel Wilberforce, over the origin of species is a classic example of the clash between beliefs
about the foundations of knowledge. Wilberforce argued that Man was created by God; Huxley argued
that Man evolved through natural selection. Bishop Wilberforce believed he was right because `true'
knowledge was determined through faith and interpretation of holy scripture; Professor Huxley believed
he was right because `true' knowledge was derived through empirical science and rational skepticism.

   An important part of higher education is aimed at developing students' understanding, within a
particular discipline, of the criteria and values that underpin academic study of that discipline, and
these include questions of what constitutes valid knowledge in that subject area. For many experts in a
particular field, these assumptions are often so strong and embedded that the experts may not even be
openly conscious of them unless challenged. But for novices, such as students, it often takes a great deal
of time to understand fully the underlying value systems that drive choice of content and methods of
teaching.

   Our epistemological position therefore has direct practical consequences for how we teach.

2.2.2 Epistemology and theories of learning

Most teachers in the school/k-12 sector will be familiar with the main theories of learning, but because
instructors in post-secondary education are hired primarily for their subject experience, or research
or vocational skills, it is essential to introduce and discuss, if only briefly, these main theories. In
practice, even without formal training or knowledge of different theories of learning, all teachers and
instructors will approach teaching within one of these main theoretical approaches, whether or not they
are aware of the educational jargon surrounding these approaches. Also, as new technologies and new
modes of teaching such as online learning, technology-based teaching, and informal digital networks of
learners have evolved, new theories of learning are beginning to emerge.

   With a knowledge of alternative theoretical approaches, teachers and instructors are in a better
position to make choices about how to approach their teaching in ways that will best fit the perceived
needs of their students, within the very many different learning contexts that teachers and instructors
face. This is particularly important when addressing many of the requirements of learners in a digital age
that are set out in Chapter 1. Furthermore, the choice of or preference for a particular epistemology or
a particular theoretical approach to teaching will have major implications for the way that technology is
used to support teaching.

   In fact, there is a huge amount of literature on theories of learning, and I am aware that the treatment
in this book is cursory, to say the least. Those who would prefer a more detailed introduction to theories
of learning should explore Schunk (2016) or Harasim (2017). The aim of my book though is not to be
comprehensive in terms of in-depth coverage of all learning theories, but to provide a basis on which to
suggest and evaluate different ways of teaching to meet the diverse needs of learners in a digital age.

   The important point here is that every theory of teaching or learning is underpinned by a particular
                                                                                                         2.2 Epistemology and theories of learning 69

assumption or understanding of what constitutes `true' knowledge: in other words by a particular
epistemological position. In the following sections I examine four of the most common theories of
learning, and the underlying epistemologies that drive them.

References

Harasim, L. (2017) Learning Theory and Online Technologies 2nd edition New York/London: Taylor
and Francis

Hofer, B. and Pintrich, P. (1997) `The development of epistemological theories: beliefs about knowledge
and knowing and their relation to learning' Review of Educational Research Vol. 67, No. 1, pp. 88-140

Schunk, D. (2016) Learning Theories: An Educational Perspective: 7th edition London: Pearson
Education

                                                  Activity 2.2 Epistemologies at a dinner party

             1. Draw two columns. Under one column, write down a list of the justifications that Caroline used
                 for her book in Scenario B. Similarly, in the other column, write down Stephen's objections.

             2. What are the common themes underlying each person's justification for their arguments? (Try not
                 to make a value judgement about which were the `best' arguments.)

             3. Would it be possible to reconcile both approaches?
      Feedback to come
2.3 Objectivism and behaviourism

Figure 2.3.1 The solar system: an objective fact?
Image: © International Astronomical Union/Wikipedia

2.3.1 The objectivist epistemology
Objectivists believe that there exists an objective and reliable set of facts, principles and theories that
either have been discovered and delineated or will be over the course of time. This position is linked to
the belief that truth exists outside the human mind, or independently of what an individual may or may
not believe. Thus the laws of physics are constant, although our knowledge of them may evolve as we
discover the `truth' out there.
2.3.2 Objectivist approaches to teaching
A teacher operating from a primarily objectivist view is more likely to believe that a course must present

                                                                    71
72 Chapter 2: The nature of knowledge and the implications for teaching

a body of knowledge to be learned. This may consist of facts, formulas, terminology, principles, theories
and the like.

   The effective transmission of this body of knowledge becomes of central importance. Lectures
and textbooks must be authoritative, informative, organized, and clear. The student's responsibility is
accurately to comprehend, reproduce and add to the knowledge handed down to him or her, within the
guiding epistemological framework of the discipline, based on empirical evidence and the testing of
hypotheses. Course assignments and exams would require students to find `right answers' and justify
them. Original or creative thinking must still operate within the standards of an objectivist approach - in
other words, new knowledge development must meet the rigorous standards of empirical testing within
agreed theoretical frameworks.

   An `objectivist' teacher has to be very much in control of what and how students learn, choosing what
is important to learn, the sequence, the learning activities, and how learners are to be assessed.

2.3.3 Behaviourism

Although initially developed in the 1920s, behaviourism still dominates approaches to teaching and
learning in many places, particularly in the USA. Behaviourism is an objectivist learning theory.
Behaviourist psychology is an attempt to model the study of human behaviour on the methods of the
physical sciences, and therefore concentrates attention on those aspects of behaviour that are capable of
direct observation and measurement. At the heart of behaviourism is the idea that certain behavioural
responses become associated in a mechanistic and invariant way with specific stimuli. Thus a certain
stimulus will evoke a particular response. At its simplest, it may be a purely physiological reflex action,
like the contraction of an iris in the eye when stimulated by bright light.

   However, most human behaviour is more complex. Nevertheless behaviourists have demonstrated in
labs that it is possible to reinforce through reward or punishment the association between any particular
stimulus or event and a particular behavioural response. The bond formed between a stimulus and
response will depend on the existence of an appropriate means of reinforcement at the time of association
between stimulus and response. This depends on random behaviour (trial and error) being appropriately
reinforced as it occurs.

   This is essentially the concept of operant conditioning, a principle most clearly developed by Skinner
(1968). He showed that pigeons could be trained in quite complex behaviour by rewarding particular,
desired responses that might initially occur at random, with appropriate stimuli, such as the provision
of food pellets. He also found that a chain of responses could be developed, without the need for
intervening stimuli to be present, thus linking an initially remote stimulus with a more complex
behaviour. Furthermore, inappropriate or previously learned behaviour could be extinguished by
withdrawing reinforcement. Reinforcement in humans can be quite simple, such as immediate feedback
for an activity or getting a correct answer to a multiple-choice test.
                                                                                                                    2.3 Objectivism and behaviourism 73

Figure 2.3.2 YouTube video/film of B.F. Skinner demonstrating his teaching machine, 1954
Click on image to see video

   You can see a fascinating five minute film of B.F. Skinner describing his teaching machine in a
1954 film captured on YouTube, either by clicking on the picture above or at: http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=jTH3ob1IRFo

   Underlying a behaviourist approach to teaching is the belief that learning is governed by invariant
principles, and these principles are independent of conscious control on the part of the learner.
Behaviourists attempt to maintain a high degree of objectivity in the way they view human activity, and
they generally reject reference to unmeasurable states, such as feelings, attitudes, and consciousness.
Human behaviour is above all seen as predictable and controllable. Behaviourism thus stems from a
strongly objectivist epistemological position.

   Skinner's theory of learning provides the underlying theoretical basis for the development of teaching
machines, measurable learning objectives, computer-assisted instruction, and multiple choice tests.
It often is implicit in the application of artificial intelligence to modifying human behaviour.
Behaviourism's influence is still strong in corporate and military training, and in some areas of science,
engineering, and medical training. It can be of particular value for rote learning of facts or standard
74 Chapter 2: The nature of knowledge and the implications for teaching

procedures such as multiplication tables, for dealing with children or adults with limited cognitive ability
due to brain disorders, or for compliance with industrial or business standards or processes that are
invariant and do not require individual judgement. It is also the underlying methodology of social media
such as Facebook for influencing behaviour, through `likes', number of hits and connections, and other
`status' rewards.

   Behaviourism, with its emphasis on reward and punishment as drivers of learning, and on pre-
defined and measurable outcomes, is the basis of populist conceptions of learning among many parents,
politicians, and, it should be noted, computer scientists interested in automating learning. It is not
surprising then that there has also been a tendency until recently to see technology, and in
particular computer-aided instruction, as being closely associated with behaviourist approaches to
learning, although we shall see in Chapter 5, Section 4 that computers do not necessarily have to be used
in a behaviourist way.

   Lastly, although behaviourism is an `objectivist' approach to teaching, it is not the only way of
teaching `objectively'. For instance, problem-based learning can still take a highly objective approach to
knowledge and learning.

References

Skinner, B. (1968) The Technology of Teaching, New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts

                                                      Activity 2.3 Defining the limits of behaviourism

      1. What areas of knowledge do you think would be best `taught' or learned through a behaviourist approach?
      2. What areas of knowledge do you think would NOT be appropriately taught through a behaviourist
   approach?
      3. What are your reasons?
      Feedback to come
2.4 Cognitivism

                                       Figure 2.4.1 Benjamin Bloom Image: Wikipedia

2.4.1 What is cognitivism?
An obvious criticism of behaviourism is that it treats humans as a black box, where inputs into the black
box, and outputs from the black box, are known and measurable, but what goes on inside the black box is
ignored or not considered of interest. However, humans have the ability for conscious thought, decision-
making, emotions, and the ability to express ideas through social discourse, all of which are highly
significant for learning. Thus we will likely get a better understanding of learning if we try to find out
what goes on inside the black box.

   Cognitivists therefore have focused on identifying mental processes - internal and conscious
representations of the world - that they consider are essential for human learning. Fontana (1981)
summarises the cognitive approach to learning as follows:

     `The cognitive approach ... holds that if we are to understand learning we cannot confine ourselves
     to observable behaviour, but must also concern ourselves with the learner's ability mentally to re-
     organize his psychological field (i.e. his inner world of concepts, memories, etc.) in response to

                                                                    75
76 Chapter 2: The nature of knowledge and the implications for teaching

     experience. This latter approach therefore lays stress not only on the environment, but upon the way
     in which the individual interprets and tries to make sense of the environment. It sees the individual
     not as the somewhat mechanical product of his environment, but as an active agent in the learning
     process, deliberately trying to process and categorize the stream of information fed into him by the
     external world.' (p. 148)

   Thus the search for rules, principles or relationships in processing new information, and the search
for meaning and consistency in reconciling new information with previous knowledge, are key concepts
in cognitive psychology. Cognitive psychology is concerned with identifying and describing mental
processes that affect learning, thinking and behaviour, and the conditions that influence those mental
processes.

2.4.2 Cognitivist learning theory

The most widely used theories of cognitivism in education are based on Bloom's taxonomies of learning
objectives (Bloom et al., 1956), which are related to the development of different kinds of learning
skills, or ways of learning. Bloom and his colleagues claimed that there are three important domains of
learning:

         · cognitive (thinking)
         · affective (feeling)
         · psycho-motor (doing).

Cognitivism focuses on the `thinking' domain. In more recent years, Anderson and Krathwohl (2000)
have slightly modified Bloom et al.'s original taxonomy, adding `creating' new knowledge:
                                                                                                                                             2.4 Cognitivism 77

Figure 2.4.2 Cognitive domain
Image: © Atherton J S (2013) CC-NC-ND

   Bloom et al. also argued that there is a hierarchy of learning, meaning that learners need to progress
through each of the levels, from remembering through to evaluating/creating. As psychologists delve
deeper into each of these cognitive activities to understand the underlying mental processes, it becomes
an increasingly reductionist exercise (see Figure 2.4.3 below).
78 Chapter 2: The nature of knowledge and the implications for teaching

Figure 2.4.3 © Faizel Mohidin, UsingMindMaps, 2011.

2.4.3 Applications of cognitivist learning theory
Cognitive approaches to learning, with a focus on comprehension, abstraction, analysis, synthesis,
generalization, evaluation, decision-making, problem-solving and creative thinking, seem to fit much
better with higher education than behaviourism, but even in school/k-12 education, a cognitivist
approach would mean for instance focusing on teaching learners how to learn, on developing stronger
or new mental processes for future learning, and on developing deeper and constantly changing
understanding of concepts and ideas.

   Cognitive approaches to learning cover a very wide range. At the objectivist end, cognitivists
consider basic mental processes to be genetic or hard-wired, but can be programmed or modified by
external factors, such as new experiences. Early cognitivists in particular were interested in the concept
of mind as computer, and more recently brain research has led to a search for linking cognition to the
development and reinforcement of neural networks in the brain.

   In terms of practice, this concept of mind as computer has led to several technology-based
developments in teaching, including:

         · intelligent tutoring systems, a more refined version of teaching machines, based on breaking
            down learning into a series of manageable steps, and analysing learners' responses to direct
                                                                                                                                             2.4 Cognitivism 79

            them to the most appropriate next step. Adaptive learning is the latest extension of such
            developments;
         · artificial intelligence, which seeks to represent in computer software the mental processes
            used in human learning (which of course if successful would result in computers replacing
            many human activities - such as teaching, if learning is considered in an objectivist
            framework);
         · pre-determined learning outcomes, based on an analysis and development of different kinds
            of cognitive activities, such as comprehension, analysis, synthesis, and evaluation;
         · problem-based learning, based on an analysis of the thinking processes successful problem-
            solvers use to solve problems;
         · instructional design approaches that attempt to manage the design of teaching to ensure
            successful achievement of pre-determined learning outcomes or objectives.

Cognitivists have increased our understanding of how humans process and make sense of new
information, how we access, interpret, integrate, process, organize and manage knowledge, and have
given us a better understanding of the conditions that affect learners' mental states.

References

Anderson, L. and Krathwohl, D. (eds.) (2001). A Taxonomy for Learning, Teaching, and Assessing: A
Revision of Bloom's Taxonomy of Educational Objectives New York: Longman

   Atherton J. S. (2013) Learning and Teaching; Bloom's taxonomy, retrieved 7 May 2019
   Bloom, B. S.; Engelhart, M. D.; Furst, E. J.; Hill, W. H.; Krathwohl, D. R. (1956). Taxonomy of
educational objectives: The classification of educational goals. Handbook I: Cognitive domain. New
York: David McKay Company
   Fontana, D. (1981) Psychology for Teachers London: Macmillan/British Psychological Society

                                                        Activity 2.4 Defining the limits of cognitivism

      1. What areas of knowledge do you think would be best `taught' or learned through a cognitivist approach?
      2. What areas of knowledge do you think would NOT be appropriately taught through
   a cognitivist approach?
      3. What are your reasons?
      Feedback to come
2.5 Constructivism

Figure 2.5.1 Project work is one form of constructivist learning
Image: © Jim Olive, Environmental Protection Agency/Wikipedia, 1972

2.5.1 What is constructivism?
Both behaviourist and some elements of cognitive theories of learning are deterministic, in the sense
that behaviour and learning are believed to be rule-based and operate under predictable and constant
conditions over which the individual learner has no or little control. However, constructivists
emphasise the importance of consciousness, free will and social influences on learning. Carl Rogers
(1969) stated that:

     every individual exists in a continually changing world of experience in which he is the center.

                                                                    81
82 Chapter 2: The nature of knowledge and the implications for teaching

   The external world is interpreted within the context of that private world. The belief that humans are
essentially active, free and strive for meaning in personal terms has been around for a long time, and is
an essential component of constructivism.

   Constructivists believe that knowledge is essentially subjective in nature, constructed from our
perceptions and mutually agreed upon conventions. According to this view, we construct new knowledge
rather than simply acquire it via memorization or through transmission from those who know to those
who don't know. Constructivists believe that meaning or understanding is achieved by assimilating
information, relating it to our existing knowledge, and cognitively processing it (in other words, thinking
or reflecting on new information). Social constructivists believe that this process works best through
discussion and social interaction, allowing us to test and challenge our own understandings with
those of others. For a constructivist, even physical laws exist because they have been constructed by
people from evidence, observation, and deductive or intuitive thinking, and, most importantly, because
certain communities of people (in this example, scientists) have mutually agreed what constitutes valid
knowledge.

   Constructivists argue that individuals consciously strive for meaning to make sense of their
environment in terms of past experience and their present state. It is an attempt to create order in their
minds out of disorder, to resolve incongruities, and to reconcile external realities with prior experience.
The means by which this is done are complex and multi-faceted, from personal reflection, seeking new
information, to testing ideas through social contact with others. Problems are resolved, and incongruities
sorted out, through strategies such as seeking relationships between what was known and what is
new, identifying similarities and differences, and testing hypotheses or assumptions. Reality is always
tentative and dynamic.

   One consequence of constructivist theory is that each individual is unique, because the interaction of
their different experiences, and their search for personal meaning, results in each person being different
from anyone else. Thus behaviour is not predictable or deterministic, at least not at the individual
level (which is a key distinguishing feature from cognitivism, which seeks general rules of thinking
that apply to all humans). The key point here is that for constructivists, learning is seen as essentially
a social process, requiring communication between learner, teacher and others. This social process
cannot effectively be replaced by technology, although technology may facilitate it.

2.5.2 Constructivist approaches to teaching

For many educators, the social context of learning is critical. Ideas are tested not just on the teacher, but
with fellow students, friends and colleagues. Furthermore, knowledge is mainly acquired through social
processes or institutions that are socially constructed: schools, universities, and increasingly these days,
online communities. Thus what is taken to be `valued' knowledge is also socially constructed.

   Constructivists believe that learning is a constantly dynamic process. Understanding of concepts or
principles develops and becomes deeper over time. For instance, as a very young child, we understand
the concept of heat through touch. As we get older we realise that it can be quantified, such as
minus 20 centigrade being very cold (unless you live in Manitoba, where -20C would be considered
normal). As we study science, we begin to understand heat differently, for instance, as a form of
energy transfer, then as a form of energy associated with the motion of atoms or molecules. Each `new'
component needs to be integrated with prior understandings and also integrated with other related
concepts, including other components of molecular physics and chemistry.

   Thus `constructivist' teachers place a strong emphasis on learners developing personal meaning
                                                                                                                                         2.5 Constructivism 83

through reflection, analysis and the gradual building of layers or depths of knowledge through conscious
and ongoing mental processing. Reflection, seminars, discussion forums, small group work, and projects
are key methods used to support constructivist learning in campus-based teaching (discussed in more
detail in Chapter 3), and online collaborative learning, and communities of practice are
important constructivist methods in online learning (Chapter 4).

   Although problem-solving can be approached in an objectivist way, by pre-determining a set of steps
or processes to go through pre-determined by `experts', it can also be approached in a constructivist
manner. The level of teacher guidance can vary in a constructivist approach to problem-solving, from
none at all, to providing some guidelines on how to solve the problem, to directing students to possible
sources of information that may be relevant to solving that problem, to getting students to brainstorm
particular solutions. Students will probably work in groups, help each other and compare solutions to the
problem. There may not be considered one `correct' solution to the problem, but the group may consider
some solutions better than others, depending on the agreed criteria of success for solving the problem.

   It can be seen that there can be `degrees' of constructivism, since in practice the teacher may well
act as first among equals, and help direct the process so that `suitable' outcomes are achieved. The
fundamental difference is that students have to work towards constructing their own meaning, testing it
against `reality', and further constructing meaning as a result.

   Constructivists also approach technology for teaching differently from behaviourists. From a
constructivist perspective, brains have more plasticity, adaptability and complexity than current
computer software programs. Other uniquely human factors, such as emotion, motivation, free
will, values, and a wider range of senses, make human learning very different from the way computers
operate. Following this reasoning, education would be much better served if computer scientists tried to
make software to support learning more reflective of the way human learning operates, rather than trying
to fit human learning into the current restrictions of behaviourist computer programming. This will be
discussed in more detail in Chapter 4, Section 4.

   Although constructivist approaches can be and have been applied to all fields of knowledge, they
are more commonly found in approaches to teaching in the humanities, social sciences, education, and
other less quantitative subject areas.

References

Rogers, C. (1969) Freedom to Learn Columbus, OH: Charles E. Merrill Publishing Co.

There are many books on constructivism but some of the best are the original works of some of the early
educators and researchers, in particular:

   Piaget, J. and Inhelder, B., (1958) The Growth of Logical Thinking from Childhood to
Adolescence New York: Basic Books, 1958

   Searle, J. (1996) The construction of social reality New York: Simon & Shuster
   Vygotsky, L. (1978) Mind in Society: Development of Higher Psychological Processes Cambridge
MA: Harvard University Press
84 Chapter 2: The nature of knowledge and the implications for teaching

                                                     Activity 2.5 Defining the limits of constructivism

      1. What areas of knowledge do you think would be best `taught' or learned through a constructivist
   approach?

      2. What areas of knowledge do you think would NOT be appropriately taught through a constructivist
   approach?

      3. What are your reasons?
      Feedback to come
2.6 Connectivism

                                              Figure 2.6.1 Stephen Downes Image:
                                              Wikipedia

                                           Figure 2.6.2 George Siemens Image:
                                           Wikipedia

2.6.1 What is connectivism?
Another epistemological position, connectivism, has emerged in recent years that is particularly relevant
to a digital society. Connectivism is still being refined and developed, and it is currently highly
controversial, with many critics.

   In connectivism it is the collective connections between all the `nodes' in a network that result in new
forms of knowledge. According to Siemens (2005), knowledge is created beyond the level of individual
human participants, and is constantly shifting and changing. Knowledge in networks is not controlled
or created by any formal organization, although organizations can and should `plug in' to this world of

                                                                    85
86 Chapter 2: The nature of knowledge and the implications for teaching

constant information flow, and draw meaning from it. Knowledge in connectivism is a chaotic, shifting
phenomenon as nodes come and go and as information flows across networks that themselves are inter-
connected with myriad other networks.

   The significance of connectivism is that its proponents argue that the Internet changes the essential
nature of knowledge. `The pipe is more important than the content within the pipe,' to quote Siemens
again. Downes (2007) makes a clear distinction between constructivism and connectivism:

     In connectivism, a phrase like "constructing meaning" makes no sense. Connections form
     naturally, through a process of association, and are not "constructed" through some sort of
     intentional action. ...Hence, in connectivism, there is no real concept of transferring knowledge,
     making knowledge, or building knowledge. Rather, the activities we undertake when we conduct
     practices in order to learn are more like growing or developing ourselves and our society in certain
     (connected) ways.

Figure 2.6.3: A map of connectivism Image: © pkab.wordpress.com. Click and drag for a larger image.
                                                                                                                                           2.6 Connectivism 87

2.6.2 Connectivism and learning

For Siemens (2005), it is the connections and the way information flows that result in knowledge
existing beyond the individual. Learning becomes the ability to tap into significant flows of information,
and to follow those flows that are significant. He argues that:

     Connectivism presents a model of learning that acknowledges the tectonic shifts in society where
     learning is no longer an internal, individualistic activity....Learning (defined as actionable
     knowledge) can reside outside of ourselves (within an organization or a database).

Siemens (2005) identifies the principles of connectivism as follows:

         · Learning and knowledge rests in diversity of opinions.
         · Learning is a process of connecting specialized nodes or information sources.
         · Learning may reside in non-human appliances.
         · Capacity to know more is more critical than what is currently known
         · Nurturing and maintaining connections is needed to facilitate continual learning.
         · Ability to see connections between fields, ideas, and concepts is a core skill.
         · Currency (accurate, up-to-date knowledge) is the intent of all connectivist learning activities.
         · Decision-making is itself a learning process. Choosing what to learn and the meaning of

            incoming information is seen through the lens of a shifting reality. While there is a right
            answer now, it may be wrong tomorrow due to alterations in the information climate affecting
            the decision.

Downes (2007) states that:

     at its heart, connectivism is the thesis that knowledge is distributed across a network of connections,
     and therefore that learning consists of the ability to construct and traverse those
     networks....[Connectivism] implies a pedagogy that:

           (a) seeks to describe `successful' networks (as identified by their properties, which I have
           characterized as diversity, autonomy, openness, and connectivity) and

           (b) seeks to describe the practices that lead to such networks, both in the individual and in
           society - which I have characterized as modelling and demonstration (on the part of a teacher)
           - and practice and reflection (on the part of a learner).

2.6.3 Applications of connectivism to teaching and learning

Siemens, Downes and Cormier constructed the first massive open online course (MOOC), Connectivism
and Connective Knowledge 2011, partly to explain and partly to model a connectivist approach to
learning.
88 Chapter 2: The nature of knowledge and the implications for teaching

   Connectivists such as Siemens and Downes tend to be somewhat vague about the role of teachers
or instructors, as the focus of connectivism is more on individual participants, networks and the flow
of information and the new forms of knowledge that result. The main purpose of a teacher appears to
be to provide the initial learning environment and context that brings learners together, and to help
learners construct their own personal learning environments that enable them to connect to `successful'
networks, with the assumption that learning will automatically occur as a result, through exposure to
the flow of information and the individual's autonomous reflection on its meaning. There is no need for
formal institutions to support this kind of learning, especially since such learning often depends heavily
on social media readily available to all participants.

   There are numerous criticisms of the connectivist approach to teaching and learning (see Chapter 5,
Section 4). Some of these criticisms may be overcome as practice improves, as new tools for assessment,
and for organizing co-operative and collaborative work with massive numbers, are developed, and
as more experience is gained. More importantly, connectivism is really the first theoretical attempt to
radically re-examine the implications for learning of the Internet and the explosion of new
communications technologies.

References and further reading

AlDahdouh, A., et al. (2015) Understanding knowledge network, learning and connectivism,
International Journal of Instructional Technology and Distance Learning, Vol. 12, No.10

   Downes, S. (2007) What connectivism is Half An Hour, February 3
   Downes, S. (2014) The MOOC of One, Stephen's Web, March 10
   Siemens, G. (2005) Connectivism: a theory for the digital age International Journal of Instructional
Technology and Distance Learning, Vol. 2, No. 1.

                                                      Activity 2.6 Defining the limits of connectivism

      1. What areas of knowledge do you think would be best `taught' or learned through a connectivist approach?

      2. What areas of knowledge do you think would NOT be appropriately taught through
   a connectivist approach?

      3. What are your reasons?

      You might like to come back to your answer after you have read Chapter 6 on MOOCs. Otherwise no
   feedback is provided for this activity.
2.7 Is the nature of knowledge changing?

Figure 2.7 Academic knowledge is a second-order form of knowledge that seeks abstractions and generalizations
based on reasoning and evidence Image: © Wallpoper/Wikipedia

2.7.1 Knowledge and technology
Before moving on to the more pragmatic elements of teaching in a digital age, it is necessary to address
the question of whether the development of digital technologies has actually changed the nature of
knowledge, because if that is the case, then this will influence strongly what needs to be taught as well
as how it will be taught.

                                                                    89
90 Chapter 2: The nature of knowledge and the implications for teaching

   Connectivists such as Siemens and Downes argue that the Internet has changed the nature of
knowledge. They argue that `important' or `valid' knowledge now is different from prior forms of
knowledge, particularly academic knowledge. Downes (2007) has argued that new technologies allow
for the de-institutionalisation of learning. Chris Anderson, the editor of Wired Magazine and now
Curator of Ted Talks, has argued (2008) that massive meta-data correlations can replace `traditional'
scientific approaches to creating new knowledge:

   Google's founding philosophy is that we don't know why this page is better than that one: If the statistics of
   incoming links say it is, that's good enough. No semantic or causal analysis is required. ...This is a world
   where massive amounts of data and applied mathematics replace every other tool that might be brought to
   bear. Out with every theory of human behavior, from linguistics to sociology. Forget taxonomy, ontology, and
   psychology. Who knows why people do what they do? The point is they do it, and we can track and measure it
   with unprecedented fidelity. With enough data, the numbers speak for themselves.

      The big target here isn't advertising, though. It's science. The scientific method is built around testable
   hypotheses. These models, for the most part, are systems visualized in the minds of scientists. The models are
   then tested, and experiments confirm or falsify theoretical models of how the world works. This is the way
   science has worked for hundreds of years. Scientists are trained to recognize that correlation is not causation,
   that no conclusions should be drawn simply on the basis of correlation between X and Y (it could just be a
   coincidence). Instead, you must understand the underlying mechanisms that connect the two. Once you have
   a model, you can connect the data sets with confidence. Data without a model is just noise. But faced with
   massive data, this approach to science -- hypothesize, model, test -- is becoming obsolete.'

(It should be noted this was written before derivative-based investments caused financial markets to
collapse, mainly because those using them didn't understand the underlying logic that created the data.)

   Jane Gilbert's book, `Catching the Knowledge Wave' (2005), directly addresses the assumption that
the nature of knowledge is changing. Drawing on publications by Manuel Castells (2009) and Jean-
François Lyotard (1984), she writes (p. 35):

   `Castells says that...knowledge is not an object but a series of networks and flows...the new knowledge is a
   process not a product...it is produced not in the minds of individuals but in the interactions between people.....

      According to Lyotard, the traditional idea that acquiring knowledge trains the mind would become obsolete,
   as would the idea of knowledge as a set of universal truths. Instead, there will be many truths, many
   knowledges and many forms of reason. As a result... the boundaries between traditional disciplines are
   dissolving, traditional methods of representing knowledge (books, academic papers, and so on) are becoming
   less important, and the role of traditional academics or experts are undergoing major change.'

Back in the 1960s Marshall McLuhan (1964) argued that the medium is the message; the way
information is represented and transmitted is changed and so is our focus and understanding as
information moves between and within different media. If information and knowledge are now
represented and more significantly now flow differently, how does that affect educational processes such
as teaching and learning?

   One way knowledge is certainly changing is in the way it is represented. It should be remembered that
Socrates (according to Plato) criticised writing because it could not lead to `true' knowledge which came
only from verbal dialogue and oratory. Writing however is important because it provides a permanent
record of knowledge. The printing press was important because it enabled the written word to spread to
many more people. As a consequence, scholars could challenge and better interpret, through reflection,
what others had written, and more accurately and carefully argue their own positions. Many scholars
believe that one consequence of the development of mass printing was the Renaissance and the age of
enlightenment, and modern academia consequently came to depend very heavily on the print medium.
                                                                                                          2.7 Is the nature of knowledge changing? 91

   Now we have other ways to record and transmit knowledge that can be studied and reflected upon,
such as video, audio, animations, and graphics, and the Internet does expand enormously the speed and
range by which these representations of knowledge can be transmitted. We shall also see in Chapter 8
and Chapter 9 that that media are not neutral, but represent meaning in different ways.

2.7.2 Knowledge as a commodity

All the above authors agree that the `new' knowledge in the knowledge society is about the
commercialisation or commodification of knowledge: `it is defined not through what it is, but through
what it can do.' (Gilbert, p.35). `The capacity to own, buy and sell knowledge has contributed, in major
ways, to the development of the new, knowledge-based societies.' (p.39)

   In a knowledge-based society, particular emphasis is placed on the utility of knowledge for
commercial purposes. As a result there is more emphasis on certain types of immediately practical
knowledge over longer term research, for instance, but because of the strong relationship between pure
and applied knowledge, this is probably a mistake, even in terms of economic development.

   The issue is not so much the nature of knowledge, but how students or learners come to acquire that
knowledge and learn how it can be used. As I argued in Chapter 1, this requires more emphasis on
developing and learning skills of how best to apply knowledge, rather than a focus on merely teaching
content. Also it will be argued later in the book that students have many more sources of information
besides the teacher or instructor and that a key educational issue is the management of vast amounts of
knowledge. Since knowledge is dynamic, expanding and constantly changing, learners need to develop
the skills and learn to use the tools that will enable them to continue to learn.

   But does this mean that knowledge itself is now different? I will argue that in a digital age, some
aspects of knowledge do change considerably, but others do not, at least in essence. In particular, I argue
that academic knowledge, in terms of its values and goals, does not and should not change a great deal,
but the way it is represented and applied will and should change.

2.7.3 The nature of academic knowledge

Academic knowledge is a specific form of knowledge that has characteristics that differentiate it
from other kinds of knowledge, and particularly from knowledge or beliefs based solely on direct
personal experience. In summary, academic knowledge is a second-order form of knowledge that seeks
abstractions and generalizations based on reasoning and evidence.

   Fundamental components of academic knowledge are

         · transparency,

         · codification,

         · reproduction, and

         · communicability.

Transparency means that the source of the knowledge can be traced and verified. Codification means
that the knowledge can be consistently represented in some form (words, symbols, video) that enables
interpretation by someone other than the originator. Knowledge can be reproduced or have multiple
copies. Lastly, knowledge must be in a form such that it can be communicated and challenged by others.

   Laurillard (2001) recognises the importance of relating the student's direct experience of the world to
92 Chapter 2: The nature of knowledge and the implications for teaching

an understanding of academic concepts and processes, but she argues that teaching at a university level
must go beyond direct experience to reflection, analysis and explanations of those direct experiences.
Because every academic discipline has a specific set of conventions and assumptions about the nature
of knowledge within its discipline, students in higher education need to change the perspectives of their
everyday experience to match those of the subject domain.

   As a result, Laurillard argues that university teaching is `essentially a rhetorical activity, persuading
students to change the way they experience the world' (p.28). Laurillard then goes on to make the
point that because academic knowledge has this second-order character, it relies heavily on symbolic
representation, such as language, mathematical symbols, `or any symbol system that can represent a
description of the world, and requires interpretation' (p.27) to enable this mediation to take place.

   If academic knowledge requires mediation, then this has major significance for the use of technology.
Language (i.e. reading and speaking) is only one channel for mediating knowledge. Media such as video,
audio, and computing can also provide teachers with alternative channels of mediation.

   Laurillard's reflections on the nature of academic knowledge are a counter-balance to the view that
students can automatically construct knowledge through argument and discussion with their peers,
or self-directed study, or the wisdom of the crowd. For academic knowledge, the role of the teacher
is to help students understand not just the facts or concepts in a subject discipline, but the rules and
conventions for acquiring and validating knowledge within that subject discipline. Academic knowledge
shares common values or criteria, making academic knowledge itself a particular epistemological
approach.

2.7.4 Academic versus applied knowledge

In a knowledge-based society, knowledge that leads to innovation and commercial activity is now
recognised as critical to economic development. Again, there is a tendency to argue that this kind of
knowledge - `commercial' knowledge - is different from academic knowledge. I would argue that
sometimes it is and sometimes it isn't.

   I have no argument with the point of view that knowledge is the driver of most modern economies,
and that this represents a major shift from the `old' industrial economy, where natural resources (coal,
oil, iron), machinery and cheap manual labour were the predominant drivers. I do though challenge the
idea that the nature of knowledge has undergone radical changes.

   The difficulty I have with the broad generalisations about the changing nature of knowledge is that
there have always been different kinds of knowledge. One of my first jobs was in a brewery in the East
End of London in 1959. I was one of several students hired during our summer vacation. One of my
fellow student workers was a brilliant mathematician. Every lunch hour the regular brewery workers
played cards (three card brag) for what seemed to us large sums of money, but they would never let us
play with them. My student friend was desperate to get a game, and eventually, on our last week, they
let him in. They promptly won all his wages. He knew the numbers and the odds, but there was still a lot
of non-academic knowledge he didn't know about playing cards for money, especially against a group
of friends playing together rather than against each other. Gilbert's point is that academic knowledge has
always been more highly valued in education than `everyday' knowledge. However, in the `real' world,
all kinds of knowledge are valued, depending on the context. Thus while beliefs about what constitutes
`important' knowledge may be changing, this does not mean that the nature of academic knowledge is
changing.

   Gilbert argues that in a knowledge society, there has been a shift in valuing applied knowledge over
academic knowledge in the broader society, but this has not been recognised or accepted in education
                                                                                                          2.7 Is the nature of knowledge changing? 93

(and particularly the school system). She sees academic knowledge as associated with narrow disciplines
such as mathematics and philosophy, whereas applied knowledge is knowing how to do things, and
hence by definition tends to be multi-disciplinary. Gilbert argues (p. 159-160) that academic knowledge
is:

   `authoritative, objective, and universal knowledge. It is abstract, rigorous, timeless - and difficult. It is
   knowledge that goes beyond the here and now knowledge of everyday experience to a higher plane of
   understanding.....In contrast, applied knowledge is practical knowledge that is produced by putting academic
   knowledge into practice. It is gained through experience, by trying things out until they work in real-world
   situations.'

Other kinds of knowledge that don't fit the definition of academic knowledge are those kinds built on
experience, traditional crafts, trial-and-error, and quality improvement through continuous minor change
built on front-line worker experience - not to mention how to win at three card brag.

   I agree that academic knowledge is different from everyday knowledge, but I challenge the view that
academic knowledge is `pure', not applied. It is too narrow a definition, because it thus excludes all
the professional schools and disciplines, such as engineering, medicine, law, business, education that
`apply' academic knowledge. These are just as accepted and `valued' parts of universities and colleges
as the `pure' disciplines of humanities and science, and their activities meet all the criteria for academic
knowledge set out by Gilbert.

   Making a distinction between academic and applied knowledge misses the real point about the kind
of education needed in a knowledge society and a digital age. It is not just knowledge - both pure and
applied - that is important, but also digital literacy, skills associated with lifelong learning, and attitudes/
ethics and social behaviour.

   Knowledge is not just `stuff', or fixed content, but it is dynamic. Knowledge is also not just `flow'.
Content or `stuff' does matter as well as the discussions or interpretations we have about content. Where
does the `stuff' come from that ebbs and flows over the discussions on the internet? It may not originate
or end in the heads of individuals, but it certainly flows through them, where it is interpreted and
transformed. Knowledge may be dynamic and changing, but at some point each person does settle, if
only for a brief time, on what they think knowledge to be, even if over time that knowledge changes,
develops or becomes more deeply understood. Thus `stuff' or content does matter, though knowing (a)
how to acquire content and (b) what to do with content we have acquired, is even more important.

   Thus it is not sufficient just to teach academic content (applied or not). It is equally important also
to enable students to develop the ability to know how to find, analyse, organise and apply information/
content within their professional and personal activities, to take responsibility for their own learning, and
to be flexible and adaptable in developing new knowledge and skills. All this is needed because of the
explosion in the quantity of knowledge in any professional field that makes it impossible to memorise
or even be aware of all the developments that are happening in the field, and the need to keep up-to-date
within the field after graduating.

   To do this learners must have access to appropriate and relevant content, know how to find it, and must
have opportunities to apply and practice what they have learned. Thus learning has to be a combination
of content, skills and attitudes, and increasingly this needs to apply to all areas of study. This does not
mean that there is no room to search for universal truths, or fundamental laws or principles, but this
needs to be embedded within a broader learning environment. This should include the ability to use
digital technologies as an integral part of learning, but tied to appropriate content and skills within their
area of study.

   Also, the importance of non-academic knowledge in the growth of knowledge-based industries
94 Chapter 2: The nature of knowledge and the implications for teaching

should not be ignored. These other forms of knowledge have proved just as valuable. For instance it is
important within a company to manage the every-day knowledge of employees through better internal
communication, encouraging external networking, and rewards for collaboration and participation in
improving products and services.

2.7.5 The relevance of academic knowledge in the knowledge society

An over-emphasis on the functionality of knowledge will result in `academic knowledge'
being implicitly seen as irrelevant to the knowledge society. However, it has been the explosion in
academic knowledge that has formed the basis of the knowledge society. It was academic development
in sciences, medicine and engineering that led to the development of the Internet, biotechnology, digital
financial services, computer software and telecommunications, for example. Indeed, it is no coincidence
that those countries most advanced in knowledge-based industries were those that have the highest
participation rates in university education.

   Thus while academic knowledge is not `pure' or timeless or objectively `true', it is the principles
or values that drive academic knowledge that are important. Although it often falls short, the goal
of academic studies is to reach for deep understanding, general principles, empirically-based theories,
timelessness, etc., even if knowledge is dynamic, changing and constantly evolving. Academic
knowledge is not perfect, but does have value because of the standards it requires. Nor have academic
knowledge or methods run out of steam. There is evidence all around us: academic knowledge is
generating new drug treatments, new understandings of climate change, better technology, and certainly
new knowledge generation.

   Indeed, more than ever, we need to sustain the elements of academic knowledge, such as rigour,
abstraction, evidence-based generalisation, empirical evidence, rationalism and academic independence.
It is these elements of education that have enabled the rapid economic growth both in the industrial and
the knowledge societies. The difference now is that these elements alone are not enough; they need to be
combined with new approaches to teaching and learning.

2.7.6 Academic knowledge and other forms of knowledge

As mentioned earlier, there are many other forms of knowledge that are useful or valued besides
academic knowledge. There is increasing emphasis from government and business on the development
of vocational or trades skills. Teachers or instructors are responsible for developing these areas of
knowledge as well. In particular, skills that require manual dexterity, performance skills in music or
drama, production skills in entertainment, skills in sport or sports management, are all examples of forms
of knowledge that have not traditionally been considered `academic'.

   However, one feature of a digital society is that increasingly these vocational skills are now requiring
a much higher proportion of academic knowledge or intellectual and conceptual knowledge as well as
performance skills. For example higher levels of ability in math and/or science are now demanded of
many trades and professions such as network engineers, power engineers, auto mechanics, nurses and
other health professionals. The `knowledge' component of their work has increased over recent years.

   The nature of the job is also changing. For instance, auto mechanics are now increasingly focused on
diagnosis and problem-solving as the value component of vehicles becomes increasingly digitally based
and components are replaced rather than repaired. Nurse practitioners now are undertaking areas of work
previously done by doctors or medical specialists. Many workers now also need strong inter-personal
skills, especially if they are in front-line contact with the public. At the same time, as we saw in Chapter
                                                                                                          2.7 Is the nature of knowledge changing? 95

1, more traditionally academic areas are needing to focus more on skills development, so the somewhat
artificial boundaries between pure and applied knowledge are beginning to break down.

   In summary, a majority of jobs now require both academic and skills-based knowledge. Academic and
skills-based knowledge also need to be integrated and contextualised. As a result, the demands on those
responsible for teaching and instruction have increased, but above all, these new demands of teachers in
a digital age mean that their own skills level needs to be increased to cope with these demands.

                                                   Activity 2.7 Epistemology and academic knowledge

      1. Can you state the epistemological position that drives your teaching? Does it fit with any of the
   epistemological positions described in this chapter? How does that work out in practice in terms of what you
   do?

      2. Can you justify the role of `teacher' in a digital society where individuals can find all they need on the
   Internet and from friends or even strangers? How do you think that the role of the teacher might, could or
   should change as a result of the development of a digital society? Or are there `constants' that will remain?

      3. Briefly define the subject area or speciality in which you are teaching. Do you agree that academic
   knowledge is different from everyday knowledge? If so, to what extent is academic knowledge important for
   your learners? Is its importance growing or diminishing? Why? If it is diminishing, what is it being replaced
   with - or what should replace it?

      Feedback to come

References

Anderson, C. (2008) The End of Theory: The Data Deluge Makes the Scientific Method Obsolete Wired
Magazine, 16.07

   Castells, M. (2009) The Rise of the Network Society Hoboken NJ: Wiley
   Downes, S. (2007) What connectivism is Half An Hour, February 3
   Gilbert, J. (2005) Catching the Knowledge Wave: the Knowledge Society and the Future of
Education Wellington, NZ: New Zealand Council for Educational Research
   Laurillard, D. (2001) Rethinking University Teaching: A Conversational Framework for the Effective
Use of Learning Technologies New York/London: Routledge
   Lyotard, J-F, (1984) The Post-Modern Condition: A Report on Knowledge Manchester: Manchester
University Press
   McLuhan, M. (1964) Understanding Media London/New York: Routledge
   Surowiecki, J. (2004) The Wisdom of Crowds: Why the Many Are Smarter Than the Few and How
Collective Wisdom Shapes Business, Economies, Societies and Nations New York: Random House
   See also:
   Rugg, G. (2014) Education versus training, academic knowledge versus craft skills: Some useful
concepts Hyde and Rugg, February 23
2.8 Summary

Figure 2.8.1 The green boxes are left open until we cover teaching methods (the bottom line) in Chapters 3 and 4

   I have chosen just a few epistemological approaches that influence teaching and learning, but I could
have chosen many others. Theologies reflect another epistemological approach, based on faith. Elements
of scholasticism can still be found in elite universities such as Oxford and Cambridge, particularly in
their tutorial system.

   It can be seen then that there are different epistemologies that influence teaching today. Furthermore,
much to the consternation and confusion of many students, teachers themselves will have different
epistemological positions, not just across different disciplines, but sometimes within the same discipline.
For instance, subject areas such as psychology and economics may contain different epistemological

                                                                    97
98 Chapter 2: The nature of knowledge and the implications for teaching

foundations in different parts of the curriculum: statistics is validated differently from Freudian analysis
or behavioural factors that influence investor behaviour.

   Epistemological positions are rarely explicitly discussed with students, are not always consistent even
within a subject discipline, and are not mutually exclusive. For instance a teacher may deliberately
choose to use a more objectivist approach with novice students, then move to a more constructivist
approach when the students have learned the basic facts and concepts within a topic through an
objectivist approach. Even within the same lesson, the teacher may shift epistemological positions,
often causing confusion for students.

   At this point, I'm not taking sides (although I do favour in general a more constructivist philosophy).
Arguments can be made for or against any of these epistemological positions. However, we need to be
aware that knowledge and consequently teaching is not a pure, objective concept, but driven by different
values and beliefs about the nature of knowledge.

   Arguments are also being made today that academic knowledge is now redundant and is being or will
be replaced by networked learning or more applied learning. I have made the case though that there
are strong reasons to sustain and further develop academic knowledge, but with a focus as much on the
development of skills as on learning content.

   Different theories of learning reflect different positions on the nature of knowledge. With the possible
exception of connectivism, there is some form of empirical evidence to support each of the theories
of learning outlined in this chapter. However, while the theories suggest different ways in which all
people learn, they do not automatically tell teachers or instructors how to teach. Indeed, theories of
behaviourism, cognitivism and constructivism were all developed outside of education, in experimental
labs, psychology, neuroscience, and psychotherapy. Educators have had to work out how to move from
the theoretical position to the practical one of applying these theories within an educational experience.
In other words, they have had to develop teaching methods that build on such learning theories.

                                                  For my personal comments on the
                                                  relationship between
                                                  epistemologies, theories of
                                                  learning and teaching methods,
                                                  please click on the podcast below
                                                                                                                                                2.8 Summary 99

                       An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                    https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=78

   The next chapter examines a range of teaching methods that have been developed, their
epistemological roots, and their implications for teaching in a digital age.

Reference

Entwistle, N. (2010) `Taking Stock: An Overview of Research Findings' in Christensen Hughes, J. and
Mighty, J. (eds.) Taking Stock: Research on Teaching and Learning in Higher Education Montreal and
Kingston: McGill-Queen's University Press

   For more on the relationship between epistemologies, learning theories and methods of teaching, see:
   Bates, T. (2015) Thinking about theory and practice, Open Learning and Distance Education
Resources, July 29

                                                          Activity 2.8 Choosing a theory of learning

      Entwistle (2010) states:
            `There are some important questions to ask when considering how much weight to place on evidence

         or how valuable a theory will be for pedagogy. For example:

              · Is the theory derived from data or observations in an educational context?
              · Is the theory presented in language that is readily intelligible to teachers?
              · Can the aspects identified as affecting learning be readily changed [by the teacher]?
              · Does the theory have direct implications for teaching and learning [in the particular context in

                 which you are working]?
              · How realistic and practical are the suggestions?
              · Will the theory spark off new ideas about teaching?
      It is not sufficient for a pedagogical theory simply to explain how people learn; it also has to provide clear
   implications about how to improve the quality and efficiency of learning.`
      Using Entwistle's criteria and your own knowledge and experience of teaching, answer the questions below.
      1. Which theory of learning do you like best, and why? State what main subject you are teaching.
      2. Does your preferred way of teaching match any of these theoretical approaches? Write down some of the
   activities you do when teaching that `fit' with this theory. Can you think of other possible activities you now
   could use within this theoretical framework for teaching?
      3. Does your teaching generally combine different theories - sometimes behaviourist, sometimes cognitive,
   etc.? If so, what are the reasons or contexts for taking one specific approach rather than another?
100 Chapter 2: The nature of knowledge and the implications for teaching

      4. How useful are these theories in terms of teaching practice? In your view, are they just jargon or useless
   theorising, or `labelling' of commonly understood practice, or do they provide strong guidelines for how you
   should teach?

      5. How do you think new digital technologies, such as social media, affect these theories? Do new
   technologies make these theories redundant? Does connectivism replace other theories or merely add another
   way of looking at teaching and learning?

      Feedback to come.

                                                                            Key Takeaways

      1. Teaching is a highly complex occupation, which needs to adapt to a great deal of variety in context,
   subject matter and learners. It does not lend itself to broad generalizations. Nevertheless it is possible to
   provide guidelines or principles based on best practices, theory and research, that must then be adapted or
   modified to local conditions.

      2. Our underlying beliefs and values, usually shared by other experts in a subject domain, shape our
   approach to teaching. These underlying beliefs and values are often implicit and are often not directly shared
   with our students, even though they are seen as essential components of becoming an `expert' in a particular
   subject domain.

      3. It is argued that academic knowledge is different from other forms of knowledge, and is even more
   relevant today in a digital age.

      4. However, academic knowledge is not the only kind of knowledge that is important in today's society, and
   as teachers we have to be aware of other forms of knowledge and their potential importance to our students,
   and make sure that we are providing the full range of contents and skills needed for students in a digital age.
Chapter 3: Methods of teaching: campus-focused

                                                                      Purpose of the chapter

      This chapter discusses a selection of teaching methods that are often used in a campus-based learning
   environment.

      When you have read this chapter you should be able to:
              · describe several different methods of teaching used in campus-based teaching;
              · discuss the general strengths and weaknesses of each approach;
              · identify the extent to which each approach meets the needs of learners in a digital age;
              · choose an appropriate teaching method (or mix of methods) for your teaching context.

What is covered in this chapter

Five perspectives on teaching are examined and related to epistemologies and theories of learning, with
a particular emphasis on their relevance to a digital age. In particular this chapter covers the following
topics:

         · Scenario C: A stats lecturer fights the system
         · 3.1 Five perspectives on teaching
         · 3.2 The origins of the classroom design model
         · 3.3 Transmissive lectures: learning by listening
         · 3.4 Interactive lectures, seminars, and tutorials: learning by talking
         · 3.5 Learning by doing: Experiential learning
         · 3.6 Learning by doing: Apprenticeship
         · 3.7 Learning by being: The nurturing and social reform models of teaching
         · 3.8 Main conclusions
Also in this chapter you will find the following activities:
         · Activity 3.1 There is no activity for this section
         · Activity 3.2 Thinking outside the [classroom] box
         · Activity 3.3 The future of lectures

                                                                   101
102 A.W. (Tony) Bates

         · Activity 3.4 Developing conceptual learning

         · Activity 3.5 Assessing experiential design models

         · Activity 3.6 Applying apprenticeship to university teaching

         · Activity 3.7 Nurturing, social reform and connectivism

         · Activity 3.8 `Labelling' your own teaching

                                                                            Key Takeaways

      Most instructors will mix and match different methods, depending on the needs of both the subject matter
   and the needs of their students at a particular time. There are though some core conclusions to be drawn from
   this comparative review of different approaches to teaching.

             1. No single method is likely to meet all the requirements teachers face in a digital age.
             2. Nevertheless, some forms of teaching fit better with the development of the skills needed in a

                 digital age. In particular, methods that focus on conceptual development, such as dialogue and
                 discussion, knowledge management, and experiential learning in real-world contexts are more
                 likely to develop the high level conceptual skills required in a digital age, rather than information
                 transmission.
             3. It is not just conceptual skills though that are needed. It is the combination of conceptual,
                 practical, personal and social skills in highly complex situations that are needed. This again
                 means combining a variety of teaching methods.
             4. Nearly all of these teaching methods are media or technology independent. In other words, they
                 can be used in classrooms or online. What matters from a learning perspective is not so much the
                 choice of technology as the efficacy and expertise in appropriately choosing and using the
                 teaching method.
             5. Nevertheless, we shall see in the next chapter that new technologies offer new possibilities for
                 teaching, including offering more practice or time on task, reaching out to new target groups, and
                 increasing the productivity of both teachers and the system as a whole.
Scenario C: A stats lecturer fights the system

   Figure 3 C Image: Verywellmind.com

Clive (looking carefully at his partner, Jean): So what went wrong at work today?
   Jean: So you noticed - nice.
   Clive: Now don't take it out on me. How could I have avoided the slamming of the door, the shouting

at the cat, and the almost instant demand for a large glass of wine - which incidentally is sitting on your
desk?

   Jean (grabbing the wine). Well, today was the last straw. I got the results of the student end-of-term
evaluation of my new class I've been teaching.

   Clive: Bad, eh?
   Jean: Well, first the rankings are odd: about 30 per cent As, about 5 per cent Bs, 15 per cent Cs, 15 per
cent D's and 35 per cent E's - NOT a normal curve of distribution! They either loved me or hated me,
but the average - which is all Harvey, the stupid head of department, looks at - came out as a D, which

                                                                   103
104 Chapter 3: Methods of teaching: campus-focused

means any chance of a promotion next year just went straight out the window. I'm now going to have to
explain myself to that old buffoon who last taught a class when slate tablets were the latest technology.

   Clive: I'm not going to say I told you so, but.....
   Jean: DON'T go there. I know I'm bloody mad to have stopped lecturing and tried to engage the
students more. I could kill that faculty development guy who persuaded me to change how I teach.
I didn't mind all the extra work, not even the continual fighting with the guy from Facilities who
kept telling me to put all the tables and chairs back properly - he was just a jerk - and I loved the
actual teaching, which was stimulating and deeply satisfying, but what really finished me was when
the department wouldn't change the exam. I've been trying to get the kids to question what is meant
by a sample, discuss alternative ways of looking at significance, solve problems, and then they go and
give the poor kids multiple-choice questions that just assessed their memory of statistical techniques and
formulae. No wonder most of the students were mad at me.
   Clive: But you've always claimed that the students enjoyed your new way of teaching.
   Jean: Well, I was fooled by them. From the student comments on the evaluation, it seemed that about
a third of them really did like the lessons and some even said it opened up their eyes to what statistics is
all about, but apparently what the rest wanted was just a crib sheet they could use to answer the exam
questions.
   Clive: So what are you going to do now?
   Jean: I honestly don't know. I know what I'm doing is right, now I've been through all the changes.
Those kids won't have crib sheets when they start work, they will have to interpret data, and when they
get into advanced level science and engineering courses they won't be able to use statistics properly if I
just teach to the exam. They will know a bit about statistics but not how to do it properly.
   Clive: So you'll have to get the department to agree to changing the exam.
   Jean: Yeah, good luck with that, because everyone else will have to change how they teach if we do
that.
   Clive: But I thought the whole reason for you changing your teaching was that the university was
worried it wasn't producing graduates with the right kind of skills and knowledge needed today.
   Jean: You're right, but the problem is Harvey won't support me - he's old school down to his socks
and underpants and thinks that what I am doing is just trendy - and without his support there's no way
the rest of the department is going to change.
   Clive: OK, so just relax for now and have a glass of wine and we'll go out somewhere nice for dinner.
That will help clear my mind of the thought of Harvey in his socks and underpants. Then you can hear
about my day.
3.1 Five perspectives on teaching

                                                  For my personal comments on why
                                                  I wrote this chapter on
                                                  campus-based teaching methods,
                                                  please click on the podcast below

                       An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                    https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=83

   The first thing to be said about teaching methods is that there is no law or rule that says teaching
methods are driven by theories of learning. Especially in post-secondary education, most instructors
would be surprised if their teaching was labelled as behaviourist or constructivist. On the other hand, it
would be less than accurate to call such teaching `theory-free'. We have seen how views about the nature
of knowledge are likely to impact on preferred teaching methods. But it would be unwise to press this
too hard. A great deal of teaching, at least at a post-secondary level, is based on an apprenticeship model
of copying the same methods used by one's own teachers, then gradually refining them from experience,
without a great deal of attention being paid to theories of how students actually learn.

   Dan Pratt (1998) studied 253 teachers of adults, across five different countries, and identified `five
qualitatively different perspectives on teaching,... presenting each perspective as a legitimate view of
teaching`:

         · transmission: effective delivery of content (an objectivist approach)
         · apprenticeship: modelling ways of being (learning by doing under supervision)

                                                                   105
106 Chapter 3: Methods of teaching: campus-focused

         · developmental: cultivating ways of thinking (constructivist/cognitivist)
         · nurturing: facilitating self-efficacy (a fundamental tenet of connectivist MOOCs)
         · social reform: seeking a better society.

It can be seen that each of these perspectives relates to theories of learning to some extent, and they help
to drive methods of teaching. So in practical terms, I will start by looking at some common methods
of teaching, and assessing their appropriateness for developing the knowledge and skills outlined in
Chapter 1.

   I will organise these various methods of teaching into two chapters. The first chapter will discuss
design models that derive from more traditional school or campus-based teaching, and the second
chapter will be focused on design models that make more use of Internet technologies, although we will
see in Chapter 10 that these distinctions are already beginning to break down.

References

Pratt, D. and Associates (1998) Five Perspectives on Teaching in Adult and Higher Education Malabar
FL: Krieger Publishing Company
3.2 The origins of the classroom design model

Figure 3.2.1 Miss Bowls's class in an unidentified girls' school, England Date: circa 1905
Image: Southall Board, Flickr

Our institutions are a reflection of the times in which they were created. Francis Fukuyama, in his
monumental writing on political development and political decay (2011, 2014), points out that
institutions that provide essential functions within a state often become so fixed over time in their
original structures that they fail to adapt and adjust to changes in the external environment. We need
therefore to examine in particular the roots of our modern educational systems, because teaching and
learning in the present day is still strongly influenced by institutional structures developed many years
ago. Thus, we need to examine the extent to which our traditional campus-based models of teaching
remain fit for a digital age.

   The large urban school, college or university, organized by age stratification, learners meeting in
groups, and regulated units of time, was an excellent fit for an industrial society. In many ways it

                                                                   107
108 Chapter 3: Methods of teaching: campus-focused

matched the way work was organised in factories. In effect, we still have a predominantly industrial
model of educational design, which in large part remains our default design model even today.

   Some design models are so embedded in tradition and convention that we are often like fish in water
- we just accept that this is the environment in which we have to live and breath. The classroom model
is a very good example of this. In a classroom based model, learners are organised in classes that meet
on a regular basis at the same place at certain times of the day for a given length of time over a given
period (a term or semester).

   This is a design decision that was taken more than 150 years ago. It was embedded in the social,
economic and political context of the 19th century. This context included:

         · the industrialization of society which provided `models' for organizing both work and labour,
            such as factories and mass production;

         · the movement of people from rural to urban occupations and communities, with increased
            density resulting in larger institutions;

         · the move to mass education to meet the needs of industrial employers and an increasingly
            large and complex range of state-managed activities, such as government, health and
            education;

         · voter enfranchisement and hence the need for a better educated voting public;

         · over time, demand for more equality, resulting in universal access to education.

However, over the span of 150 years, our society has slowly changed. Many of these factors or
conditions no longer exist, while others persist, but often in a less dominant way than in the past. Thus
we still have factories and large industries, but we also have many more small companies, greater social
and geographical mobility, and above all a massive development of new technologies that allow both
work and education to be organized in different ways.

   This is not to say that the classroom design model is inflexible. Teachers for many years have used
a wide variety of teaching approaches within this overall institutional framework. But in particular, the
way in which our institutions are structured strongly affects the way we teach. We need to examine
which of the methods built around a classroom model are still appropriate in today's society, and,
more of a challenge, whether we could build new or modified institutional structures that would better
meet the needs of today.

References

Fukuyama, F. (2011) The Origins of Political Order: From Prehuman Times to the French
Revolution New York: Farrar Strauss and Giroux

   Fukuyama, F. (2014) Political Order and Political Decay: From the Industrial Revolution to the
Globalisation of Democracy New York: Farrar Strauss and Giroux

                                               Activity 3.2 Thinking outside the [classroom] box
                                                                                             3.2 The origins of the classroom design model 109

If classrooms, schools and university campuses are the physical products of an industrial age, what type of
learning environment would be a product of a digital age? In other words, if we were starting from scratch
today, how would you design an environment for teaching and learning that would reflect the age in which we
live?

   Obviously there is no right or wrong answer to this, but later you may want to look at Chapter 6 on learning
environments to see if your `digital' learning environment contains all the necessary components.

   You may also want to consider the social, economic and political context of the 21st century in terms
of identifying an appropriate learning environment. How much would the campus experience still be
necessary? (For instance, how would the environment deal with the effects of too much screen time on
children's development?)

   Listen to the podcast below for my response to this:

                       An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                    https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=86
3.3 Transmissive lectures: learning by listening

Figure 3.3.1 The lecture is one of the most traditional forms of classroom teaching. Image: Lecture Hall, Baruch
College, New York City - Wikipedia

3.3.1 Definition
     [Lectures] are more or less continuous expositions by a speaker who wants the audience to learn
     something.'
                                                                                                               Bligh, 2000

This specific definition is important as it excludes contexts where a lecture is deliberately designed to be
interrupted by questions or discussion between instructors and students. This form of more interactive
lecturing will be discussed in the next section (Chapter 3, Section 4).

                                                                   111
112 Chapter 3: Methods of teaching: campus-focused

3.3.2 The origins of the lecture

Transmissive lectures can be traced back as far as ancient Greek and Roman times, and certainly from
at least the start of the European university, in the 13th century. The term `lecture' comes from the
Latin, meaning a reading. In the 13th century, most books were extremely rare. They were
painstakingly handcrafted and illustrated by monks, often from fragments or collections of earlier and
exceedingly rare and valuable scrolls from ancient Greek or Roman times, or were translated from
Arabic sources, since much documentation was destroyed in Europe during the Dark Ages following
the fall of the Roman empire. As a result, a university would often have only one copy of a book, and it
may have been the only copy available in the world. The library and its collection therefore became
critical to the reputation of a university, and professors had to borrow the only text from the library and
literally read from it to the students, who dutifully wrote down their own version of the lecture.

   Lectures themselves belong to an even longer oral tradition of learning, where knowledge is passed
on by word of mouth from one generation to the next. In such contexts, accuracy and authority (or power
in controlling access to knowledge) are critical for `accepted' knowledge to be successfully transmitted.
Thus accurate memory, repetition and a reference to authoritative sources become exceedingly important
in terms of validating the information transmitted. The great sagas of the ancient Greeks and, much
later, of the Vikings, are examples of the power of oral transmission of knowledge, continued even
today through the myths and legends of many indigenous communities.
                                                                                                 3.3 Transmissive lectures: learning by listening 113

Figure 3.3.2 A medieval lecture
Artist: Laurentius de Voltolina;
Liber ethicorum des Henricus de Alemannia; Kupferstichkabinett SMPK, Berlin/Staatliche Museen Preussiischer
Kulturbesitz, Min. 1233

   This illustration from a thirteenth-century manuscript shows Henry of Germany delivering a lecture
to university students in Bologna, Italy, in 1233. What is striking is how similar the whole context is to
lectures today, with students taking notes, some talking at the back, and one clearly asleep. Certainly, if
Rip Van Winkle awoke in a modern lecture theatre after 800 years of sleeping, he would know exactly
where he was and what was happening.

   Nevertheless, the lecture format has been questioned for many years. Samuel
Johnson (1709-1784) over 200 years ago said of lectures:

     `People have nowadays...got a strange opinion that everything should be taught by lectures. Now,
     I cannot see that lectures can do as much good as reading the books from which the lectures are
     taken...Lectures were once useful, but now, when all can read, and books are so numerous, lectures
     are unnecessary.'
114 Chapter 3: Methods of teaching: campus-focused

                                                                                                            Boswell, 1791
   What is remarkable is that even after the invention of the printing press, radio, television, and the
Internet, the transmissive lecture, characterised by the authoritative instructor talking to a group of
students, still remains the dominant methodology for teaching in many institutions, even in a digital age,
where information is available at a click of a mouse. It could be argued that anything that has lasted this
long must have something going for it. On the other hand, we need to question whether the transmissive
lecture is still the most appropriate means of teaching, given all the changes that have taken place in
recent years, and in particular given the kinds of knowledge and skills needed in a digital age.

3.3.3 What does research tell us about the effectiveness of lectures?

Whatever you may think of Samuel Johnson's opinion, there has indeed been a great deal of research
into the effectiveness of lectures, going back to the 1960s, and continued through until today. The
most authoritative analysis of the research on the effectiveness of lectures remains Bligh's (2000). He
summarized a wide range of meta-analyses and studies of the effectiveness of lectures compared with
other teaching methods and found consistent results:

         · the lecture is as effective as other methods for transmitting information (the corollary of
            course is that other methods - such as video, reading, independent study, or Wikipedia - are
            just as effective as lecturing for transmitting information);

         · most lectures are not as effective as discussion for promoting thought;

         · lectures are generally ineffective for changing attitudes or values or for inspiring interest in a
            subject;

         · lectures are relatively ineffective for teaching behavioural skills.

Bligh also examined research on student attention, on memorizing, and on motivation, and concluded
(p.56):

     `We see evidence... once again to suppose that lectures should not be longer than twenty to thirty
     minutes - at least without techniques to vary stimulation.`

   These research studies have shown that in order to understand, analyze, apply, and commit
information to long-term memory, the learner must actively engage with the material. In order for a
lecture to be effective, it must include activities that compel the student to mentally manipulate the
information. Many lecturers of course do this, by stopping and asking for comments or questions
throughout the lecture - but many do not.

   Again, although these findings have been available for a long time, and You Tube videos now last
approximately eight minutes and TED talks 20 minutes at a maximum, teaching in many educational
institutions is still organized around a standard 50 minute lecture session or longer, with, if students are
lucky, a few minutes at the end for questions or discussion. There are two important conclusions from
the research:

         · even for the sole purpose for which lectures may be effective - the transmission of
            information - the 50 minute lecture needs to be well organized, with frequent opportunities
            for student questions and discussion (Bligh provides excellent suggestions on how to do this
                                                                                                 3.3 Transmissive lectures: learning by listening 115

            in his book);

         · for all other important learning activities, such as developing critical thinking, deep
            understanding, and application of knowledge - the kind of skills needed in a digital age -
            lectures are ineffective. Other forms of teaching and learning - such as opportunities for
            discussion and student activities - are necessary.

3.3.4 Does new technology make lectures more relevant?

Over the years, institutions have made massive investments in adding technologies to support lecturing.
Powerpoint presentations, multiple projectors and screens, clickers for recording student responses, even
`back-chat' channels on Twitter, enabling students to comment on a lecture - or more often, the lecturer
- in real time (surely the worst form of torture for a speaker), have all been tried. Students have been
asked to bring tablets or lap-tops to class, and universities in particular have invested millions of dollars
in state of the art lecture theatres. Nevertheless, all this is just lipstick on a pig. The essence of a lecture
remains the transmission of information, all of which is now readily and, in most cases, freely available
in other media and in more learner-friendly formats.

   I worked in a college where in one program all students had to bring laptops to class. At least in these
classes, there were some activities to do related to the lecture that required the students to use the laptops
during class time. However, in most classes this took less than 25 per cent of the lesson time. Most of
the other time, students were talked at, and as a result used their laptops for other, mainly non-academic
activities, especially playing online poker.

   Faculty often complain about students use of technology such as mobile phones or tablets, for `non-
relevant' multitasking in class, but this misses the point. If most students have mobile phones or laptops,
why are they still having to come to a lecture hall in person? Why can't they get a podcast or a video
of the lecture? Second, if they are coming, why are the lecturers not requiring them to use their mobile
phones, tablets, or laptops for study purposes, such as finding sources? Why not break the students into
small groups and get them to do some online research then come back with group answers to share with
the rest of the class? If lectures are to be offered, the aim should be to make the lecture engaging in its
own right, so the students are not distracted by their non-academic online activity.

3.3.5 Is there then no role for lectures in a digital age?

Lectures though still have their uses. One example is an inaugural lecture I attended for a newly
appointed research professor. In this lecture, the professor summarised all the research he and his team
had done, resulting in treatments for several cancers and other diseases. This was a public lecture, so he
had to satisfy not only other leading researchers in the area, but also a lay public with often no science
background. He did this by using excellent visuals and analogies. The lecture was followed by a small
wine and cheese reception for the audience. The lecture worked for several reasons:

         · first of all, it was a celebratory occasion bring together family, colleagues and friends;

         · second, it was an opportunity to pull together nearly 20 years of research into a single,
            coherent narrative or story;

         · third, the lecture was well supported by an appropriate use of graphics and video;

         · lastly, he put a great deal of work into preparing this lecture and thinking about who would be
116 Chapter 3: Methods of teaching: campus-focused

            in the audience - much more preparation than would have been the case if this was just one
            of many lectures in a course.

McKeachie and Svinicki (2006, p. 58) believe that lecturing is best used for:

         · providing up-to-date material that can't be found in one source;
         · summarizing material found in a variety of sources;
         · adapting material to the interests of a particular group;
         · initially helping students discover key concepts, principles or ideas;
         · modelling expert thinking.

The last point is important. Faculty often argue that the real value of a lecture is to provide a model for
students of how the faculty member, as an expert, approaches a topic or problem. Thus the important
point of the lecture is not the transmission of content (facts, principles, ideas), which the students could
get from just reading, but an expert way of thinking about the topic. The trouble with this argument for
lectures is three-fold:

         · students are rarely aware that this is the purpose of the lecture, and therefore focus on
            memorizing the content, rather than the `modelling' of expert thinking;

         · faculty themselves are not explicit about how they are doing the modelling (or fail to offer
            other ways in which modelling could be used, so students can compare and contrast);

         · students get no practice themselves in modelling this skill, even if they are aware of the
            modelling.

Perhaps more importantly, looking at McKeachie and Svinicki's suggestions, would it not be better for
the students, rather than the lecturer, to be doing these activities in a digital age?

   So, yes, there are a few occasions when lectures work very well. But in a digital age they should not
be the default model for regular teaching. There are much better ways to teach that will result in better
learning over the length of a course or program.

3.3.6 Why are lectures still the main form of educational delivery?

Given all of the above, some explanation needs to be offered for the persistence of the lecture into the
21st century. Here are some suggestions:

         · in fact, in many areas of education, the lecture has been replaced, particularly in many
            elementary or primary schools;

         · architectural inertia: a huge investment has been made by institutions in facilities that support
            the lecture model. What is to happen to all that real estate if it is not used? (As Winston
            Churchill said, `We shape our buildings and our buildings shape us`);

         · in North America, the Carnegie unit of teaching, which is based on a notion of one hour per
            week of classroom time per credit over a 13 week period. It is easy then to divide a three
            credit course into 39 one hour lectures over which the curriculum for the course must be
            covered. It is on this basis that teaching load and resources are decided;
                                                                                                 3.3 Transmissive lectures: learning by listening 117

         · faculty in post-secondary education have no other model for teaching. This is the model they
            are used to, and because appointment is based on training in research or work experience, and
            not on qualifications in teaching, they have no knowledge of how students learn or
            confidence or experience in other methods of teaching;

         · many experts prefer the oral tradition of teaching and learning, because it enhances their
            status as an expert and source of knowledge; being allowed an hour of other people's time to
            hear your ideas without major interruption is very satisfying on a personal level (at least for
            me when I'm lecturing);

         · see Scenario C at the start of this chapter.

3.3.7 Is there a future for lectures in a digital age?

That depends on how far into the future one wants to look. Given the inertia in the system, lectures are
likely still to predominate for another ten years, but after that, in most institutions, courses based on three
lectures a week over 13 weeks will have disappeared. There are several reasons for this:

         · all content can be easily digitalized and made available on demand at very low cost (see
            Chapter 11);

         · institutions will be making greater use of dynamic video (not talking heads) for
            demonstration, simulations, animations, etc. Thus most content modules will be multi-media;

         · third, open textbooks incorporating multi-media components and student activities will
            provide the content, organization and interpretation that are the rationale for most lectures;

         · lastly, and most significantly, the priority for teaching will have changed from information
            transmission and organization to knowledge management, where students have the
            responsibility for finding, analyzing, evaluating, sharing and applying knowledge, under the
            direction of a skilled subject expert. Project-based learning, collaborative learning and
            situated or experiential learning will become much more widely prevalent. Also many
            instructors will prefer to use the time they would have spent on a series of lectures in
            providing more direct, individual and group learner support, thus bringing them into closer
            contact with learners.

This does not mean that lectures will disappear altogether, but they will be special events, and probably
multi-media, synchronously and asynchronously delivered. Special events might include:

         · a professor's summary of her latest research,

         · the introduction to a course,

         · a point mid-way through a course for taking stock and dealing with common difficulties, or

         · the wrap-up to a course.

Lectures will provide a chance for instructors to make themselves known, to impart their interests and
enthusiasm, and to motivate learners, but this will be just one, relatively small, but important component
of a much broader learning experience for students.
118 Chapter 3: Methods of teaching: campus-focused

   For a different and informed perspective on the role and future of lectures, see Christine Gross-Loh,
2016.

References

Bates, A. (1985) Broadcasting in Education: An Evaluation London: Constables
   Bligh, D. (2000) What's the Use of Lectures? San Francisco: Jossey-Bass
   Boswell, J. (1791), The Life of Samuel Johnson, New York: Penguin Classics (edited by Hibbert, C.,

1986)
   Gross-Loh, C. (2016) Should colleges really eliminate the college lecture? The Atlantic, 14 July
   McKeachie, W. and Svinicki, M. (2006) McKeachie's Teaching Tips: Strategies, Research and Theory

for College and University Teachers Boston/New York: Houghton Mifflin

                                                               Activity 3.3 The future of lectures

      1. Do you agree that lectures are dead - or soon will be?
      2. Look at the skills needed in a digital age described in Chapter 1. Which of these skills could lectures help
   develop? Would they need to be redesigned or modified to do this and if so, how?
      For feedback on the second question click on the podcast below:

                           An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                        https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=89

References

Bligh, D. (2000) What's the Use of Lectures? San Francisco: Jossey-Bass
   Boswell, J. (1791), The Life of Samuel Johnson, New York: Penguin Classics (edited by Hibbert, C.,

1986)
   Gross-Loh, C. (2016) Should colleges really eliminate the college lecture? The Atlantic, 14 July
   McKeachie, W. and Svinicki, M. (2006) McKeachie's Teaching Tips: Strategies, Research and Theory

for College and University Teachers Boston/New York: Houghton Mifflin
3.4 Interactive lectures, seminars, and tutorials: learning by talking

Figure 3.4.1 A tutorial at Oriel College, Oxford University: Image: University of Oxford

3.4.1 The theoretical and research basis for dialogue and discussion
Researchers have identified a distinction, often intuitively recognised by instructors, between
meaningful and rote learning (Asubel et al., 1978). Meaningful learning involves the learner going
beyond memorization and surface comprehension of facts, ideas or principles, to a deeper understanding
of what those facts, ideas or principles mean to them. Marton and Saljö, who have conducted a number
of studies that examined how university students actually go about their learning, make the distinction
between deep and surface approaches to learning (see, for instance, Marton and Saljö, 1997). Students
who adopt a deep approach to learning tend to have a prior intrinsic interest in the subject. Their
motivation is to learn because they want to know more about a topic. Students with a surface approach

                                                                   119
120 Chapter 3: Methods of teaching: campus-focused

to learning are more instrumental. Their interest is primarily driven by the need to get a pass grade or
qualification.

   Subsequent research (e.g. Entwistle and Peterson, 2004) showed that as well as students' initial
motivation for study, a variety of other factors also influence students' approaches to learning. In
particular, surface approaches to learning are more commonly found when there is a focus on:

         · information transmission,

         · tests that rely mainly on memory,

         · a lack of interaction and discussion.

On the other hand, deeper approaches to learning are found when there is a focus on:

         · analytical or critical thinking or problem-solving,

         · in-class discussion,

         · assessment based on analysis, synthesis, comparison and evaluation.

Constructivists believe that knowledge is mainly acquired through social processes which are necessary
to move students beyond surface learning to deeper levels of understanding. Connectivist approaches
to learning also place heavy emphasis on networking learners, with all participants learning through
interaction and discussion between each other, driven both by their individual interests and the extent to
which these interests connect to the interests of other participants. The very large numbers participating
in connectivist MOOCs (see Chapter 5) means that there is a high probability of converging interests for
all participants, although those interests may vary considerably over the whole group.

   Laurillard (2001), and Harasim (2017), have emphasised that academic knowledge requires students
to move constantly from the concrete to the abstract and back again, and to build or construct knowledge
based on academic criteria such as logic, evidence and argument. This in turn requires a strong teacher
presence within a dialectical environment, in which argument and discussion within the rules and criteria
of the subject discipline are encouraged and developed by the instructor or teacher. Laurillard calls this
a rhetorical exercise, an attempt to get learners to think about the world differently. Conversation and
discussion are critical if this is to be achieved.

   The combination of theory and research here suggests the need for frequent interaction between
students, and between teacher and students, for the kinds of learning needed in a digital age. This
interaction usually takes the form of semi-structured discussion. I will now examine how this kind of
learning has traditionally been facilitated by educators.

3.4.2 Seminars and tutorials

3.4.2.1 Definitions

     A seminar is a group meeting (either face-to-face or online) where a number of students participate
     at least as actively as the teacher, although the teacher may be responsible for the design of the
     group experience, such as choosing topics and assigning tasks to individual students.

     A tutorial is either a one-on-one session between a teacher and a student, or a very small group
                                                                     3.4 Interactive lectures, seminars, and tutorials: learning by talking 121

     (three or four) of students and an instructor, where the learners are at least as active in discussion
     and presentation of ideas as the teacher.

3.4.2.2 Seminars

Seminars can range from six or more students, up to 30 students in the same group. Because the general
perception is that seminars work best when numbers are relatively small, they tend to be found more at
graduate level or the last year of undergraduate programs.

Figure 3.4.1 Socrates and his students: Painter: Johann Friedrich Greuter, 1590: (San Francisco, Achenbach
Foundation for Graphic Arts)

   Seminars and tutorials again have a very long history, going back at least to the time of Socrates
and Aristotle. Both were tutors to the aristocracy of ancient Athens. Aristotle was the private tutor
to Alexander the Great when Alexander was young. Socrates was the tutor of Plato, the philosopher,
although Socrates denied he was a teacher, rebelling against the idea common at that time in ancient
Greece that `a teacher was a vessel that poured its contents into the cup of the student'. Instead,
122 Chapter 3: Methods of teaching: campus-focused

according to Plato, Socrates used dialogue and questioning `to help others recognize on their own what
is real, true, and good.' (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.) Thus it can be seen that seminars and
tutorials reflect a strongly constructivist approach to learning and teaching.

   The format can vary a great deal. One common format, especially at graduate level, although similar
practices can be found at the school/k-12 level, is for the teacher to set advance work for a selected
number of students, and then have the selected students present their work to the whole group, for
discussion, criticism and suggestions for improvement. Although there may be time for only two or
three student presentations in each seminar, over a whole semester every student gets their turn. Another
format is to ask all the students in a group to do some specified advanced reading or study, then for the
teacher to introduce questions for general discussion within the seminar that requires students to draw
on their earlier work.

3.4.2.3 Tutorials

Tutorials are a particular kind of seminar that are identified with Ivy League universities, and in
particular Oxford or Cambridge. There may be as few as two students and a professor in a tutorial and
the meeting often follows closely the Socratic method of the student presenting his or her findings and
the professor rigorously questioning every assumption made by the student - and also drawing in the
other student to the discussion.

   Both these forms of dialogical learning can be found not only in classroom contexts, but also online.
Online discussion will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 4, Section 4. However, in general,
the pedagogical similarities between online and face-to-face discussions are much greater than the
differences.

3.4.3 Are seminars a practical method in a massive education system?

For many faculty, the ideal teaching environment is Socrates sitting under the linden tree, with three or
four dedicated and interested students. Unfortunately, the reality of mass higher education makes this
impossible for all but the most elite and expensive institutions.

   However, seminars for 25-30 students are not unrealistic, even in public undergraduate education.
More importantly, they enable the kind of teaching and learning that are most likely to facilitate the types
of skills needed from our students in a digital age. Seminars are flexible enough to be offered in class
or online, depending on the needs of the students. They are probably best used when students have done
individual work before the seminar. Of upmost importance, though, is the ability of teachers to teach
successfully in this manner, which requires different skills from transmissive lecturing.

   Although expansion of student numbers in higher education is part of the problem, it's not the
whole problem. Other factors, such as senior professors teaching less, and focusing mainly on graduate
students, lead to larger classes at undergraduate level that use transmissive lecturing. And if more senior
or experienced instructors switched from transmissive lectures, and instead required students to find
and analyse content for themselves, this would free up more time for them to spend on seminar-type
teaching.

   So it as much an organizational issue, a matter of choice and priorities, as an economic issue.
The more we can move towards a seminar approach to teaching and learning and away from large,
transmissive lectures, the better, if we are to develop students with the skills needed in a digital age.
            3.4 Interactive lectures, seminars, and tutorials: learning by talking 123

References

Ausubel, D., Novak, J., & Hanesian, H. (1978). Educational Psychology: A Cognitive View (2nd Ed.).
New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.

   Entwistle, N. and Peterson, E. (2004) Conceptions of Learning and Knowledge in Higher Education:
Relationships with Study Behaviour and Influences of Learning Environments International Journal of
Educational Research, Vol. 41, No. 6, pp. 407-428

   Harasim, L. (2017) Learning Theory and Online Technologies New York/London: Taylor and Francis
   Laurillard, D. (2001) Rethinking University Teaching: A Conversational Framework for the Effective
Use of Learning Technologies New York/London: Taylor and Francis
   Marton, F. & Saljö, R. (1997). `Approaches to learning', in F. Marton, D. Hounsell, & N. Entwistle
(Eds.), The experience of learning. Edinburgh: Scottish Academic Press.

            Activity 3.4 Developing conceptual learning

1. What kind of teacher interventions in group discussions can you suggest that could help learners develop
deep, conceptual learning?

   2. How could you reorganise a lecture class of 200 or more students to develop group work and the
development of conceptual learning?

   Click on the podcast below for my suggestions:

                       An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                    https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=92
3.5 Learning by doing: Experiential learning

Figure 3.5.1 Ryerson University's Law Practice program is a good example of a blended learning approach to
experiential learning. For more details, click here

   Learning by doing is one of Pratt's five teaching approaches. There are a number of different
approaches or terms within the broad heading of experiential learning, such as cooperative learning,
adventure learning and apprenticeship. I will use the term `experiential learning` as a broad umbrella
term to cover this wide variety of approaches to learning by doing. I will deal with apprenticeship as a
separate section (Chapter 3.6) because of its traditional (if tacit) role in preparing university and college
instructors, although it can be seen as just one of several methods of experiential learning.
3.5.1. What is experiential learning?
Simon Fraser University (2010) has defined experiential learning as:

     the strategic, active engagement of students in opportunities to learn through doing, and reflection
     on those activities, which empowers them to apply their theoretical knowledge to practical
     endeavours in a multitude of settings inside and outside of the classroom.

                                                                   125
126 Chapter 3: Methods of teaching: campus-focused

   There are many different theorists in this area, such as John Dewey (1938) and more recently David
Kolb (1984). There is a wide range of design models that aim to embed learning within real world
contexts, including:

         · laboratory, workshop or studio work;
         · apprenticeship;
         · problem-based learning;
         · case-based learning;
         · project-based learning;
         · inquiry-based learning;
         · cooperative (work- or community-based) learning.

The focus here is on some of the main ways in which experiential learning can be designed and
delivered, with particular respect to the use of technology, and in ways that help develop the knowledge
and skills needed in a digital age. (For a more detailed analysis of experiential learning, see Moon,
2004).

3.5.2 Core design principles

Experiential learning focuses on learners reflecting on their experience of doing something, so as to gain
conceptual insight as well as practical expertise. Kolb's experiential learning model suggest four stages
in this process:

         · active experimentation;
         · concrete experience;
         · reflective observation;
         · abstract conceptualization.

Experiential learning is a major form of teaching at the University of Waterloo. Its web site lists the
conditions needed to ensure that experiential learning is effective, as identified by the Association for
Experiential Education.

   The next section examines different ways in which these principles have been applied.

3.5.3 Experiential design models

There are many different design models for experiential learning, but they also have many features in
common.
                                             3.5 Learning by doing: Experiential learning 127

3.5.3.1 Laboratory, workshop or studio work

Figure 3.5.2 Concordia University wood shop

   Today, we take almost for granted that laboratory classes are an essential part of teaching science
and engineering. Workshops and studios are considered critical for many forms of trades training or the
development of creative arts. Labs, workshops and studios serve a number of important functions or
goals, which include:

         · to give students hands-on experience in choosing and using common scientific, engineering
            or trades equipment appropriately;

         · to develop motor skills in using scientific, engineering or industrial tools or creative media;
         · to give students an understanding of the advantages and limitations of laboratory

            experiments;
         · to enable students to see science, engineering or trade work `in action';
         · to enable students to test hypotheses or to see how well concepts, theories, procedures

            actually work when tested under laboratory conditions;
128 Chapter 3: Methods of teaching: campus-focused

         · to teach students how to design and/or conduct experiments;

         · to enable students to design and create objects or equipment in different physical media.

An important pedagogical value of laboratory classes is that they enable students to move from the
concrete (observing phenomena) to the abstract (understanding the principles or theories that are derived
from the observation of phenomena). Another is that the laboratory introduces students to a critical
cultural aspect of science and engineering, that all ideas need to be tested in a rigorous and particular
manner for them to be considered `true'.

   One major criticism of traditional educational labs or workshops is that they are limited in the kinds
of equipment and experiences that scientists, engineers and trades people need today. As scientific,
engineering and trades equipment becomes more sophisticated and expensive, it becomes increasingly
difficult to provide students in schools especially but increasingly now in colleges and universities
direct access to such equipment. Furthermore traditional teaching labs or workshops are capital and
labour intensive and hence do not scale easily, a critical disadvantage in rapidly expanding educational
opportunities.

   Because laboratory work is such an accepted part of science teaching, it is worth remembering that
teaching science through laboratory work is in historical terms a fairly recent development. In the 1860s
neither Oxford nor Cambridge University were willing to teach empirical science. Thomas Huxley
therefore developed a program at the Royal School of Mines (a constituent college of what is now
Imperial College, of the University of London) to teach school-teachers how to teach science, including
how to design laboratories for teaching experimental science to school children, a method that is still the
most commonly used today, both in schools and universities.

   At the same time, scientific and engineering progress since the nineteenth century has resulted in other
forms of scientific testing and validation that take place outside at least the kind of `wet labs' so common
in schools and universities. Examples are nuclear accelerators, nanotechnology, quantum mechanics and
space exploration. Often the only way to observe or record phenomena in such contexts is remotely or
digitally. It is also important to be clear about the objectives of lab, workshop and studio work. There
may now be other, more practical, more economic, or more powerful ways of achieving these objectives
through the use of new technology, such as remote labs, simulations, and experiential learning. These
will be examined in more detail later in this book.

3.5.3.2 Problem-based learning

The earliest form of systematised problem-based learning (PBL) was developed in 1969 by Howard
Barrows and colleagues in the School of Medicine at McMaster University in Canada, from where it has
spread to many other universities, colleges and schools. This approach is increasingly used in subject
domains where the knowledge base is rapidly expanding and where it is impossible for students to
master all the knowledge in the domain within a limited period of study. Working in groups, students
identify what they already know, what they need to know, and how and where to access new information
that may lead to resolution of the problem. The role of the instructor (usually called a tutor in classic
PBL) is critical in facilitating and guiding the learning process.

   Usually PBL follows a strongly systematised approach to solving problems, although the detailed
steps and sequence tend to vary to some extent, depending on the subject domain. The following is a
typical example:
                                                                                                     3.5 Learning by doing: Experiential learning 129

Figure 3.5.3 (derived from Gijeselaers, 1995)

   Traditionally, the first five steps would be done in a small face-to-face class tutorial of 20-25 students,
with the sixth step requiring either individual or small group (four or five students) private study, with a
the seventh step being accomplished in a full group meeting with the tutor. However, this approach also
lends itself to blended learning in particular, where the research solution (step 6) is done mainly online,
although some instructors have managed the whole process online, using a combination of synchronous
web conferencing and asynchronous online discussion.

   Developing a complete problem-based learning curriculum is challenging, as problems must be
carefully chosen, increasing in complexity and difficulty over the course of study, and problems must
be chosen so as to cover all the required components of the curriculum. Students often find the
problem-based learning approach challenging, particularly in the early stages, where their foundational
knowledge base may not be sufficient to solve some of the problems. (The term `cognitive overload' has
been used to describe this situation.) Others argue that lectures provide a quicker and more condensed
way to cover the same topics. Assessment also has to be carefully designed, especially if a final exam
carries heavy weight in grading, to ensure that problem-solving skills as well as content coverage are
measured.

   However, research (see for instance, Strobel and van Barneveld, 2009) has found that problem-
based learning is better for long-term retention of material and developing `replicable' skills, as well as
for improving students' attitudes towards learning. There are now many variations on the `pure' PBL
130 Chapter 3: Methods of teaching: campus-focused

approach, with problems being set after initial content has been covered in more traditional ways, such
as lectures or prior reading, for instance.

   The methodology of problem-based learning however is one essential tool for developing the
knowledge and skills needed in a digital society.

3.5.3.3 Case-based learning

     With case-based teaching, students develop skills in analytical thinking and reflective judgment by
     reading and discussing complex, real-life scenarios.

                   University of Michigan Centre for Research on Teaching and Learning

Case-based learning is sometimes considered a variation of PBL, while others see it as a design model in
its own right. As with PBL, case-based learning uses a guided inquiry method, but usually requires the
students to have a degree of prior knowledge that can assist in analysing the case. There is usually more
flexibility in the approach to case-based learning compared to PBL. Case-based learning is particularly
popular in business education, law schools and clinical practice in medicine, but can be used in many
other subject domains.

   Herreid (2004) provides eleven basic rules for case-based learning.

       1. Tells a story.
       2. Focuses on an interest-arousing issue.
       3. Set in the past five years
       4. Creates empathy with the central characters.
       5. Includes direct quotations from the characters.
       6. Relevant to the reader.
       7. Must have pedagogic utility.
       8. Conflict provoking.
       9. Decision forcing.
      10. Has generality.
      11. Is short.

Using examples from clinical practice in medicine, Irby (1994) recommends five steps in case-based
learning:

         · anchor teaching in a (carefully chosen) case;
         · actively involve learners in discussing, analysing and making recommendations regarding the

            case;
         · model professional thinking and action as an instructor when discussing the case with

            learners;
         · provide direction and feedback to learners in their discussions;
         · create a collaborative learning environment where all views are respected.
                                                                                                     3.5 Learning by doing: Experiential learning 131

Case-based learning can be particularly valuable for dealing with complex, interdisciplinary topics or
issues which have no obvious `right or wrong' solutions, or where learners need to evaluate and decide
on competing, alternative explanations. Case-based learning can also work well in both blended and
fully online environments. Marcus, Taylor and Ellis (2004) used the following design model for a case-
based blended learning project in veterinary science:

Figure 3.5.4 Blended learning sequence involving online learning resources, Marcus, Taylor and Ellis, 2004

   Other configurations are of course also possible, depending on the requirements of the subject.

3.5.3.4 Project-based learning

Project-based learning is similar to case-based learning, but tends to be longer and broader in scope, and
with even more student autonomy/responsibility in the sense of choosing sub-topics, organising their
work, and deciding on what methods to use to conduct the project. Projects are usually based around real
world problems, which give students a sense of responsibility and ownership in their learning activities.

   Once again, there are several best practices or guidelines for successful project work. For instance,
Larmer and Mergendoller (2010) argue that every good project should meet two criteria:

         · students must perceive the work as personally meaningful, as a task that matters and that they
            want to do well;

         · a meaningful project fulfills an educational purpose.

The main danger with project-based learning is that the project can take on a life of its own, with not only
students but the instructor losing focus on the key, essential learning objectives, or important content
areas may not get covered. Thus project-based learning needs careful design and monitoring by the
instructor.

3.5.3.5 Inquiry-based learning

Inquiry-based learning (IBL) is similar to project-based learning, but the role of the teacher/instructor is
somewhat different. In project-based learning, the instructor decides the `driving question' and plays
a more active role in guiding the students through the process. In inquiry-based learning, the learner
explores a theme and chooses a topic for research, develops a plan of research and comes to conclusions,
although an instructor is usually available to provide help and guidance when needed.

   Banchi and Bell (2008) suggest that there are different levels of inquiry, and students need to begin at
the first level and work through the other levels to get to `true' or `open' inquiry as follows:
132 Chapter 3: Methods of teaching: campus-focused

Figure 3.5.5 Levels of inquiry-based learning, from Banchi and Bell (2008)

   It can be seen that the fourth level of inquiry describes the graduate thesis process, although
proponents of inquiry-based learning have advocated its value at all levels of education.
3.5.4 Experiential learning in online learning environments
Some advocates of experiential learning are highly critical of online learning, because, they argue, it is
impossible to embed learning in real world examples. However, this is an oversimplification, and there
are contexts in which online learning can be used very effectively to support or develop experiential
learning, in all its variations:

         · blended or flipped learning: although group sessions often start off the process, and/or bring
            a problem or project to a conclusion, they are usually done in a classroom or lab setting.
            However students can increasingly conduct the research and information gathering by
            accessing resources online, by using online multimedia resources to create reports or
            presentations, and by collaborating online through group project work or through critique and
            evaluation of each other's work;
                                                                                                     3.5 Learning by doing: Experiential learning 133

         · fully online: increasingly, instructors are finding that experiential learning can be applied
            fully online, through a combination of synchronous tools such as web conferencing,
            asynchronous tools such as discussion forums and/or social media for group work, e-
            portfolios and multimedia for reporting, and remote labs for experimental work.

Indeed, there are circumstances where it is impractical, too dangerous, or too expensive to use real world
experiential learning. Online learning can be used to simulate real conditions and to reduce the time to
master a skill. Flight simulators have long been used to train commercial pilots, enabling trainee pilots to
spend less time mastering fundamentals on real aircraft. Commercial flight simulators are still extremely
expensive to build and operate, but in recent years the costs of creating realistic simulations has dropped
dramatically.

Figure 3.5.6 Virtual world border crossing, Loyalist College, Ontario

   Instructors at Loyalist College have created a `virtual' fully functioning border crossing and a virtual
134 Chapter 3: Methods of teaching: campus-focused

car in Second Life to train Canadian Border Services Agents. Each student takes on the role of an agent,
with his/her avatar interviewing the avatars of the travellers wishing to enter Canada. Other students
play the travellers. All communication is done by voice communications in Second Life, with the
people playing the travellers in a separate room from the students. Each student interviews three
or four travellers and the entire class observes the interactions and discusses the situations and the
responses. A secondary site for auto searches features a virtual car that can be completely dismantled so
students learn all possible places where contraband may be concealed. This learning is then reinforced
with a visit to the auto shop at Loyalist College and the search of an actual car. The students in the
customs and immigration track are assessed on their interviewing techniques as part of their final grades.
Students participating in the first year of the Second Life border simulation achieved a grade standing
that was 28 per cent higher than the previous class who did not utilize a virtual world. The next class,
using Second Life, scored a further 9 per cent higher. More details can be found here.

   Staff in the Emergency Management Division at the Justice Institute of British Columbia have
developed a simulation tool called Praxis that helps to bring critical incidents to life by introducing real-
world simulations into training and exercise programs. Because participants can access Praxis via the
web, it provides the flexibility to deliver immersive, interactive and scenario-based training exercises
anytime, anywhere. A typical emergency might be a major fire in a warehouse containing dangerous
chemicals. `Trainee' first responders, who will include fire, police and paramedical personnel, as well
as city engineers and local government officials, are `alerted' on their mobile phones or tablets, and
have to respond in real time to a fast developing scenario, `managed' by a skilled facilitator, following
procedures previously taught and also available on their mobile equipment. The whole process is
recorded and followed later by a face-to-face debriefing session.

   Once again, design models are not in most cases dependent on any particular medium. The pedagogy
transfers easily across different delivery methods. Learning by doing is an important method for
developing many of the skills needed in a digital age.

3.5.5 Strengths and weaknesses of experiential learning models

How one evaluates experiential learning designs depends partly on one's epistemological position.
Constructivists strongly support experiential learning models, whereas those with a strong objectivist
position are usually highly skeptical of the effectiveness of this approach. Nevertheless, problem-based
learning in particular has proved to be very popular in many institutions teaching science or medicine,
and project-based learning is used across many subject domains and levels of education. There is
evidence that experiential learning, when properly designed, is highly engaging for students and leads
to better long-term memory. Proponents also claim that it leads to deeper understanding, and develops
skills for a digital age such as problem-solving, critical thinking, improved communications skills, and
knowledge management. In particular, it enables learners to manage better highly complex situations
that cross disciplinary boundaries, and subject domains where the boundaries of knowledge are difficult
to manage.

   Critics though such as Kirschner, Sweller and Clark (2006) argue that instruction in experiential
learning is often `unguided', and pointed to several `meta-analyses' of the effectiveness of problem-
based learning that indicated no difference in problem-solving abilities, lower basic science exam scores,
longer study hours for PBL students, and that PBL is more costly. They conclude:

     In so far as there is any evidence from controlled studies, it almost uniformly supports direct, strong
     instructional guidance rather than constructivist-based minimal guidance during the instruction
                                                                                                     3.5 Learning by doing: Experiential learning 135

     of novice to intermediate learners. Even with students with considerable prior knowledge, strong
     guidance when learning is most often found to be equally effective as unguided approaches.

   Certainly, experiential learning approaches require considerable re-structuring of teaching and a great
deal of detailed planning if the curriculum is to be fully covered. It usually means extensive re-training
of faculty, and careful orientation and preparation of students. I would also agree with Kirschner et al.
that just giving students tasks to do in real world situations without guidance and support is likely to be
ineffective.

   However, many forms of experiential learning can and do have strong guidance from instructors,
and one has to be very careful when comparing matched groups that the tests of knowledge include
measurement of the skills that are claimed to be developed by experiential learning, and are not just
based on the same assessments as for traditional methods, which often have a heavy bias towards
memorisation and comprehension.

   On balance then, I would support the use of experiential learning for developing the knowledge and
skills needed in a digital age, but as always, it needs to be done well, following best practices associated
with the different design models.

References

Banchi, H., and Bell, R. (2008) `The Many Levels of Inquiry' Science and Children, Vol. 46, No. 2
   Dewey, J. (1938). Experience & Education. New York, NY: Macmillan
   Gijselaers, W., (1995) `Perspectives on problem-based learning' in Gijselaers, W, Tempelaar, D,

Keizer, P, Blommaert, J, Bernard, E & Kapser, H (eds) Educational Innovation in Economics and
Business Administration: The Case of Problem-Based Learning. Dordrecht, Kluwer.

   Herreid, C. F. (2007). Start with a story: The case study method of teaching college science. Arlington
VA: NSTA Press.

   Irby, D. (1994) Three exemplary models of case-based teaching Academic Medicine, Vol. 69, No. 12
   Kirshner, P., Sweller, J. amd Clark, R. (2006) Why Minimal Guidance During Instruction Does
Not Work: An Analysis of the Failure of Constructivist, Discovery, Problem-Based, Experiential, and
Inquiry-Based Teaching Educational Psychologist, Vo. 41, No.2
   Kolb. D. (1984) Experiential Learning: Experience as the source of learning and development
Englewood Cliffs NJ: Prentice Hall
   Larmer, J. and Mergendoller, J. (2010) Seven essentials for project-based learning Educational
Leadership, Vol. 68, No. 1
   Marcus, G. Taylor, R. and Ellis, R. (2004) Implications for the design of online case-based learning
activities based on the student blended learning experience: Perth, Australia: Proceedings of the
ASCILITE conference, 2004
   Moon, J.A. (2004) A Handbook of Reflective and Experiential Learning: Theory and Practice New
York: Routledge
   Simon Fraser University (2010) Task Force on Teaching and Learning: Recommendations Report
Burnaby BC: Simon Fraser University
   Strobel, J. , & van Barneveld, A. (2009). When is PBL More Effective? A Meta-synthesis of Meta-
analyses Comparing PBL to Conventional Classrooms. Interdisciplinary Journal of Problem-based
Learning, Vol. 3, No. 1
136 Chapter 3: Methods of teaching: campus-focused

                                                     Activity 3.5 Assessing experiential design models

      1. If you have experiences with experiential learning, what worked well and what didn't?
      2. Are the differences between problem-based learning, case-based learning, project-based learning and
   inquiry-based learning significant, or are they really just minor variations on the same design model?
      3. Do you have a preference for any one of the models? If so, why?
      4. Do you agree that experiential learning can be done just as well online as in classrooms or in the field?
   If not, what is the `uniqueness' of doing it face-to-face that cannot be replicated online? Can you give an
   example?
      5. Kirschner, Sweller and Clark's paper is a powerful condemnation of PBL. Read it in full, then decide
   whether or not you share their conclusion, and if not, why not.
      Click on the podcast below for my feedback on these questions.

                           An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                        https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=103
3.6 Learning by doing: Apprenticeship

Figure 3.6.1 BMW Group UK Apprentice Recruitment, 2013
Image: © Motoring Insight, 2013

3.6.1 The importance of apprenticeship as a teaching method
Apprenticeship is one of the most common and well established forms of experiential learning. Bloom
and his colleagues designated psycho-motor skills as the third domain of learning back in 1956. Learning
by doing is particularly common in teaching motor skills, such as learning to ride a bicycle or play a
sport, but examples can also be found in higher education, such as teaching practice, medical internships,
and laboratory studies.

   Apprenticeship is a particular way of enabling students to learn by doing. It is often associated
with vocational training where a more experienced tradesman or journeyman models behaviour, the
apprentice attempts to follow the the model, and the journeyman provides feedback.
However, apprenticeship is the most common method used to train post-secondary education instructors

                                                                   137
138 Chapter 3: Methods of teaching: campus-focused

in teaching (at least implicitly), so there is a wide range of applications for an apprenticeship approach
to teaching.

   Because a form of apprenticeship is the often implicit, default model also for university teaching, and
in particular for pre-service training of university instructors, apprenticeship will be discussed separately
from other forms of experiential learning, although it is really just one, very commonly used, version.
3.6.2 Key features of apprenticeship

                       Figure 3.6.2 An apprentice being supervised
                       Image: © BBC, 2014

     `It is useful to remember that apprenticeship is not an invisible phenomenon. It has key elements:
     a particular way of viewing learning, specific roles and strategies for teachers and learners, and
     clear stages of development, whether for traditional or cognitive apprenticeship. But mostly it's
     important to remember that in this perspective, one cannot learn from afar. Instead, one learns amid
     the engagement of participating in the authentic, dynamic and unique swirl of genuine practice.`
                                                                                                             3.6 Learning by doing: Apprenticeship 139

                                                                                                Pratt and Johnson, 1998
   Schön (1983) argues that apprenticeship operates in `situations of practice that...are frequently
ill-defined and problematic, and characterized by vagueness, uncertainty and disorder`. Learning in
apprenticeship is not just about learning to do (active learning), but also requires an understanding of
the contexts in which the learning will be applied. In addition there is a social and cultural element to
the learning, understanding and embedding the accepted practices, customs and values of experts in the
field. Pratt and Johnson (1998) identify the characteristics of a master practitioner, whom they define as:

     a person who has acquired a thorough knowledge of and/or is especially skilled in a particular area
     of practice. Master practitioners:

       1. possess great amounts of knowledge in their area of expertise, and are able to apply that
            knowledge in difficult practice settings;

       2. have well-organized, readily accessible schemas (cognitive maps) which facilitate the
            acquisition of new information;

       3. have well-developed repertoires of strategies for acquiring new knowledge, integrating and
            organizing their schemas, and applying their knowledge and skills in a variety of contexts....;

       4. ...are motivated to learn as part of the process of developing their identities in their
            communities of practice. They are not motivated to learn simply to reach some external
            performance goal or reward;

       5. frequently display tacit knowledge in the form of:

                      spontaneous action and judgements;

                      being unaware of having learned to do these things;

                      being unable or having difficulty in describing the knowing which their actions
                        reveal.

Pratt and Johnson further distinguish two different but related forms of apprenticeship: traditional
and cognitive. A traditional apprenticeship experience, based on developing a motor or manual skill,
involves learning a procedure and gradually developing mastery, during which the master and learner go
through several stages.

3.6.3 University apprenticeship

An intellectual or cognitive apprenticeship model is somewhat different because this form of learning is
less easily observable than learning motor or manual skills. Pratt and Johnson argue that in this context,
master and learner must say what they are thinking during applications of knowledge and skills, and
must make explicit the context in which the knowledge is being developed, because context is so critical
to the way knowledge is developed and applied. Pratt and Johnson suggest five stages for cognitive and
intellectual modelling (p. 99):

       1. modelling by the master and development of a mental model/schema by the learner;

       2. learner approximates replication of the model with master providing support and feedback
            (scaffolding/coaching);
140 Chapter 3: Methods of teaching: campus-focused

       3. learner widens the range of application of the model, with less support from master;
       4. self-directed learning within the specified limits acceptable to the profession;
       5. generalizing: learner and master discuss how well the model might work or would have to be

            adapted in a range of other possible contexts.

Pratt and Johnson provide a concrete example of how this apprenticeship model might work for a
novice university professor (pp. 100-101). They argue that for cognitive apprenticeship it is important to
create a forum or set of opportunities for:

     articulate discussion and authentic participation in the realities of practice from within the practice,
     not from just one single point of view. Only from such active involvement, and layered and
     cumulative experience does the novice move towards mastery.

   The main challenge of the apprenticeship model in a university setting is that it is not usually applied
in a systematic matter. The hope that young or new university teachers will have automatically learned
how to teach just by observing their own professors teach leaves far too much to chance.

   [Removed from Version 1: 3.5.4 Apprenticeship in online environments]

3.6.4 Strengths and weaknesses

The main advantages of an apprenticeship model of teaching can be summarised as follows:

         · teaching and learning are deeply embedded within complex and highly variable contexts,
            allowing rapid adaptation to real-world conditions;

         · it makes efficient use of the time of experts, who can integrate teaching within their regular
            work routine;

         · it provides learners with clear models or goals to aspire to;
         · it acculturates learners to the values and norms of the trade or profession.

On the other hand, there are some serious limitations with an apprenticeship approach, particularly in
preparing for university teaching:

         · much of a master's knowledge is tacit, partly because their expertise is built slowly through a
            very wide range of activities;

         · experts often have difficulty in expressing consciously or verbally the schema and `deep'
            knowledge that they have built up and taken almost for granted, leaving the learner often to
            have to guess or approximate what is required of them to become experts themselves;

         · experts often rely solely on modelling with the hope that learners will pick up the knowledge
            and skills from just watching the expert in action, and don't follow through on the other
            stages that make an apprenticeship model more likely to succeed;

         · there is clearly a limited number of learners that one expert can manage, given that the
            experts themselves are fully engaged in applying their expertise in often demanding work
            conditions which may leave little time for paying attention to the needs of novice learners in
                                                                                                             3.6 Learning by doing: Apprenticeship 141

            the trade or profession;
         · traditional vocational apprenticeship programs have a very high attrition rate: for instance, in

            British Columbia, more than 60 per cent of those that enter a formal campus-based vocational
            apprenticeship program withdraw before successful completion of the program. As a result,
            there are large numbers of experienced tradespeople in the workforce without full
            accreditation, limiting their career development and slowing down economic development
            where there are shortages of fully qualified skilled workers;
         · in trades or occupations undergoing rapid change in the workplace, the apprenticeship model
            can slow adaptation or change in working methods, because of the prevalence of traditional
            values and norms being passed down by the `master' that may no longer be as relevant in the
            new conditions facing workers. This limitation of the apprenticeship model can be clearly
            seen in the post-secondary education sector, where traditional values and norms around
            teaching are increasingly in conflict with external forces such as new technology and the
            massification of higher education.

Nevertheless, the apprenticeship model, when applied thoroughly and systematically, is a very useful
model for teaching in highly complex, real-world contexts.

References

Bloom, B.S. (Ed.). Engelhart, M.D., Furst, E.J., Hill, W.H., Krathwohl, D.R. (1956). Taxonomy of
Educational Objectives, Handbook I: The Cognitive Domain. New York: David McKay Co Inc.

   Pratt, D. and Johnson, J. (1998) `The Apprenticeship Perspective: Modelling Ways of Being' in Pratt,
D. (ed.) Five Perspectives on Teaching in Adult and Higher Education Malabar FL: Krieger Publishing
Company

   Schön, D. (1983) The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think in Action New York: Basic
Books

                                              Activity 3.6 Applying apprenticeship to university teaching

      1. Do you agree that learning to teach in a university depends heavily on an apprenticeship model? In what
   ways does it resemble apprenticeship and in what ways does it differ? In what ways could it be improved?

      2. What are the key features required for an apprenticeship model to work?
      Click on the podcast below for my response to this activity

                           An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                        https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=96
3.7 Learning by being: The nurturing and social reform models of
teaching:

Figure 3.7.1 Image: Michigan State University, 2019

   In this section I will briefly discuss the last two of Pratt's five teaching perspectives, nurturing and
social reform.
3.7.1 The nurturing perspective
A nurturing perspective on teaching can best be understood in terms of the role of a parent. Pratt (1998)
states:

     We expect `successful' parents to understand and empathize with their child; and that they will
     provide kind, compassionate, and loving guidance through content areas of utmost difficulty....The
     nurturing educator works with other issues...in different contexts and different age groups, but

                                                                   143
144 Chapter 3: Methods of teaching: campus-focused

     the underlying attributes and concerns remain the same. Learners' efficacy and self-esteem issues
     become the ultimate criteria against which learning success is measured, rather than performance-
     related mastery of a content body.

   There is a strong emphasis on the teacher focusing on the interests of the learner, on empathizing with
how the learner approaches learning, of listening carefully to what the learner is saying and thinking
when learning, and providing appropriate, supportive responses in the form of `consensual validation of
experience`. This perspective is driven partly by the observation that people learn autonomously from
a very early age, so the trick is to create an environment for the learner that encourages rather than
inhibits their `natural' tendency to learn, and directs it into appropriate learning tasks, decided by an
analysis of the learner's needs. This is further elaborated in Chapter 6, on Building an Effective Learning
Environment.

3.7.2 The social reform perspective

Pratt (1998, p. 173) states:

     Teachers holding a social reform perspective are most interested in creating a better society and
     view their teaching as contributing to that end. Their perspective is unique in that it is based upon
     an explicitly stated ideal or set of principles linked to a vision of a better social order. Social
     reformers do not teach in one single way, nor do they hold distinctive views about knowledge in
     general...these factors all depend on the particular ideal that inspires their actions.

   This then in some ways is less a theory of teaching as an epistemological position, that society needs
change, and the social reformer knows how to bring about this change through teaching and education.
Indeed, as Figure 3.7.2 below illustrates, the social reform model of learning can be driven as much by
the passions and concerns of learners as by those of their instructors.
                                                          3.7 Learning by being: The nurturing and social reform models of teaching: 145

Figure 3.7.2

3.7.3 Past and future: the relevance of the nurturing and social reform methods for
connectivism
These two perspectives on teaching again have a long history, with echoes of:

         · Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1762): `education should be carried out, so far as possible, in
            harmony with the development of the child's natural capacities by a process of apparently
            autonomous discovery` (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)

         · Malcolm Knowles (1984): `As a person matures his self concept moves from one of being a
            dependent personality toward one of being a self-directed human being.'

         · Paulo Freire (2004): `education makes sense because women and men learn that through
            learning they can make and remake themselves, because women and men are able to take
            responsibility for themselves as beings capable of knowing--of knowing that they know and
            knowing that they don't.'

         · Ivan Illich (1971) (in his criticism of the institutionalization of education): `The current
            search for new educational funnels must be reversed into the search for their institutional
            inverse: educational webs which heighten the opportunity for each one to transform each
146 Chapter 3: Methods of teaching: campus-focused

            moment of his living into one of learning, sharing, and caring.'

The reason why the nurturing and social reform perspectives on teaching are important is because they
reflect many of the assumptions or beliefs around connectivism (Chapter 2.6). Indeed, as early as 1971,
Illich made this remarkable statement for the use of advanced technology to support "learning webs":

     The operation of a peer-matching network would be simple. The user would identify himself by
     name and address and describe the activity for which he sought a peer. A computer would send him
     back the names and addresses of all those who had inserted the same description. It is amazing that
     such a simple utility has never been used on a broad scale for publicly valued activity.

   Well, those conditions certainly exist today. Learners do not necessarily need to go through
institutional gateways to access information or knowledge, which is increasing available and accessible
through the Internet. As we shall see in Chapter 5, MOOCs help to identify those common interests and
connectivist MOOCs in particular aim to provide the networks of common interests and the environment
for self-directed learning. The digital age provides the technology infrastructure and support needed for
this kind of learning.

3.7.4 The roles of learners and teachers

Of all the perspectives on teaching these two are the most learner-centred. They are based on a
profoundly optimistic view of human nature, that people will seek out and learn what they need, and will
find the necessary support from caring, dedicated educators and/or from others with similar interests and
concerns, and that individuals have the capacity and ability to identify and follow through with their own
educational needs. It is also a more radical view of education, because it seeks to escape the political and
controlling aspects of state or private institutions.

   Within each of these two perspectives, there are differences of view about the centrality of teachers
for successful learning. For Pratt, the teacher plays a central role in nurturing learning; for others such
as Illich or Freire, professionally trained teachers are more likely to be the servant of the state than of
the individual learner. For those supporting these perspectives on teaching, volunteer mentors or social
groups organised around certain ideals or social goals provide the necessary support for learners.

3.7.5 Strengths and weaknesses of these two approaches

There are, as always, a number of drawbacks to these two perspectives on teaching:

         · The teacher in a nurturing approach needs to adopt a highly dedicated and unselfish
            approach, putting the demands and needs of the learner first. This often means for teachers
            who are experts in their subject holding back the transmission and sharing of their knowledge
            until the learner is `ready', thus denying to many subject experts their own identity and needs
            to a large extent;

         · Pratt argues that `although content is apparently neglected, children taught by nurturing
            educators do continue to master it at much the same rate as children taught by curriculum-
            driven teaching methodologies`, but no empirical evidence is offered to support this
            statement, although it does derive in Pratt's case from strong personal experience of teaching
            in this way;
                                                          3.7 Learning by being: The nurturing and social reform models of teaching: 147

         · like all the other teaching approaches the nurturing perspective is driven by a very strong
            belief system, which will not necessarily be shared by other educators (or parents - or even
            learners, for that matter);

         · a nurturing perspective necessitates probably the most labour-intensive of all the teaching
            models other than apprenticeship, requiring a deep understanding on the part of the teacher of
            each learner and that learner's needs; every individual learner is different and needs to be
            treated differently, and teachers need to spend a great deal of time identifying learners' needs,
            their readiness to learn, and building or creating supportive environments or contexts for that
            learning;

         · there may well be a conflict between what the learner identifies as their personal learning
            needs, and the demands of society in a digital age. Dedicated teachers may be able to help a
            learner negotiate that divide, but in situations where learners are left without professional
            guidance, learners may end up just talking to other individuals with similar views that do not
            progress their learning (remembering that academic teaching is a rhetorical exercise,
            challenging learners to view the world differently);

         · social reform depends to a large extent on learners and teachers embracing similar belief
            systems, and can easily descend into dogmatism without challenges from outside the `in-
            community' established by self-referential groups.

Nevertheless, there are aspects of both perspectives that have significance for a digital age:

         · both nurturing and social reform perspectives seems to work well for many adults in
            particular, and the nurturing approach also works well for younger children;

         · nurturing is an approach that has been adopted as much in advanced corporate training in
            companies such as Google as in informal adult education (see for instance, Tan, 2012);

         · we shall see in Chapter 5 that connectivist MOOCs strongly reflect both the nurturing
            approach and the ability to create webs of connections that enable the development of self-
            efficacy and attempts at social reform;

         · both perspectives seem to be effective when learners are already fairly well educated and
            already have good prior knowledge and conceptual development;

         · perspectives that focus on the needs of individuals rather than institutions or state
            bureaucracies can liberate thinking and learning and thus make the difference between `good'
            and `excellent' in creative thinking, problem-solving, and application of knowledge in
            complex and variable contexts.

References

Freire, P. (2004). Pedagogy of Indignation. Boulder CO: Paradigm
   Illich, I. (1971) Deschooling Society, New York: Harper and Row
   Knowles, M. (1984) Andragogy in Action. Applying modern principles of adult education, San

Francisco: Jossey Bass
   Pratt, D. and Associates (1998) Five Perspectives on Teaching in Adult and Higher

Education Malabar FL: Krieger Publishing Company
148 Chapter 3: Methods of teaching: campus-focused

   Rousseau, J.-J. (1762) Émile, ou de l'Éducation (Trans. Allan Bloom). New York: Basic Books, 1979
   Tan, C.-M. (2012) Search Inside Yourself New York: Harper Collins

                                                 Activity 3.7 Nurturing, social reform and connectivism

      1. Do you have experience of teaching in one or both of these ways? If so, do you agree with the analysis of
   the strengths and weaknesses of each component?

      2. Do you think that connectivism is a modern reflection of either of these models of teaching - or is
   connectivism a distinct and unique method of teaching in itself? If so, what distinguishes it as a teaching
   method from all the other methods I have covered?

      There is no immediate feedback for these questions, although the issues will be raised again in Chapter 5.
3.8 Main conclusions

Figure 3.8 A workshop on blended learning, where instructors apply principles from a lecture on blended learning to
designing a unit of teaching (a mix of transmissive and experiential learning methods reflecting a constructivist
epistemology). Image: Tony Bates, 2017

                                                                   149
150 Chapter 3: Methods of teaching: campus-focused

3.8.1 Relating epistemology, learning theories and teaching methods

3.8.1.1 Pragmatism trumps ideology in teaching

Although there is often a direct relationship between a method of teaching, a learning theory and an
epistemological position, this is by no means always the case. It is tempting to try to put together a table
and neatly fit each teaching method into a particular learning theory, and each theory into a particular
epistemology, but unfortunately education is not as tidy as computer science, so it would be misleading
to try to do a direct ontological classification. For instance a transmissive lecture might be structured
so as to further a cognitivist rather than a behaviourist approach to learning, or a lecture session may
combine several elements, such as transmission of information, learning by doing, and discussion.

   Purists may argue that it is logically inconsistent for a teacher to use methods that cross
epistemological boundaries (and it may certainly be confusing for students) but teaching is essentially
a pragmatic profession and teachers will do what it takes to get the job done. If students need to
learn facts, principles, standard procedures or ways of doing things, before they can start an informed
discussion about their meaning, or before they can start solving problems, then a teacher may well
consider behaviourist methods to lay this foundation before moving to more constructivist approaches
later in a course or program.

3.8.1.2 Teaching methods are not determined by technology

Secondly technology applications such as MOOCs or video recorded lectures may replicate exactly a
particular teaching method or approach to learning used in the classroom. In many ways methods of
teaching, theories of learning and epistemologies are independent of a particular technology or medium
of delivery, although we shall see in Chapters 7, 8, 9 and 10 that technologies can be used to transform
teaching, and a particular technology will in some cases further one method of teaching more easily than
other methods, depending on the characteristics or `affordances' of that technology.

   Thus, teachers who are aware of not only a wide array of teaching methods, but also of learning
theories and their epistemological foundation will be in a far better position to make appropriate
decisions about how to teach in a particular context. Also, as we shall see, having this kind of
understanding will also facilitate an appropriate choice of technology for a particular learning task or
context.

3.8.2 Relating teaching methods to the knowledge and skills needed in a digital age

The main purpose of this chapter has been to enable you as a teacher to identify the classroom teaching
methods that are most likely to support the development of the knowledge and skills that students or
learners will need in a digital age. We still have a way to go before we have all the information and
tools needed to make this decision, but we can at least have a stab at it from here, while recognising
that such decisions will depend on a wide variety of factors, such as the nature of the learners and their
prior knowledge and experience, the demands of particular subject areas, the institutional context in
which teachers and learners find themselves, and the likely employment context for learners.
                                                                      3.8 Main conclusions 151

First, we can identify a number of different types of skills needed:

· conceptual skills, such as knowledge management, critical thinking, analysis, synthesis,
   problem-solving, creativity/innovation, experimental design;

· developmental or personal skills, such as independent learning, communications skills,
   ethics, networking, responsibility and teamwork;

· digital skills, embedded within and related to a particular subject or professional domain;

· manual and practical skills, such as machine or equipment operation, safety procedures,
   observation and recognition of data, patterns, and spatial factors.

We can also identify that in terms of content, we need teaching methods that enable students to manage
information or knowledge, rather than methods that merely transmit information to students.

There are several key points for a teacher or instructor to note:

· the teacher needs to be able to identify/recognise the skills they are hoping to develop in their
   students;

· these skills are often not easily separated but tend to be contextually based and often
   integrated;

· teachers need to identify appropriate methods and contexts that will enable students to
   develop these skills;

· students will need practice to develop such skills;

· students will need feedback and intervention from the teacher and other students to ensure a
   high level of competence or mastery in the skill;

· an assessment strategy needs to be developed that recognises and rewards students'
   competency and mastery of such skills.

In a digital age, just choosing a particular teaching method such as seminars or apprenticeship is not
going to be sufficient. It is unlikely that one method, such as transmissive lectures, or seminars, will
provide a rich enough learning environment for a full range of skills to be developed within the subject
area. It is necessary to provide a rich learning environment for students to develop such skills that
includes contextual relevance, and opportunities for practice, discussion and feedback. As a result, we
are likely to combine different methods of teaching.

   Secondly, this chapter has focused mainly on classroom or campus-based approaches to teaching.
In the next chapter a range of teaching methods that incorporate online/digital technologies will be
examined. So it would be foolish at this stage to say that any single method, such as seminars, or
apprenticeship, or nurturing, is the best method for developing the knowledge and skills needed in a
digital age. At the same time, the limitations of transmissive lectures, especially if they are used as the
main method for teaching, are becoming more apparent.

Activity 3.8 `Labelling' your own teaching
152 Chapter 3: Methods of teaching: campus-focused

             1. Think of what you consider in the past to have been your most successful unit of teaching (a class
                 or a whole course). Can you identify the underlying epistemology? What theory or theories of
                 learning would best describe how students learned in that context? What was the main teaching
                 method(s) you used?

             2. Look at one of the courses you are likely to be teaching next year. How would you change your
                 teaching methods on that course, now you have read Chapters 1, 2 and 3?

      There is no direct feedback from me on this activity as it is a reflective exercise.

                                                                            Key Takeaways

      This list of classroom or campus-based teaching methods is not meant to be exhaustive or comprehensive.
   The aim is to show that there many different ways to teach, and all are in some ways legitimate in certain
   circumstances. Most instructors will mix and match different methods, depending on the needs of both the
   subject matter and the needs of their students at a particular time. There are though some core conclusions to
   be drawn from this comparative review of different approaches to teaching.

             1. No single method is likely to meet all the requirements teachers face in a digital age.
             2. Nevertheless, some forms of teaching fit better with the development of the skills needed in a

                 digital age. In particular, methods that focus on conceptual development, such as dialogue and
                 discussion, knowledge management (rather than information transmission), and experiential
                 learning in real-world contexts, are all methods more likely to develop the high level conceptual
                 skills required in a digital age.
             3. It is not just conceptual skills though that are needed. It is the combination of conceptual,
                 practical, personal and social skills in highly complex situations that are needed. This again
                 means combining a variety of teaching methods.
             4. Nearly all of these teaching methods are media or technology independent. In other words, they
                 can be used in classrooms or online. What matters from a learning perspective is not so much the
                 choice of technology as the efficacy and expertise in appropriately choosing and using the
                 teaching method.
             5. Nevertheless, we shall see in the next chapter that new technologies offer new possibilities for
                 teaching, including offering more practice or time on task, reaching out to new target groups, and
                 increasing the productivity of both teachers and the system as a whole.
Chapter 4: Methods of teaching with an online focus

                                                                      Purpose of the chapter

      At the end of this chapter you should be able to:
             1. Describe key approaches to the design of online teaching and learning.
             2. Analyse each model in terms of its value for teaching in a digital age.
             3. Decide which model or combination of models will fit best with your own teaching.
             4. Use the model as a basis for designing your own teaching.

What is covered in this chapter

         · Scenario D: Developing historical thinking
         · 4.1 Online learning and teaching methods
         · 4.2 Old wine in new bottles: classroom-type online learning
         · 4.3 The ADDIE model
         · 4.4 Online collaborative learning
         · 4.5 Competency-based learning
         · 4.6 Communities of practice
         · Scenario E: ETEC 522: Ventures in e-Learning
         · 4.7 `Agile' Design: flexible designs for learning
         · 4.8 Making decisions about teaching methods
Also in this chapter you will find the following activities:
         · Activity 4.1 There is no activity for this section
         · Activity 4.2 Moving the classroom model online
         · Activity 4.3 Using the ADDIE model
         · Activity 4.4 Evaluating online collaborative learning models
         · Activity 4.5 Thinking about competency-based education
         · Activity 4.6 Making communities of practice work
         · Activity 4.7 Taking risks with `agile' design

                                                                   153
154 A.W. (Tony) Bates

         · Activity 4.8 Making choices

                                                                            Key Takeaways

      1. Traditional classroom teaching, and especially transmissive lectures, were designed for another age.
   Although lectures have served us well, we are now in a different age that requires different methods.

      2. The key shift is towards greater emphasis on skills, particularly knowledge management, and less on
   memorising content. We need design models for teaching and learning that lead to the development of the skills
   needed in a digital age.

      3. There is no one `best' design model for all circumstances. The choice of design model needs to take
   account of the context in which it will be applied, but nevertheless, some design models are better than
   others for developing the knowledge and skills needed in a digital age. For the contexts with which I'm most
   associated, online collaborative learning, experiential learning and agile design best meet my criteria.

      4. Design models in general are not dependent on a particular mode of delivery; they can operate in most
   cases as well online as in class.

      5. In an increasingly volatile, uncertain, complex and ambiguous world, we need design models for teaching
   that are light and nimble.
Scenario D: Developing historical thinking

Figure 4 D An artifact used by students in their history of Beijing, 1964-2014
Image: © zonaeuropa.com

Ralph Goodyear is a professor of history in a public research university in the central United States. He
has a class of 72 undergraduate students taking HIST 305, `Historiography'. For the first three weeks of
the course, Goodyear had recorded a series of short 15 minute video lectures that covered the following
topics/content:

                                                                   155
156 Chapter 4: Methods of teaching with an online focus

         · the various sources used by historians (e.g. earlier writings, empirical records including
            registries of birth, marriage and death, eye witness accounts, artifacts such as paintings,
            photographs, and physical evidence such as ruins);

         · the themes around which historical analysis tend to be written;

         · some of the techniques used by historians, such as narrative, analysis and interpretation;

         · three different positions or theories about history (objectivist, marxist, post modernist).

Students downloaded the videos according to a schedule suggested by Goodyear. Students attended two
one hour classes a week, where specific topics covered in the videos were discussed. Students also
had an online discussion forum in the course space on the university's learning management system,
where Goodyear had posted similar topics for discussion. Students were expected to make at least one
substantive contribution to each online topic for which they received a mark that went towards their final
grade. Students also had to read a major textbook on historiography over this three week period.

   In the fourth week, he divided the class into twelve groups of six, and asked each group to research the
history of any city outside the United States over the last 50 years or so. They could use whatever sources
they could find, including online sources such as newspaper reports, images, research publications, and
so on, as well as the university's own library collection. In writing their report, they had to do the
following:

         · pick a particular theme that covered the 50 years and write a narrative based around the
            theme;

         · identify the sources they finally used in their report, and discuss why they selected some
            sources and dismissed others;

         · compare their approach to the three positions covered in the lectures;

         · post their report in the form of an online e-portfolio in the course space on the university's
            learning management system.

They had five weeks to do this.
   The last three weeks of the course were devoted to presentations by each of the groups, with

comments, discussion and questions, both in class and online (the in class presentations were recorded
and made available online). At the end of the course, students assigned grades to each of the other
groups' work. Goodyear took these student gradings into consideration, but reserved the right to adjust
the grades, with an explanation of why he did the adjustment. Goodyear also gave each student an
individual grade, based on both their group's grade, and their personal contribution to the online and
class discussions.

   Goodyear commented that he was surprised and delighted at the quality of the students' work. He
said: `What I liked was that the students weren't learning about history; they were doing it.'

                                                          Based on an actual case, but with some embellishments
4.1 Online learning and teaching methods

                                                   For my personal comments on
                                                   some of the issues raised in this
                                                   chapter, please click on the
                                                   podcast below, which discusses
                                                   the relationship between quality,
                                                   modes of delivery, teaching
                                                   methods and design.

                       An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                    https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=114

   Online learning is increasingly influencing both classroom/campus-based teaching but more
importantly it is leading to new models or designs for teaching and learning.

   When commercial movies were first produced, they were basically a transfer of previous music
hall and vaudeville acts to the movie screen. Then along came D.W. Griffith's `Birth of a Nation',
which transformed the design of movies, by introducing techniques that were unique to cinema at the
time, such as panoramic long shots, panning shots, realistic battle scenes, and what are now known as
special effects.

   A similar development has taken place with online learning. Initially, there were two separate
influences: designs from classroom teaching; and designs inherited from print-based or multimedia
distance education. Over time, though, new designs that fully exploit the unique characteristics of online
learning are beginning to emerge.

   What we do when we move teaching online is to change the learning environment. Thus, I am

                                                                   157
158 Chapter 4: Methods of teaching with an online focus

beginning to move from talking about teaching methods (which can be the same both in class and online)
to design models, where the teaching method is deliberately adapted to the learning environment.
4.2 Old wine in new bottles: classroom-type online learning

Figure 4.2.1 Live video streaming of lecture Image: Planet eStream, 2019

   We start with classroom teaching methods that have been moved into a technological format with little
change to the overall design principles. I will argue that these are essentially old designs in new bottles.
4.2.1 Live, streamed video
This is basically a classroom lecture delivered at the time of delivery to remote students (although there
may also be live students in the lecture theatre as well). The remote students may be watching on their
own at home, work or in transit, or (more often) in small groups at another campus or local learning
centre. There is no change in the design, although the instructor may need to make sure that the remote
students are not ignored if there are questions or discussion. For an example, see here.

   This is often the first step instructors take into online learning, because they do not have to do anything
new other than learn how to set up and switch on the equipment. As the technology became cheaper and

                                                                   159
160 Chapter 4: Methods of teaching with an online focus

easier to use, the use of live streamed lectures doubled between 2016 and 2017 in Canada (Bates et al.,
2018).

   Some instructors require all students to be present during the live lecture in order to ensure discussion,
but this can be counter-productive if the aim of going online is to increase flexibility for students.
This can be countered by using an online asynchronous discussion forum in a learning management
system (for more on this, see Chapter 4.4). In most cases, though, lecturers prefer also to record the live
transmission so all students can access the lecture at any time (see the next section below).
4.2.2 Classes using lecture capture
This technology, which automatically records a classroom lecture, was originally designed to enhance
the classroom model by making lectures available for repeat viewings online at any time for students
regularly attending classes - in other words, a form of homework or revision.

Figure 4.2.2 An MIT classroom lecture recorded and made available through MIT's OpenCourseWare. Click on image
to see the lecture.

   Flipped classrooms, which pre-record a lecture for students to watch on their own, followed by
discussion in class, are an attempt to exploit more fully this potential. The main advantage of lecture
                                                                               4.2 Old wine in new bottles: classroom-type online learning 161

capture is increased access, especially if students have long commutes or harsh weather to navigate. In
some cases, it can reduce student drop-out dramatically. For an example of this see here.

   One of the biggest impacts of lecture capture has been for `instructionist' massive open online courses
(xMOOCs), such as those offered by Coursera, Udacity and edX. However, even this type of MOOC is
really a basic classroom design model (MOOCs are discussed in more detail in Chapter 5). The main
difference with a MOOC is that in a MOOC the classroom is open to anyone - but then in principle so
are many university lectures - but MOOCs are available to unlimited numbers at a distance. Thus, if an
institution decided to put all its recorded lectures up on an openly accessible server or on YouTube, they
would become MOOCs. Nevertheless, whether lecture captures are available only to students registered
in a course or as a MOOC, the design of the teaching has not changed markedly, although increasingly
lectures are recorded in smaller chunks, partly as a result of research on MOOCs (for more on this
research see Chapter 8.4).

4.2.2 Courses using learning management systems

Learning management systems (LMSs) are software that enable instructors and students to log in and
work within a password protected online learning environment. Most learning management systems,
such as Blackboard, Desire2Learn and Moodle, are in fact used to replicate a classroom design model.
They have weekly units or modules, the instructor selects and presents the material to all students in
the class at the same time, a large class enrolment can be organized into smaller sections with their
own instructors, there are opportunities for (online) discussion, students work through the materials at
roughly the same pace, and assessment is by end-of-course tests or essays.
162 Chapter 4: Methods of teaching with an online focus

Figure 4.2.3 A screenshot of the University of British Columbia's LMS, Blackboard Connect

   The main design differences are that the content is primarily text based rather than oral (although
increasingly video and audio are now integrated into LMSs), the online discussion is mainly
asynchronous rather than synchronous, and the course content is available at any time from anywhere
with an Internet connection. These are important differences from a physical classroom, and skilled
teachers and instructors can modify or adapt LMSs to meet different teaching or learning requirements
(as they can in physical classrooms), but the basic organizing framework of the LMS remains the same
as for a physical classroom.

   Nevertheless, the LMS is still an advance over online designs that merely put lectures on the
Internet as pre-recorded videos, or load up pdf copies of Powerpoint lecture notes, as is still the case
unfortunately in many online programs. There is also enough flexibility in the design of learning
management systems for them to be used in ways that break away from the traditional classroom model,
which is important, as good online design should take account of the special requirements of online
learners, so the design needs to be different from that of a classroom model.
4.2.3 The limitations of the classroom design model for online learning
Old wine can still be good wine, whether the bottle is new or not. What matters is whether classroom
                                                                               4.2 Old wine in new bottles: classroom-type online learning 163

design meets the changing needs of a digital age. However, just adding technology to the mix, or
delivering the same design online, does not automatically result in meeting changing needs.

   It is important then to look at the design that makes the most of the educational affordances of new
technologies, because unless the design changes significantly to take full advantage of the potential of
the technology, the outcome is likely to be inferior to that of the physical classroom model which it
is attempting to imitate. Thus even if the new technology, such as lecture capture and computer-based
multiple-choice questions organised in a MOOC, result in helping more students memorise better or
learn more content, for example, this may not be sufficient to meet the higher level skills needed in a
digital age.

   The second danger of just adding new technology to the classroom design is that we may just be
increasing cost, both in terms of technology and the time of instructors, without changing outcomes.

   The most important reason though is that students studying online are in a different learning
environment or context than students learning in a classroom, and the design needs to take account of
this. This will be discussed more fully in the rest of the book.

   Education is no exception to the phenomenon of new technologies being used at first merely to
reproduce earlier design models before they find their unique potential. However, changes to the basic
design model are needed if the demands of a digital age and the full potential of new technology are to
be exploited in education.

References

Bates, A. et al. (2018) Tracking Online and Distance Education in Canadian Universities and Colleges:
2018 Halifax NS: Canadian Digital Learning Research Association

                                                      Activity 4.2 Moving the classroom model online

      1. Do you agree that the classroom design model is a product of the 19th century and needs to changed for
   teaching in a digital age? Or is there still enough flexibility in the classroom model for our times?

      2. Do you agree that courses using LMSs are basically a classroom model delivered online, or are they a
   unique design model in themselves. If so, what makes them unique?

      3. What are the advantages and disadvantages of breaking up a 50 minute lecture into say five 10 minute
   chunks for recording? Would you call this a significant design change - if so, what makes it significant?

      For my personal views on these three questions listen to the podcast below:

                           An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                        https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=118
4.3 The ADDIE model

Figure 4.3.1 The ADDIE model.
© Flexible Learning Australia, 2014

   There have been many books written about the ADDIE model (see for instance, Morrison, 2010; Dick
and Carey, 2004). I give here just a very brief introduction.

                                                                   165
166 Chapter 4: Methods of teaching with an online focus

4.3.1 What is ADDIE?

ADDIE stands for:

Analyse

         · identify all the variables that need to be considered when designing the course, such as
            learner characteristics, learners' prior knowledge, resources available, etc. This stage is
            similar to the describing the learning environment outlined in Appendix 1 of this book;

Design

         · this stage focuses on identifying the learning objectives for the course and how materials will
            be created and designed (for instance, it may include describing what content areas are to be
            covered and a storyboard outlining what will be covered in text, audio and video and in what
            order), and deciding on the selection and use of technology, such as an LMS, video or social
            media;

Develop

         · the creation of content, including whether to develop in-house or outsource, copyright
            clearance for third party materials, loading of content into a web site or LMS, and so on;

Implement

         · this is the actual delivery of the course, including any prior training or briefing of learner
            support staff, and student assessment;

Evaluate

         · feedback and data is collected in order to identify areas that require improvement and this
            feeds into the design, development and implementation of the next iteration of the course.

4.3.2 Where is ADDIE used?

This is a design model used by many professional instructional designers for technology-based teaching.
ADDIE has been almost a standard for professionally developed, high quality distance education
programs, whether print-based or online. It is also heavily used in corporate e-learning and training.
There are many variations on this model (my favourite is `PADDIE', where planning and/or preparation
are added at the start). The model is mainly applied on an iterative basis, with evaluation leading to re-
analysis and further design and development modifications. One reason for the widespread use of the
ADDIE model is that it is extremely valuable for large and complex teaching designs. ADDIE's roots
go back to the Second World War and derive from system design, which was developed to manage the
hugely complex Normandy landings.

   Many open universities, such as the U.K. Open University and the OU of the Netherlands, Athabasca
University and Thompson Rivers Open University in Canada, still make heavy use of ADDIE to
manage the design of complex multi-media distance education courses. When the U.K. OU opened in
                                                                                                                                  4.3 The ADDIE model 167

1971 with an initial intake of 20,000, it used radio, television, specially designed printed modules, text
books, reproduced research articles in the form of selected readings that were mailed to students, and
regional study groups, with teams of often 20 academics, media producers and technology support staff
developing courses, and with delivery and learner support provided by an army of regional tutors and
senior counsellors. Creating and delivering its first courses within two years of receiving its charter
would have been impossible without a systematic instructional design model, and in 2014, with over
200,000 students, the OU was still using the ADDIE approach for many of its courses.

  Although ADDIE and instructional design in general originated in the USA, the U.K.
Open University's success in developing high quality learning materials influenced many
more institutions that were offering distance education on a much smaller scale to adopt
the ADDIE model, if in a more modest way, typically with a single instructor working
with an instructional designer. As distance education courses became increasingly
developed as online courses, the ADDIE model continued, and is now being used by
instructional designers in many institutions for the re-design of large lecture classes,
hybrid learning, and for fully online courses.

4.4.3 What are the benefits of ADDIE?

One reason it has been so successful is that it is heavily associated with good quality design, with
clear learning objectives, carefully structured content, controlled workloads for faculty and students,
integrated media, relevant student activities, and assessment strongly tied to desired learning outcomes.
Although these good design principles can be applied with or without the ADDIE model, ADDIE is a
model that allows these design principles to be identified and implemented on a systematic and thorough
basis. It is also a very useful management tool, allowing for the design and development of large
numbers of courses to a standard high quality.

4.4.5 What are the limitations of ADDIE?

The ADDIE approach can be used with any size of teaching project, but works best with large and
complex projects. Applied to courses with small student numbers and a deliberately simple or traditional
classroom design, it becomes expensive and possibly redundant, although there is nothing to stop an
individual teacher following this strategy when designing and delivering a course.

   A second criticism is that the ADDIE model is what might be called `front-end loaded' in that it
focuses heavily on content design and development, but does not pay as much attention to the interaction
between instructors and students during course delivery. Thus it has been criticised by constructivists
for not paying enough attention to learner-instructor interaction, and for privileging more behaviourist
approaches to teaching.

   Another criticism is that while the five stages are reasonably well described in most descriptions
of the model, the model does not provide guidance on how to make decisions within that framework.
For instance, it does not provide guidelines or procedures for deciding how to choose between different
media, or what assessment strategies to use. Instructors have to go beyond the ADDIE framework to
make these decisions.

   The over-enthusiastic application of the ADDIE model can result in overly complex design stages,
with many different categories of workers (faculty, instructional designers, editors, web designers) and
consequently a strong division of labour, resulting in courses taking up to two years from initial approval
168 Chapter 4: Methods of teaching with an online focus

to actual delivery. The more complex the design and management infrastructure, the more opportunities
there are for cost over-runs and very expensive programming. It is a very good example of the industrial
approach to course design.

   My main criticism though is that the model is too inflexible for the digital age. How does a teacher
respond to rapidly developing new content, new technologies or apps being launched on a daily basis,
to a constantly changing student base? Although the ADDIE model has served us well in the past, and
provides a good foundation for designing teaching and learning, it can be too pre-determined, linear and
inflexible to handle more volatile learning contexts. I will discuss more flexible models for design in
Section 4.7.

References

Dick, W., and Carey, L. (2004). The Systematic Design of Instruction Allyn & Bacon; 6 edition Allyn &
Bacon

Morrison, Gary R. (2010) Designing Effective Instruction, 6th Edition New York: John Wiley & Sons

                                                              Activity 4.3 Using the ADDIE model

      1. Take a course you are currently offering. How many of the stages of the ADDIE model did you go
   through? If you missed out on some of the stages, do you think the course would have been better if you had
   included these stages? Given the amount of work needed to work through each of the stages, do you think the
   results would be worth the effort?

      2. If you are thinking of designing a new course, use the Flexible Learning Australia infographic to work
   through the four steps of analysis they recommend. Was this helpful? If so, you might want to continue with
   the other recommended steps.

      3. If you have previously used the ADDIE model, are you happy with it? Do you agree with my criticisms?
   Is it flexible enough for the context in which you are working?

      I do not provide feedback on these questions as they are for you to think about based on your own
   experience.
4.4 Online collaborative learning

Figure 4.4.1. Collaborative group work. In this example the teacher has organized a class of 19 students into six
groups. The teacher can interact with individual students or with each group as a whole. In online collaborative
learning each group can have its own discussion area which can be `closed' (except to the teacher) or open to the
other students. In this model, all communication is textual, over the Internet, using online discussion forum software.
However, the model could be applied to video-conferencing, but usually with smaller numbers of students due to
bandwidth restrictions, or to classroom teaching. Each mode of delivery though will need its own variations in design
for it to work well. Image: Tony Bates, 2019.

                                                                   169
170 Chapter 4: Methods of teaching with an online focus

4.4.1 What is online collaborative learning?

The concurrence of both constructivist approaches to learning and the development of the Internet
has led to the development of a particular form of constructivist teaching, originally called computer-
mediated communication (CMC), or networked learning, but which has been developed into what
Harasim (2017) now calls online collaborative learning theory (OCL). She describes OCL as follows (p.
90):

     OCL theory provides a model of learning in which students are encouraged and supported to
     work together to create knowledge: to invent, to explore ways to innovate, and, by so doing, to
     seek the conceptual knowledge needed to solve problems rather than recite what they think is the
     right answer. While OCL theory does encourage the learner to be active and engaged, this is
     not considered to be sufficient for learning or knowledge construction......In the OCL theory, the
     teacher plays a key role not as a fellow-learner, but as the link to the knowledge community, or
     state of the art in that discipline. Learning is defined as conceptual change and is key to building
     knowledge. Learning activity needs to be informed and guided by the norms of the discipline and a
     discourse process that emphasises conceptual learning and builds knowledge.

   OCL builds on and integrates theories of cognitive development that focus on conversational learning
(Pask, 1975), conditions for deep learning (Marton and Saljø, 1997; Entwistle, 2000), development of
academic knowledge (Laurillard, 2001), and knowledge construction (Scardamalia and Bereiter, 2006).

   From the very early days of online learning, some instructors have focused heavily on the
communication affordances of the Internet (see for instance, Hiltz and Turoff, 1978). They have based
their teaching on the concept of knowledge construction, the gradual building of knowledge mainly
through asynchronous online discussion among students and between students and an instructor.

   Online discussion forums go back to the 1970s, but really took off as a result of a combination of
the invention of the WorldWide Web in the 1990s, high speed Internet access, and the development of
learning management systems, most of which now include an area for online discussions. These online
discussion forums have some differences though with classroom seminars:

         · first, they are text based, not oral;

         · second, they are asynchronous: participants can log in at any time, and from anywhere with
            an Internet connection;

         · third, many discussion forums allow for `threaded' connections, enabling a response to be
            attached to the particular comment which prompted the response, rather than just displayed in
            chronological order. This allows for dynamic sub-topics to be developed, with sometimes
            more than ten responses within a single thread of discussion. This enables participants to
            follow multiple discussion topics over a period of time.

4.4.2 Core design principles of OCL

Harasim emphasises the importance of three key phases of knowledge construction through discourse:

         · idea generating: this is literally brainstorming, to collect the divergent thinking within a
            group;
                                                                                                                    4.4 Online collaborative learning 171

         · idea organising: this is where learners compare, analyse and categorise the different ideas
            previously generated, again through discussion and argument;

         · intellectual convergence: the aim here is to reach a level of intellectual synthesis,
            understanding and consensus (including agreeing to disagree), usually through the joint
            construction of some artefact or piece of work, such as an essay or assignment.

This results in what Harasim calls a Final Position, although in reality the position is never final because
for a learner, once started, the process of generating, organising and converging on ideas continues at
an ever deeper or more advanced level. The role of the teacher or instructor in this process is seen as
critical, not only in facilitating the process and providing appropriate resources and learner activities
that encourage this kind of learning, but also, as a representative of a knowledge community or subject
domain, in ensuring that the core concepts, practices, standards and principles of the subject domain are
fully integrated into the learning cycle.

   Harasim provides the following diagram to capture this process:

Figure 4.4.2: Harasim's pedagogy of group discussion (from Harasim, 2017, p. 95, with permission)

   Another important factor is that in the OCL model, discussion forums are not an addition or
172 Chapter 4: Methods of teaching with an online focus

supplement to core teaching materials, such as textbooks, recorded lectures, or text in an LMS, but are
the core component of the teaching. Textbooks, readings and other resources are chosen to support the
discussion, not the other way round.

   This is a key design principle, and explains why often instructors or tutors complain, in more
`traditional' online courses, that students don't participate in discussions. Often this is because where
online discussions are secondary to more didactic teaching, or are not deliberately designed and
managed to lead to knowledge construction, students see the discussions as optional or extra work,
because they have no direct impact on grades or assessment.

   It is also a reason why awarding grades for participation in discussion forums misses the point. It is
not the extrinsic activity that counts, but the intrinsic value of the discussion, that matters (see, for
instance, Brindley, Walti and Blashke, 2009). Thus although instructors using an OCL approach may
use learning management systems for convenience, they are used differently from courses where
traditional didactic teaching is moved online.

4.4.3 Community of Inquiry

The Community of Inquiry Model (CoI) is somewhat similar to the OCL model. As defined by Garrison,
Anderson and Archer (2000):

     An educational community of inquiry is a group of individuals who collaboratively engage in
     purposeful critical discourse and reflection to construct personal meaning and confirm mutual
     understanding.

   Garrison, Anderson and Archer argue that there are three essential elements of a community of
inquiry:

         · social presence: is "the ability of participants to identify with the community (e.g., course of
            study), communicate purposefully in a trusting environment, and develop inter-personal
            relationships by way of projecting their individual personalities."

         · teaching presence: is "the design, facilitation, and direction of cognitive and social
            processes for the purpose of realizing personally meaningful and educationally worthwhile
            learning outcomes"

         · cognitive presence: is "the extent to which learners are able to construct and confirm
            meaning through sustained reflection and discourse".
                                                                                                                    4.4 Online collaborative learning 173

Figure 4.4.3: Community of Inquiry Image: © Terry Anderson/Marguerite Koole, 2013

   However, CoI is more of a theory than a model, since it does not indicate what activities or
conditions are needed to create these three `presences'. The two models (OCL and CoI) are also
more complementary rather than competing.
4.4.4 Developing meaningful online discussion
Since the publication of the original CoI paper in 2000, there have been a number of studies that have
identified the importance of these `presences' within especially online learning (click here for a wide
selection). Although there has been a wide range of researchers and educators engaged in the area of
174 Chapter 4: Methods of teaching with an online focus

online collaborative learning and communities of inquiry, there is a high degree of convergence and
agreement about successful strategies and design principles. For academic and conceptual development,
discussions need to be well organized by the teacher, and the teacher needs to provide the necessary
support to enable the development of ideas and the construction of new knowledge for the students.

   Partly as a result of this research, and partly as the result of experienced online instructors who have
not necessarily been influenced by either the OCL or the Community of Inquiry literature, several other
design principles have been associated with successful (online) discussion, such as:

         · appropriate technology (for example, software that allows for threaded discussions);

         · clear guidelines on student online behaviour, such as written codes of conduct for
            participating in discussions, and ensuring that they are enforced;

         · student orientation and preparation, including technology orientation and explaining the
            purpose of discussion;

         · clear goals for the discussions that are understood by the students, such as: `to explore
            gender and class issues in selected novels' or `to compare and evaluate alternative methods of
            coding';

         · choice of appropriate topics, that complement and expand issues in the study materials, and
            are relevant to answering assessment questions;

         · setting an appropriate `tone' or requirements for discussion (for example, respectful
            disagreement, evidence-based arguments);

         · defining clearly learner roles and expectations, such as `you should log in at least once a
            week to each discussion topic and make at least one substantive contribution to each topic
            each week';

         · monitoring the participation of individual learners, and responding
            accordingly, by providing the appropriate scaffolding or support, such as comments that help
            students develop their thinking around the topics, referring them back to study materials if
            necessary, or explaining issues when students seem to be confused or misinformed;

         · regular, ongoing instructor `presence', such as monitoring the discussions to prevent them
            getting off topic or too personal, and providing encouragement for those that are making real
            contributions to the discussion, heading off those that are trying to hog or dominate the
            discussions, and tracking those not participating, and helping them to participate;

         · ensuring strong articulation between discussion topics and assessment.

These issues are discussed in more depth by Salmon (2000); Bates and Poole (2003); and Paloff and
Pratt (2005; 2007).

4.4.5 Cultural and epistemological issues

Students come to the educational experience with different expectations and backgrounds. As a result
there are often major cultural differences in students with regard to participating in discussion-based
collaborative learning that in the end reflect deep differences with regard to traditions of learning and
teaching. Thus teachers need to be aware that there are likely to be students in any class who may be
                                                                                                                    4.4 Online collaborative learning 175

struggling with language, cultural or epistemological issues, but in online classes, where students can
come from anywhere, this is a particularly important issue.

   In many countries, there is a strong tradition of the authoritarian role of the teacher and the
transmission of information from the teacher to the student. In some cultures, it would be considered
disrespectful to challenge or criticize the views of teachers or even other students. In an authoritarian,
teacher-based culture, the views of other students may be considered irrelevant or unimportant. Other
cultures have a strong oral tradition, or one based on story-telling, rather than on direct instruction.

   Online environments then can present real challenges to students when a constructivist approach to
the design of online learning activities is adopted. This may mean taking specific steps to help students
who are unfamiliar with a constructivist approach to learning, such as asking a student to send drafts
to the instructor by e-mail for approval before posting a `class' contribution. For a fuller discussion
of cross-cultural issues in online learning, see Jung and Gunawardena (2014) and the journal Distance
Education, Vol. 22, No. 1 (2001), the whole edition of which is devoted to papers on this topic.

4.4.6 Strengths and weaknesses of online collaborative learning

This approach to the use of technology for teaching is very different from the more objectivist
approaches found in computer-assisted learning, teaching machines, and artificial intelligence
applications to education, which primarily aim to use computing to replace at least some of the activities
traditionally done by human teachers. With online collaborative learning, the aim is not to replace the
teacher, but to use the technology primarily to increase and improve communication between teacher
and learners, with a particular approach to the development of learning based on knowledge construction
assisted and developed through social discourse. This social discourse furthermore is not random, but
managed in such a way as to `scaffold' learning:

         · by assisting with the construction of knowledge in ways that are guided by the instructor;

         · that reflect the norms or values of the discipline;

         · that also respect or take into consideration the prior knowledge within the discipline.

Thus there are two main strengths of this model:

         · when applied appropriately, online collaborative learning can lead to deep, academic
            learning, or transformative learning, as well as, if not better than, discussion in campus-based
            classrooms. The asynchronous and recorded `affordances' of online learning more than
            compensate for the lack of physical cues and other aspects of face-to-face discussion;

         · online collaborative learning as a result can also directly support the development of a range
            of high level intellectual skills, such as critical thinking, analytical thinking, synthesis, and
            evaluation, which are key requirements for learners in a digital age.

There are though some limitations:

         · it does not scale easily, requiring highly knowledgeable and skilled instructors, and a limited
            number of learners per instructor;

         · it is more likely to accommodate to the epistemological positions of faculty and instructors in
            humanities, social sciences, education and some areas of business studies and health and
176 Chapter 4: Methods of teaching with an online focus

            conversely it is likely to be less accommodating to the epistemological positions of faculty
            in science, computer science and engineering. However, if combined with a problem-based or
            inquiry-based approach, it might have acceptance even in some of the STEM subject
            domains.

4.4.7 Summary

Many of the strengths and challenges of collaborative learning apply both in face-to-face or online
learning contexts. It could be argued that there is no or little difference between online collaborative
learning and well-conducted traditional classroom, discussion-based teaching. Although there are
necessary adaptations depending on the mode of delivery, many of the core principles of successful
collaborative learning (see Barkley, Major and Cross, 2014) will apply in both online and face-to-
face teaching. Once again, we see that the mode of delivery is less important than the design model,
which can work well in both contexts. Indeed, it is possible to conduct successful collaborative learning
synchronously or asynchronously, at a distance or face-to-face.

   However, there is plenty of evidence that collaborative learning can be done just as well online, which
is important, given the need for more flexible models of delivery to meet the needs of a more diverse
student body in a digital age. Also, the necessary conditions for success in teaching this way are now
well known, even though they are not always universally applied.

References

Barkley, E., Major, C.H., and Cross, K.P. (2017) Collaborative Learning Techniques San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass/Wiley

   Bates, A. and Poole, G. (2003) Effective Teaching with Technology in Higher Education: Foundations
for Success San Francisco: Jossey-Bass

   Brindley, J., Walti, C. and Blashke, L. (2009) Creating Effective Collaborative Learning Groups in an
Online Environment International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning, Vol. 10, No. 3

   Entwistle, N. (2000) Promoting deep learning through teaching and assessment: conceptual
frameworks and educational contexts Leicester UK: TLRP Conference

   Garrison, R., Anderson, A. and Archer, W. (2000) Critical Inquiry in a Text-based Environment:
Computer Conferencing in Higher Education The Internet and Higher Education, Vol. 2, No. 3

   Harasim, L. (2017) Learning Theory and Online Technologies 2nd edition New York/London: Taylor
and Francis

   Hiltz, R. and Turoff, M. (1978) The Network Nation: Human Communication via Computer Reading
MA: Addison-Wesley

   Jung, I. and Gunawardena, C. (eds.) (2014) Culture and Online Learning: Global Perspectives and
Research Sterling VA: Stylus

   Laurillard, D. (2001) Rethinking University Teaching: A Conversational Framework for the Effective
Use of Learning Technologies New York/London: Routledge

   Marton, F. and Saljö, R. (1997) Approaches to learning, in Marton, F., Hounsell, D. and Entwistle,
N. (eds.) The experience of learning: Edinburgh: Scottish Academic Press (out of press, but available
online)

   Paloff, R. and Pratt, K. (2005) Collaborating Online: Learning Together in Community San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass
                                                                                                                    4.4 Online collaborative learning 177

   Paloff, R. and Pratt, K. (2007) Building Online Learning Communities: Effective Strategies for the
Virtual Classroom San Francisco: Jossey-Bass

   Pask, G. (1975) Conversation, Cognition and Learning Amsterdam/London: Elsevier (out of press,
but available online here)

   Salmon, G. (2000) e-Moderating: The Key to Teaching and Learning Online London: Taylor and
Francis

   Scardamalia, M. and Bereiter, C. (2006) Knowledge Building: Theory, pedagogy and technology in
Sawyer, K. (ed.) Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences New York: Cambridge University Press

                                             Activity 4.4: Evaluating online collaborative learning models

      1. Can you see the differences between `Open Collaborative Learning' (OCL) and `Communities of
   Inquiry'? Or are they really the same model with different names?

      2. Do you agree that either of these models can be applied just as successfully online or face-to-face?
      3. Do you see other strengths or weaknesses with these models?
      4. Is this common sense dressed up as theory?
      5. Does it make sense to apply either of these models to courses in the quantitative sciences such as physics
   or engineering? If so, under what conditions?
      For my comments on these questions, click on the podcast below:

                           An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                        https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=125
4.5 Competency-based learning

Figure 4.5.1 e-Commerce business course competencies, Capella University

4.5.1 What is competency-based learning?
Competency-based learning begins by identifying specific competencies or skills, and enables learners
to develop mastery of each competency or skill at their own pace, usually working with a mentor.
Learners can develop just the competencies or skills they feel they need (for which increasingly they may

                                                                   179
180 Chapter 4: Methods of teaching with an online focus

receive a `badge' or some form of validated recognition), or can combine a whole set of competencies
into a full qualification, such as a certificate, diploma or increasingly a full degree.

   Learners work individually, usually online, rather than in cohorts. If learners can demonstrate that they
already have mastery of a particular competency or skill, through a test or some form of prior learning
assessment, they may be allowed to move to the next level of competency without having to repeat a
prescribed course of study for the prior competency. Competency-based learning attempts to break away
from the regularly scheduled classroom model, where students study the same subject matter at the same
speed in a cohort of fellow students.

   The value of competency-based learning for developing practical or vocational skills or competencies
is more obvious, but increasingly competency-based learning is being used for education requiring
more abstract or academic skills development, sometimes combined with other cohort-based courses or
programs.

4.5.2 Who uses competency-based learning?

The Western Governors University in the USA, with nearly 40,000 students, has pioneered competency-
based learning, but, with the more recent support of the Federal Department of Education, competency-
based learning is expanding rapidly in the USA. Other institutions making extensive use of competency-
based learning are Southern New Hampshire University through its College for America,
designed specifically for working adults and their employers, Northern Arizona University, and Capella
University.

   Competency-based learning is particularly appropriate for adult learners with life experience who may
have developed competencies or skills without formal education or training, for those who started school
or college and dropped out and wish to return to formal study, but want their learning `after school' to
be recognized, or for those learners wanting to develop specific skills but not wanting a full program of
studies. Competency-based learning can be delivered through a campus program, but it is increasingly
delivered fully online, because many students taking such programs are already working or seeking
work, and because technology enables each student a distinct pathway through content based on their
prior knowledge.

4.5.3 Designing competency-based learning

There are various approaches, but the Western Governors' model illustrates many of the key steps.

4.5.3.1 Defining competencies

A feature of most competency-based programs is a partnership between employers and educators in
identifying the competencies required, at least at a high level. Some of the skills outlined in Chapter
1, such as problem-solving or critical thinking, may be considered high-level, but competency-based
learning tries to break down abstract or vague goals into specific, measurable competencies.

   For instance, at Western Governors University (WGU), for each degree, a high-level set of
competencies is defined by the University Council, and then a working team of contracted subject matter
experts takes the ten or so high level competencies for a particular qualification and breaks them down
into about 30 more specific competencies, around which are built online courses to develop mastery of
each competency. Competencies are based upon what graduates are supposed to know in the workplace
and as professionals in a chosen career. Assessments are designed specifically to assess the mastery of
                                                                                                                     4.5 Competency-based learning 181

each competency; thus students receive either a pass/no pass following assessment. A degree is awarded
when all 30 specified competencies are successfully achieved.

   Defining competencies that meet the needs of students and employers in ways that are progressive
(in that one competency builds on earlier competencies and leads to more advanced competencies) and
coherent (in that the sum of all the competencies produces a graduate with all the knowledge and
skills required within a business or profession) is perhaps the most important and most difficult part of
competency-based learning.

4.5.3.2 Course and program design

At WGU, courses are created by in-house subject matter experts selecting existing online curriculum
from third parties and/or resources such as e-textbooks through contracts with publishers. Increasingly
open educational resources are used. WGU does not use a learning management system but a specially
designed portal for each course. E-textbooks are offered to students without extra cost to the student,
through contracts between WGU and the publishers. Courses are pre-determined for the student with no
electives. Students are admitted on a monthly basis and work their way through each competency at their
own pace.

   Students who already possess competencies may accelerate through their program in two ways:
transferring in credits from a previous associate degree in appropriate areas (e.g. general education,
writing); or by taking exams when they feel they are ready.

4.5.3.3 Learner support

Again this varies from institution to institution. WGU currently employs approximately 750 faculty
who act as mentors. There are two kinds of mentors: `student' mentors and `course' mentors. Student
mentors, who have qualifications within the subject domain, usually at a masters level, are in at least bi-
weekly telephone contact with their students, depending on the needs of the student in working through
their courses, and are the main contact for students. A student mentor is responsible for roughly 85
students. Students start with a mentor from their first day and stay with their mentor until graduation.
Student mentors assist students in determining and maintaining an appropriate pace of study, and step in
with help when students are struggling.

   Course mentors are more highly qualified, usually with a doctorate, and provide extra support
for students when needed. Course mentors will be available to between 200-400 students at a time,
depending on the subject requirement.

   Students may contact either student or course mentors at any time (unlimited access) and mentors
are expected to deal with student calls within one business day. Mentors are full-time but work
flexible hours, usually from home. Mentors are reasonably well paid, and receive extensive training in
mentoring.

4.5.3.4 Assessment

WGU uses written papers, portfolios, projects, observed student performance and computer-marked
assignments as appropriate, with detailed rubrics. Assessments are submitted online and if they require
human evaluation, qualified graders (subject matter experts trained by WGU in assessment) are
randomly assigned to mark work on a pass/fail basis. If students fail, the graders provide feedback on
the areas where competency was not demonstrated. Students may resubmit if necessary.
182 Chapter 4: Methods of teaching with an online focus

            Figure 4.5.2 Remote proctoring of exams at Western Governors' University

   Students will take both formative (pre-assessment) and summative (proctored) exams. WGU is
increasingly using online proctoring, enabling students to take an exam at home under video supervision,
using facial recognition technology to ensure that the registered student is taking the exam. In areas such
as teaching and health, student performance or practice is assessed in situ by professionals (teachers,
nurses).
                                                                                                                     4.5 Competency-based learning 183

Figure 4.5.3 Example transcript from Northern Arizona University

4.5.4 Strengths and weaknesses
Proponents have identified a number of strengths in the competency-based learning approach:

         · it meets the immediate needs of businesses and professions; students are either already
            working, and receive advancement within the company, or if unemployed, are more likely to
            be employed once qualified;

         · it enables learners with work or family commitments to study at their own pace;
         · for some students, it speeds up time to completion of a qualification by enabling prior

            learning to be recognized;
         · students get individual support and help from their mentors;
         · tuition fees are affordable (US$6,000 per annum at WGU) and programs can be self-funding

            from tuition fees alone, since WGU uses already existing study materials and increasingly
            open educational resources;
         · competency-based education is being recognized as eligible for Federal loans and student aid
            in the USA.
Consequently, institutions such as WGU, the University of Southern New Hampshire, and Northern
Arizona University, using a competency-based approach, at least as part of their operations, have seen
annual enrolment growth in the range of 30-40 per cent per annum.
   Its main weakness is that it works well with some learning environments and less well with others. In
particular:
         · it focuses on immediate employer needs and is less focused on preparing learners with the
184 Chapter 4: Methods of teaching with an online focus

            flexibility needed for a more uncertain future;

         · it does not suit subject areas where it is difficult to prescribe specific competencies or where
            new skills and new knowledge need to be rapidly accommodated;

         · it takes an objectivist approach to learning; constructivists would argue that skills are not
            either present or absent (pass or fail), but have a wide range of performance and continue to
            develop over time;

         · it ignores the importance of social learning;

         · it will not fit the preferred learning styles of many students.

A 2015 report by EAB, a private educational consultancy, identified three `myths' about about
competency-based education:

         · high demand: in fact EAB reported a lack of demand from students or employers

         · faster and cheaper for students: in fact it is difficult for students, especially working adults, to
            complete competencies fast enough for there to be savings over conventional programs

         · cheaper for institutions: in fact, because of the need for new systems such as on-demand
            registration, and different reporting for government financial aid, institutional costs are often
            higher than anticipated

4.5.5 In conclusion

Competency-based learning is a relatively new approach to learning design which is proving
increasingly popular with employers and suits certain kinds of learners such as adults seeking to re-
skill or searching for mid-level jobs requiring relatively easily identifiable skills. It does not suit though
all kinds of learners and may be limited in developing the higher level, more abstract knowledge and
skills requiring creativity, high-level problem-solving and decision-making and critical thinking.

Further reading

At the time of writing, there is comparatively little literature and even less research on competency-based
learning compared with most other teaching approaches. It is also an area that has recently evolved from
earlier, more training-focused approaches to competency. I have therefore limited myself to more recent
publications. The following publications are recommended for those who would like to pursue this area
further:

   Book, P. (2014) All Hands on Deck: Ten Lessons from Early Adopters of Competency-based
Education Boulder CO: WCET

   Cañado, P. and Luisa, M. (eds.) (2013) Competency-based Language Teaching in Higher Education
New York: Springer

   EAB (2015) Three Myths About Competency-Based Education Washington DC: Education Advisory
Board

   Garrett, R. and Lurie, H. (2016) Deconstructing CBE: An Assessment of Institutional Activity, Goals
and Challenges in Higher Education Boston MA: Ellucian/Eduventures

   Rothwell, W. and Graber, J. (2010) Competency-Based Training Basics Alexandria VA: ADST
                                                                                                                     4.5 Competency-based learning 185

   Weise, M. (2014) Got Skills? Why Online Competency-Based Education Is the Disruptive Innovation
for Higher Education EDUCAUSE Review, November 10

   The Southern Regional Educational Board in the USA has a comprehensive Competency-based
Learning Bibliography

                                               Activity 4.5 Thinking about competency-based education?

      1. What factors are likely to influence you to adopt a competency-based approach to teaching? Could you
   describe a scenario where you could use this approach effectively?

      2. What are the advantages and disadvantages of students studying individually, rather than in a cohort?
   What skills are they likely to miss out on through individual study?

      3. Is competency-based learning something an individual instructor should contemplate? What institutional
   support would be necessary to make this approach work?

      For my response to these questions, click on the podcast below:

                           An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                        https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=130
4.6 Communities of practice

Figure 4.6.1 Bank of America's Vital Voices program links women executives of small and medium sized enterprises
from around the world
Image: © Belfast Telegraph, 2014

4.6.1 The theories behind communities of practice
The design of teaching often integrates different theories of learning. Communities of practice are one
of the ways in which experiential learning, social constructivism, and connectivism can be combined,
illustrating the limitations of trying to rigidly classify learning theories. Practice tends to be more
complex.

                                                                   187
188 Chapter 4: Methods of teaching with an online focus

4.6.2 What are communities of practice?

4.6.2.1 Definition:

     Communities of practice are groups of people who share a concern or a passion for something they
     do and learn how to do it better as they interact regularly.

                                                                                           Wenger, 2014

4.6.2.2 What are communities of practice?

The basic premise behind communities of practice is simple: we all learn in everyday life from the
communities in which we find ourselves. Communities of practice are everywhere. Nearly
everyone belongs to some community of practice, whether it is through our working colleagues or
associates, our profession or trade, or our leisure interests, such as a book club. Wenger (2000) argues
that a community of practice is different from a community of interest or a geographical community in
that it involves a shared practice: ways of doing things that are shared to some significant extent among
members.

4.6.2.3 Characteristics

Wenger argues that there are three crucial characteristics of a community of practice:

         · domain: a common interest that connects and holds together the community;
         · community: a community is bound by the shared activities they pursue (for example,

            meetings, discussions) around their common domain;
         · practice: members of a community of practice are practitioners; what they do informs their

            participation in the community; and what they learn from the community affects what they
            do.

4.6.2.4 Innovation and change

Wenger (2000) has argued that although individuals learn through participation in a community of
practice, more important is the generation of newer or deeper levels of knowledge through the sum of
the group activity. If the community of practice is centered around business processes, for instance, this
can be of considerable benefit to an organization. Smith (2003) notes that:

     ...communities of practice affect performance..[This] is important in part because of their potential
     to overcome the inherent problems of a slow-moving traditional hierarchy in a fast-moving virtual
     economy. Communities also appear to be an effective way for organizations to handle unstructured
     problems and to share knowledge outside of the traditional structural boundaries. In addition,
     the community concept is acknowledged to be a means of developing and maintaining long-term
     organizational memory.

   Brown and Duguid (2000) describe a community of practice developed around the Xerox customer
service representatives who repaired the machines in the field. The Xerox reps began exchanging tips
and tricks over informal meetings at breakfast or lunch and eventually Xerox saw the value of these
                                                                                                                          4.6 Communities of practice 189

interactions and created the Eureka project to allow these interactions to be shared across the global
network of representatives. The Eureka database has been estimated to have saved the corporation $100
million. Companies such as Google and Apple are encouraging communities of practice through the
sharing of knowledge across their many specialist staff.

2.6.2.5 Technologies

Technology provides a wide range of tools that can support communities of practice, as indicated
by Wenger (2014) in the diagram below:

Figure 4.6.2 Tools that support communities of practice
Image: Wenger, 2014
190 Chapter 4: Methods of teaching with an online focus

4.6.3 Designing effective communities of practice

Most communities of practice have no formal design and tend to be self-organising systems. They have
a natural life cycle, and come to an end when they no longer serve the needs of the community. However,
there is now a body of theory and research that has identified actions that can help sustain and improve
the effectiveness of communities of practice.

   Wenger, McDermott and Snyder (2002) have identified seven key design principles for creating
effective and self-sustaining communities of practice, related specifically to the management of the
community, although the ultimate success of a community of practice will be determined by the
activities of the members of the community themselves. Designers of a community of practice need to:

4.6.3.1 Design for evolution

Ensure that the community can evolve and shift in focus to meet the interests of the participants without
moving too far from the common domain of interest.

4.6.3.2 Open a dialogue between inside and outside perspectives

Encourage the introduction and discussion of new perspectives that come or are brought in from outside
the community of practice.

4.6.3.3 Encourage and accept different levels of participation

Different levels of participation include:

         · the `core' (most active members),
         · those who participate regularly but do not take a leading role in active contributions,
         · hose (likely the majority) who are on the periphery of the community but may become more

            active participants if the activities or discussions start to engage them more fully.

4.6.3.4 Develop both public and private community spaces

Communities of practice are strengthened if they encourage individual or group activities that are more
personal or private as well as the more public general discussions; for instance, individuals may decide
to blog about their activities, or a small group in an online community that live or work close together
may also decide to meet informally on a face-to-face basis.

4.6.3.5 Focus on value

Attempts should be made explicitly to identify, through feedback and discussion, the contributions that
the community most values.

4.6.3.6 Combine familiarity and excitement

Focus both on shared, common concerns and perspectives, but also on the introduction of radical or
challenging perspectives for discussion or action.
                                           4.6 Communities of practice 191

4.6.3.7 Create a rhythm for the community

There needs to be a regular schedule of activities or focal points that bring participants together on a
regular basis, within the constraints of participants' time and interests.

4.6.4 Critical factors for success

Subsequent research has identified a number of critical factors that influence the effectiveness
of participants in communities of practice, These include being:

         · aware of social presence: individuals need to feel comfortable in engaging socially with
            other professionals or `experts' in the domain, and those with greater knowledge must be
            willing to share in a collegial manner that respects the views and knowledge of other
            participants (social presence is defined as the awareness of others in an interaction combined
            with an appreciation of the interpersonal aspects of that interaction.)

         · motivated to share information for the common good of the community

         · able and willing to collaborate.

EDUCAUSE has developed a step-by-step guide for designing and cultivating communities of practice
in higher education (Cambridge, Kaplan and Suter, 2005).

   Lastly, research on other related sectors, such as collaborative learning or MOOCs, can inform
the design and development of communities of practice. For instance, communities of practice need
to balance between structure and chaos: too much structure and many participants are likely to feel
constrained in what they need to discuss; too little structure and participants can quickly lose interest or
become overwhelmed.

   Many of the other findings about group and online behaviour, such as the need to respect others,
observing online etiquette, and preventing certain individuals from dominating the discussion, are all
likely to apply. However, because many communities of practice are by definition self-regulating,
establishing rules of conduct and even more so enforcing them is really a responsibility of the
participants themselves.

4.6.5 Learning through communities of practice in a digital age

Communities of practice are a powerful manifestation of informal learning. They generally evolve
naturally to address commonly shared interests and problems. By their nature, they tend to exist outside
formal educational organisations. Participants are not usually looking for formal qualifications, but to
address issues in their life and to be better at what they do. Furthermore, communities of practice are not
dependent on any particular medium; participants may meet face-to-face socially or at work, or they can
participate in online or virtual communities of practice.

   It should be noted that communities of practice can be very effective in a digital world, where the
working context is volatile, complex, uncertain and ambiguous. A large part of the lifelong learning
market will become occupied by communities of practice and self-learning, through collaborative
learning, sharing of knowledge and experience, and crowd-sourcing new ideas and development. Such
informal learning provision will be particularly valuable for non-governmental or charitable
192 Chapter 4: Methods of teaching with an online focus

organizations, such as the Red Cross, Greenpeace or UNICEF, or local government, looking for ways to
engage communities in their areas of operation.

   These communities of learners will be open and free, and hence will provide a competitive alternative
to the high priced lifelong learning programs being offered by research universities. This will put
pressure on universities and colleges to provide more flexible arrangements for recognition of informal
learning, in order to hold on to their current monopoly of post-secondary accreditation.

   One of the significant developments in recent years has been the use of massive open online courses
(MOOCs) for developing online communities of practice. MOOCs are discussed in more detail in
Chapter 5, but it is worth discussing here the connection between MOOCs and communities of practice.
The more instructionist xMOOCs are not really developed as communities of practice, because they use
mainly a transmissive pedagogy, from experts to those considered less expert.

   In comparison, connectivist MOOCs are an ideal way to bring together specialists scattered around the
world to focus on a common interest or domain. Connectivist MOOCs are much closer to being virtual
communities of practice, in that they put much more emphasis on sharing knowledge between more or
less equal participants. However, current connectivist MOOCs do not always incorporate what research
indicates are best practices for developing communities of practice, and those wanting to establish a
virtual community of practice at the moment need some kind of MOOC provider to get them started and
give them access to the necessary MOOC software.

   Although communities of practice are likely to become more rather than less important in a digital
age, it is probably a mistake to think of them as a replacement for traditional forms of education. There is
no single, `right' approach to the design of teaching. Different groups have different needs. Communities
of practice are more of an alternative for certain kinds of learners, such as lifelong learners, and are likely
to work best when participants already have some domain knowledge and can contribute personally and
in a constructive manner - which suggests the need for at least some form of prior general education or
training for those participating in effective communities of practice.

   In conclusion, it is clear is that in an increasingly volatile, uncertain, complex, and ambiguous
world, and given the openness of the Internet, the social media tools now available, and the need for
sharing of knowledge on a global scale, virtual communities of practice will become even more
common and important. Smart educators and trainers will look to see how they can harness the strength
of this design model, particularly for lifelong learning. However, merely lumping together large
numbers of people with a common interest is unlikely to lead to effective learning. Attention needs to
be paid to those design principles that lead to effective communities of practice.

References

Brown, J. and Duguid, P. (2000) Balancing act: How to capture knowledge without killing it Harvard
Business Review.

  Cambridge, D., Kaplan, S. and Suter, V. (2005) Community of Practice Design
Guide Louisville CO: EDUCAUSE

   Smith, M. K. (2003) `Communities of practice', the encyclopedia of informal education, accessed 26
September, 2014, but no longer in press

   Wenger, E. (2000)Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning and Identity Cambridge UK:
Cambridge University Press

   Wenger, E. (2014) Communities of practice: a brief introduction, accessed 5 October, 2019
   Wenger, E, McDermott, R., and Snyder, W. (2002). Cultivating Communities of Practice (Hardcover).
Harvard Business Press; 1 edition.
                                                                              4.6 Communities of practice 193

Update and further reading

Wenger, E., Trayner, B. and de Laat, M. (2011)Promoting and assessing value creation in communities
and networks: a conceptual framework Heerlen NL: The Open University of the Netherlands

   This document presents a conceptual foundation for promoting and assessing value creation
in communities and networks. By value creation we mean the value of the learning enabled
by community involvement and networking.

   For an interesting critique of this paper, see:
   Dingyloudi, F. and Strijbos, J. (2015) Examining value creation in a community of learning practice:
Methodological reflections on story-telling and story-reading Seminar.net, Vol. 11, No.3

                            Activity 4.6 Making communities of practice work

   1. Can you identify a community of practice to which you belong? Is it successful and does it meet the key
design principles outlined above?

   2. Could you think of a way to develop a community of practice that would support your work as a teacher?

   3. Is there anything special you would need to do to make an online community of practice succeed that
would not be necessary in a face-to-face community?

   For my (not very deep) thoughts on these questions, click on the podcast below.

   An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=134
Scenario E: ETEC 522: Ventures in e-Learning

Figure 4 E Image: Harper Adams University

Mike: Hey, George, come and sit down and tell Allison and Rav about that weird course you're taking
from UBC.
George: Hi, you two. Yeah, it's a great course, very different from any other I've taken.
Rav.: What's it about?
George: It's how to go about starting up a technology company.
Allison: But I thought you were doing a masters in education.
George: Yeah, I am. This course is looking at how new technologies can be used in education and how
to build a business around one of these technologies.

                                                                   195
196 Chapter 4: Methods of teaching with an online focus

Mike: Really, George? So what about all your socialist principles, the importance of public education,
and all that? Are you giving up and going to become a fat capitalist?

George: No, it's not like that. What the course is really making me do is think about how we could be
using technology better in school or college.

Mike: And how to make a profit out of it, by the sound of it.

Rav.: Shut up, Mike - I'm curious, George, since I'm doing a real business program. You're going to
learn how to set up a business in 13 weeks? Gimme a break.

George: It's more about becoming an entrepreneur - someone who takes risks and tries something
different.

Mike.: With someone else's money.

George: Do you really want to know about this course, or are you just wanting to give me a hard time?

Allison: Yes, shut up, Mike. Have you chosen a technology yet, George?

George: Almost. We spend most of the course researching and analysing emerging technologies that
could have an application in education. We have to find a technology, research it then come up with a
plan of how it could be used in education, and how a business could be built around it. But I think the
real aim is to get us to think about how technology could improve or change teaching or learning..

Rav.: So what's the technology you've chosen?

George: You're jumping too far ahead, Rav. We go through two boot camps, one on analysing the edtech
marketplace, and one on entrepreneurship: what it takes to be an entrepreneur. Why are you laughing,
Mike?

Mike: I just can't see you in combat uniform, crawling through tubes under gun fire, with a book in your
hand.

George: Not that kind of bootcamp. This course is totally online. Our instructor points us in the direction
of a few technologies to get us started, but because there's more stuff coming out all the time, we're
encouraged to make our own choices about what to research. And we all help each other. I must have
looked at more than 50 products or services so far, and we all share our analyses. I'm down to possibly
three at the moment, but I'm going to have to make my mind up soon, as I have to do a YouTube elevator
pitch for my grade.

Rav.: A what?

George: If you look at most of these products, there's a short YouTube video that pitches the business.
I've got to make the case for whatever technology I choose in just under eight minutes. That's going to
be 25% of my grade.

Allison: Wow, that's tough.
                                                                                                  Scenario E: ETEC 522: Ventures in e-Learning 197

George: Well, we all help each other. We have to do a preliminary recording, then everyone pitches in to
critique it. Then we have a few days to send in our final version.

Allison: What else do you get grades for?

George: I got 25% of my marks for an assignment that analysed a particular product called Dybuster
which is used to help learners with dyslexia. I looked mainly at its educational strengths and weaknesses,
and its likely commercial viability. For my second assignment, also worth 25%, we had to build an
application of a particular product or service, in my case a module of teaching using a particular product.
There were four of us altogether working as a team to do this. Our team designed a short instructional
module that showed a chemical reaction, using an off-the-shelf online simulation tool that is free for
people to use. I'll get my last 25% from analysing my own contribution to discussions and activities.

Rav.: What, you give yourself the grade?

George: No, I have to collect my best contributions together in a sort of portfolio, then send them in to
the instructor, who then gives the grade based on the quality of the contributions.

Allison: But what I don't understand is: what's the curriculum? What text books do you have to read?
What do you have to know?

George: Well, there are the two boot camps, but really, we the students, set the curriculum. Our instructor
asks us for our first week's work to look at a range of emerging technologies that might be relevant for
education, then we select eight which form the basis of our work groups. I've already learned a lot, just
by searching and analysing different products over the Internet. We have to think about and justify our
decisions. What kind of teaching philosophy do they imply? What criteria am I using when I support or
reject a particular product? Is this a sustainable tool? (You don't want to have to get rid of good teaching
material because the company's gone bust and doesn't support the technology any more). What I'm
really learning though is to think about technology differently. Previously I wasn't really thinking about
teaching differently. I was just trying to find a technology that made my life easier. But this course has
woken me up to the real possibilities. I feel I'm in a much better position now to shake up my own school
and move them into the digital age.

Allison (sighs): Well, I guess that's the difference between an undergraduate and a graduate course. You
couldn't do this unless you already knew a lot about education, could you?

George: I'm not so sure about that, Allison. It doesn't seem to have stopped a lot of entrepreneurs from
developing tools for teaching!

Mike: George, I'm sorry. I can't wait for you to become a rich capitalist - it's your turn to buy the drinks.

                       Scenario based on a UBC graduate course for the Master in Educational Technology.
   The instructors are David Vogt and David Porter, assisted by Jeff Miller, the instructional designer
for the course.
4.7 `Agile' Design: flexible designs for learning

                     Figure 4.7.1 A volatile, uncertain, complex and ambiguous world
            Image: © Carol Mase, Free Management Library, 2011, used with permission
4.7.1 The need for more agile design models
Adamson (2012) states:
     The systems under which the world operates and the ways that individual businesses operate are

                                                                   199
200 Chapter 4: Methods of teaching with an online focus

     vast and complex - interconnected to the point of confusion and uncertainty. The linear process
     of cause and effect becomes increasingly irrelevant, and it is necessary for knowledge workers to
     begin thinking in new ways and exploring new solutions.

   In particular, knowledge workers must deal with situations and contexts that are volatile, uncertain,
complex and ambiguous (what Adamson calls a VUCA environment). This certainly applies to teachers
working with ever new, emerging technologies, very diverse students, and a rapidly changing external
world that puts pressure on institutions to change.

   If we look at course design, how does a teacher respond to rapidly developing new content, new
technologies or apps being launched on a daily basis, to a constantly changing student base, to pressure
to develop the knowledge and skills that are needed in a digital age? For instance, even setting prior
learning outcomes is fraught in a VUCA environment, unless you set them at an abstract `skill' level
such as thinking flexibly, networking, and information retrieval and analysis. Students need to develop
the key knowledge management skills of knowing where to find relevant information, how to assess,
evaluate and appropriately apply such information. This means exposing students to less than certain
knowledge and providing them with the skills, practice and feedback to assess and evaluate such
knowledge, then apply that to solving real world problems.

   In order to do this, learning environments need to be created that are rich and constantly changing,
but which at the same time enable students to develop and practice the skills and acquire the knowledge
they will need in a volatile, uncertain, complex and ambiguous world.

4.7.2 Core features of agile design models

Describing the design features of this model is a challenge, for two reasons. First, there is no single
approach to agile design. The whole point is to be adaptable to the circumstances in which it operates.
Second, it is only with the development of light, easy to use technology and media in the last few years
that instructors and course designers have started to break away from the standard design models, so
agile designs are still emerging. However, this is a challenge that software designers have also been
facing (see for instance, Larman and Vodde, 2009; Ries, 2011) and perhaps there are lessons that can be
applied to educational design.

   First, it is important to distinguish `agile' design from rapid instructional design (Meier, 2000) or
rapid prototyping, which are really both streamlined versions of the ADDIE model. Although rapid
instructional design/rapid protyping enable courses or modules to be designed more quickly (especially
important for corporate training), they still follow the same kind of sequential or iterative processes
as in the ADDIE model, but in a more compressed form. Rapid instructional design and rapid
prototyping might be considered particular kinds of agile design, but they lack some of the most
important characteristics outlined below:

4.7.2.1 Light and nimble

If ADDIE is a 100-piece orchestra, with a complex score and long rehearsals, then agile design is a jazz
trio who get together for a single performance then break up until the next time. Although there may
be a short preparation time before the course starts, most of the decisions about what will go into the
course, what tools will be used, what activities learners will do, and sometimes even how students will
be assessed, are decided as the course progresses.

   On the teaching side, there are usually only a few people involved in the actual design, one or
                                                                                                  4.7 `Agile' Design: flexible designs for learning 201

sometimes two instructors and possibly an instructional designer, who nevertheless meet frequently
during the offering of the course to make decisions based on feedback from learners and how learners are
progressing through the course. However, many more content contributors may be invited - or
spontaneously offer - to participate on a single occasion as the course progresses.

4.7.2.2 Content, learner activities, tools used and assessment vary, according to the changing environment

The content to be covered in a course is likely to be highly flexible, based more on emerging knowledge
and the interests or prior experience of the learners, although the core skills that the course aims to
develop are more likely to remain constant. For instance, for ETEC 522 in Scenario F, the overall
objective is to develop the skills needed to be a pioneer or innovator in education, and this remains
constant over each iteration of the course. However, because the technology is rapidly developing with
new products, apps and services every year, the content of the course is quite different from year to year.

   Also learner activities and methods of assessment are also likely to change, because students can
use new tools or technology themselves for learning as they become available. Very often learners
themselves seek out and organise much of the core content of the course and are free to choose what
tools they use.

4.7.2.3 The design attempts to exploit the affordances of either existing or emerging technologies

Agile design aims to exploit fully the educational potential of new tools or software, which means
sometimes changing at least sub-goals. This may mean developing different skills in learners from year
to year, as the technology changes and allows new things to be done. The emphasis here is not so much
on doing the same thing better with new technology, but striving for new and different outcomes that are
more relevant in a digital world.

   ETEC 522 for instance did not start with a learning management system. Instead, a web site, built in
WordPress, was used as the starting point for student activities, because students as well as instructors
were posting content, but in another year the content focus of the course was mainly on mobile learning,
so apps and other mobile tools were strong components of the course.

4.7.2.4 Sound, pedagogical principles guide the overall design of a course - to a point

Just as most successful jazz trios work within a shared framework of melody, rhythm, and
musical composition, so is agile design shaped by overarching principles of best practice. Most
successful agile designs have been guided by core design principles associated with `good' teaching,
such as clear learning outcomes or goals, assessment linked to these goals, strong learner support,
including timely and individualised feedback, active learning, collaborative learning, and regular course
maintenance based on learner feedback, all within a rich learning environment (see Appendix
1). Sometimes though deliberate attempts are made to move away from an established best practice for
experimental reasons, but usually on a small scale, to see if the experiment works without risking the
whole course.

4.7.2.5 Experiential, open and applied learning

Usually agile course design is strongly embedded in the real, external world. Much or all the course
may be open to other than registered students. For instance, much of ETEC 522, such as the final
YouTube business pitches, is openly available to those interested in the topics. Sometimes this results
202 Chapter 4: Methods of teaching with an online focus

in entrepreneurs contacting the course with suggestions for new tools or services, or just to share
experience.

   Another example is a course on Latin American studies from a Canadian university. This particular
course had an open, student-managed wiki, where they could discuss contemporary events as they arose.
This course was active at the same time that the Argentine government nationalised the Spanish oil
company, Repsol. Several students posted comments critical of the government action, but after a week,
a professor from a university in Argentina, who had come across the wiki by accident while searching
the Internet, responded, laying out a detailed defence of the government's policy. This was then made a
formal topic for discussion within the course.

   Such courses may though be only partially open. Discussion of sensitive subjects for instance may
still take place behind a password controlled discussion forum, while other parts of the course may be
open to all. As experience grows in this kind of design, other and perhaps clearer design principles are
likely to emerge.

4.7.3 Strengths and weaknesses of flexible design models

The main advantage of agile design is that it focuses directly on preparing students for a volatile,
uncertain, complex and ambiguous world. It aims explicitly at helping students develop many of
the specific skills they will need in a digital age, such as knowledge management, multimedia
communication skills, critical thinking, innovation, and digital literacy embedded within a subject
domain. Where agile design has been successfully used, students have found the design approach
highly stimulating and great fun, and instructors have been invigorated and enthusiastic about teaching.
Agile design enables courses to be developed and offered quickly and at much lower initial cost than
ADDIE-based approaches.

   However, agile design approaches are very new and have not really been much written about,
never mind evaluated. There is no `school' or set of agreed principles to follow, although there are
similarities between the agile approach to design for learning with `agile' design for computer software.
Indeed it could be argued that most of the things in agile design are covered in other teaching models,
such as online collaborative learning or experiential learning. Despite this, innovative instructors are
beginning to develop courses in a similar way to ETEC 522 and there is a consistency in the basic design
principles that give them a certain coherence and shape, even though each course or program appears
on the surface to be very different (another example of agile design, but campus-based, with quite a
different overall program from ETEC 522, is the Integrated Science program at McMaster University.)

   Certainly agile design approaches require confident instructors willing to take a risk, and success is
heavily dependent on instructors having a good background in best teaching practices and/or strong
instructional design support from innovative and creative instructional designers. Because of the relative
lack of experience in such design approaches the limitations are not well identified yet. For instance,
this approach can work well with relatively small class sizes but how well will it scale? Successful use
probably also depends on learners already having a good foundational knowledge base in the subject
domain. Nevertheless I expect more agile designs for learning to grow over the coming years, because
they are more likely to meet the needs of a VUCA world.

References

Adamson, C. (2012) Learning in a VUCA world, OEB Insights, November 13,
Bertram, J. (2013) Agile Learning Design for Beginners New Palestine IN: Bottom Line Performance
                                                                                                  4.7 `Agile' Design: flexible designs for learning 203

Larman, C. and Vodde, B. (2009) Scaling Lean and Agile Development New York: Addison-Wesley
Meier, D. (2000). The Accelerated Learning Handbook. New York: McGraw-Hill
Rawsthorne, P. (2012) Agile Instructional Design St. John's NF: Memorial University of
Newfoundland
Ries, E. (2011) The Lean Start-Up New York: Crown Business/Random House

                                                          Activity 4.7 Taking risks with `agile' design

      1. Do you think a `agile'/flexible design approach will increase or undermine academic excellence? What
   are your reasons?

      2. Would you like to try something like this in your own teaching (or are you already doing something like
   this)? What would be the risks and benefits in your subject area of doing this?

      For my comments on this activity, click on the podcast below:

                           An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                        https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=139
4.8 Making decisions about teaching methods

Figure 4.8.1 Making decisions about which design model to choose

4.8.1 Choosing a method
Chapters 3 and 4 cover a range of different teaching methods and design models. There are many more

                                                                   205
206 Chapter 4: Methods of teaching with an online focus

that could have been included. I will be discussing open pedagogy in Chapter 11, Section 4. MOOCs are
also a notable omission. However, the design models behind MOOCs require a full chapter of their own
(Chapter 5.)

   Your choice of teaching method and the design of the teaching within that method will depend very
much on the context in which you are teaching. However, a key criterion should be the suitability of the
method and/or design model for developing the knowledge and skills that learners will need in a digital
age. Other critical factors will be the demands of the subject domain, characteristics of the learners you
will likely be teaching, the resources available, especially in terms of supporting learners, and probably
most important of all, your own views and beliefs about what constitutes `good teaching.'

   Furthermore, the teaching methods covered in Chapters 3 and 4 by and large are not mutually
exclusive. They can probably be mixed and matched to a certain degree, but there are limitations in
doing this. Moreover, a consistent approach will be less confusing not only to learners, but also to you
as a teacher or instructor.

   So: how would you go about choosing an appropriate teaching method? I set out below in Figure
4.8.2 one way of doing this. I have chosen five criteria as headings along the top of the table:

4.8.1.1 Epistemological basis

What epistemology does this method suggest? Does the method suggest a view of knowledge as
content that must be learned, does the method suggest a rigid (`correct') way of designing learning
(objectivist)? Or does the method suggest that learning is a dynamic process and knowledge needs to
be discovered and is constantly changing (constructivist)? Does the method suggest that knowledge lies
in the connections and interpretations of different nodes or people on networks and that connections
matter more in terms of creating and communicating knowledge than the individual nodes or people on
the network (connectivist)? Or is the method epistemologically neutral, in that one could use the same
method to teach from different epistemological positions?

4.8.1.2 Industrial (20th century) or digital (21st century)

Does this method lead to the kind of learning that would prepare people for an industrial society,
with standardised learning outcomes, will it help identify and select a relatively small elite for higher
education or senior positions in society, does it enable learning to be easily organised into similarly
performing groups of learners?

   Alternatively, does the method encourage the development of the soft skills and the effective
management of knowledge needed in a digital world? Does the method enable and support
the appropriate educational use of the affordances of new technologies? Does it provide the kind of
educational support that learners need to succeed in a volatile, uncertain, complex and ambiguous world?
Does it enable and encourage learners to become global citizens?

4.8.1.3 Academic quality

Does the method lead to deep understanding and transformative learning? Does it enable students to
become experts in their chosen subject domain?

4.8.1.4 Flexibility

Does the method meet the needs of the diversity of learners today? Does it encourage open and flexible
                                                                                                  4.8 Making decisions about teaching methods 207

access to learning? Does it help teachers and instructors to adapt their teaching to ever changing
circumstances?

   Now these are my criteria, and you may well want to use different criteria (cost or your time is another
important factor), but I have drawn up the table this way because it has helped me consider better where
I stand on the different methods or design models. Where I think a method or design model is strong on
a particular criterion, I have given it three stars, where weak, one star, and n/a for not applicable. Again,
you may - no, should - rank the models differently. (See, that's why I'm a constructivist - if I was an
objectivist, I'd tell you what damned criteria to use!)

Figure 4.8.2 Choosing design models
208 Chapter 4: Methods of teaching with an online focus

   It can be seen that the only method that ranks highly on all three criteria of 21st century learning,
academic quality and flexibility is online collaborative learning. Experiential learning and agile design
also score highly. Transmissive lectures come out worst. This is a pretty fair reflection of my preferences.
However, if you are teaching first year civil engineering to over 500 students, your criteria and rankings
will almost certainly be different from mine. So please see Figure 4.8.2 as a heuristic device and not as
a general recommendation.

4.8.2 Design models and the quality of teaching and learning

Lastly, the review of different methods indicate some of the key issues around quality:

         · first, what students learn is more likely to be influenced by choosing an appropriate teaching
            method for the context in which you are teaching, than by focusing on a particular technology
            or delivery method (face-to-face or online). Technology and delivery method are more about
            access and flexibility and hence learner characteristics than they are about learning. Learning
            is affected more by pedagogy and the design of instruction;

         · second, different teaching methods are likely to lead to different kinds of learning outcomes.
            This is why there is so much emphasis in this book on being clear about what knowledge and
            skills are needed in a digital age. These are bound to vary somewhat across different subject
            domains, but only to a limited degree. Understanding of content is always going to be
            important, but the skills of independent learning, critical thinking, innovation and creativity
            are even more important. Which teaching method is most likely to help develop these
            skills in your students?

         · third, quality depends not only on the choice of an appropriate teaching method, but also on
            how that approach to teaching is implemented. Online collaborative learning can be done
            well, or it can be done badly. The same applies to other methods. Following core design
            principles is critical for the successful use of any particular teaching method. Also there is
            considerable research on what the conditions are for success in using some of the newer
            methods or design models. The findings from such research need to be applied when
            implementing a particular method (this is discussed further throughout the book, but
            specifically in Chapter 12);

         · lastly students and teachers get better with practice. If you are moving to a new method of
            teaching or design model, give yourself (and your students) time to get comfortable with it. It
            will probably take two or three courses where the new method or design is applied before you
            begin to feel comfortable that it is producing the results you were hoping for. However, it is
            better to make some mistakes along the way than to continue to teach comfortably, but not
            produce the graduates that are needed in the future.
                                                                                                  4.8 Making decisions about teaching methods 209

There are still two major teaching methods to be discussed, Open Pedagogy in Chapter 11, Section 4,
and MOOCs, which needs their own chapter (next).

                                                  For my personal comments on
                                                  some of the issues raised in this
                                                  chapter, please click on the
                                                  podcast below.

                       An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                    https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=143

                                                                   Activity 4.8 Making choices

      Describe your main subject area and level. Then try to answer each of the following questions:
      1. What are the main learning outcomes (at a high level) that I need to achieve in this course or program, if
   the students are to be properly prepared for the future?
      2. What teaching method is most likely to enable me to help learners achieve these outcomes?
      3. How much would I have to change what I'm doing now, and what would the course or program look like
   in the future? Could I write a scenario to describe how I would be teaching in the future? Or how students will
   be learning in my course or program?
      4. What support am I likely to get from my institution, in terms of supporting my ideas, supporting change,
   providing resources such as training in new methods, or professional help such as instructional designers?
      5. How will my students react to the changes I'm contemplating? How could I `sell' it to them?
      No feedback is provided on this activity; it is for your personal reflection.
210 Chapter 4: Methods of teaching with an online focus

                                                               Key Takeaways (Chapters 3 and 4)

      1. Traditional classroom teaching, and especially transmissive lectures, were designed for another age.
   Although lectures have served us well, we are now in a different age that requires different methods.

      2. The key shift is towards greater emphasis on skills, particularly knowledge management, and less on
   memorising content. We need teaching methods for teaching and learning that lead to the development of the
   skills needed in a digital age.

      3. There is no one teaching method or `best' design model for all circumstances. The choice of teaching
   method needs to take account of the context in which it will be applied, but nevertheless, some methods are
   better than others for developing the knowledge and skills needed in a digital age. For the contexts with which
   I'm most associated, online collaborative learning, experiential learning and agile design best meet my criteria.

      4. Teaching methods in general are not dependent on a particular mode of delivery; they can operate in most
   cases as well online as in class.

      5. In an increasingly volatile, uncertain, complex and ambiguous world, we need methods of teaching that
   are light and nimble.
Chapter 5: MOOCs

                                                                      Purpose of the chapter

      It has been claimed that MOOCs (Massive, Open, Online Courses) are the most disruptive of all
   technologically-based innovations in higher education, and as a result are the most controversial.

      When you have finished this chapter you should be able to:
              · understand the differences between various kinds of MOOCs, and between MOOCs and other
                 forms of online and open learning;
              · decide on whether or not to develop your own MOOC and what kind of MOOC;
              · advise your administration on whether or not to invest in MOOCs.

                                                       For a my personal
                                                       introduction to this chapter,
                                                       please click on the podcast
                                                       below.

                       An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                    https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=145

What is covered in this chapter

This chapter covers the following topics:

                                                                   211
212 A.W. (Tony) Bates

         · 5.1 Brief history
         · 5.2 What is a MOOC?
         · 5.3 A taxonomy of MOOCs
         · 5.4 Strengths and weaknesses of MOOCs
         · 5.5 Political, social and economic drivers of MOOCs
         · 5.6 Why MOOCs are only part of the answer
         · Scenario F: How to cope with being old

Also in this chapter you will find the following activities:

         · Activity 5.1 There is no activity provided for this section
         · Activity 5.2 There is no activity provided for this section
         · Activity 5.3 Thinking about MOOC design
         · Activity 5.4 Assessing the strengths and weaknesses of MOOCs
         · Activity 5.5. Assessing the importance of MOOCs
         · Activity 5.6 Strategising about MOOCs

                                                                            Key Takeaways

      1. MOOCs are forcing every higher education institution to think carefully both about its strategy for online
   teaching and its approach to open education.

      2. MOOCs are not the only form of online learning nor of open educational resources. It is important to look
   at the strengths and weaknesses of MOOCs within the overall context of online learning and open-ness.

      3. There are considerable differences in the design of MOOCs, reflecting different purposes and
   philosophies.

      4. There are currently major structural limitations in MOOCs for developing deep or transformative
   learning, or for developing the high level knowledge and skills needed in a digital age.

      5. MOOCs are at still a relatively early stage of maturity. As their strengths and weaknesses become clearer,
   and as experience in improving their design grows, they are likely to occupy a significant niche within the
   higher education learning environment

      6. MOOCs could well replace some forms of traditional teaching (such as large lecture classes). However,
   MOOCs are more likely to remain an important supplement or alternative to other conventional education
   methods. They are not on their own a solution to the high cost of higher education, although MOOCs are and
   will continue to be an important factor in forcing change.

      7. Perhaps the greatest value of MOOCs in the future will be for providing a means for tackling large global
   problems through community action.
5.1 Brief history

Figure 5.1.1 Daphne Koller's TED Talk, 2012
To see this YouTube video, click on the graphic. For a response to this video, see: `What's right and what's wrong with
Coursera-style MOOCs'.

   The term MOOC was used for the first time in 2008 for a course offered by the Extension Division of
the University of Manitoba in Canada. This non-credit course, Connectivism and Connective Knowledge
(CK08) was designed by George Siemens, Stephen Downes and Dave Cormier. It enrolled 27 on-
campus students who paid a tuition fee but was also offered online for free. Much to the surprise of the
instructors, 2,200 students enrolled in the free online version. Downes classified this course and others
like it that followed as connectivist or cMOOCs, because of their design (Downes, 2012).

   In the fall of 2011, two computer science professors from Stanford University, Sebastian Thrun
and Peter Norvig, launched a MOOC on The Introduction to AI (artificial intelligence) that attracted
over 160,000 enrollments, followed quickly by two other MOOCs, also in computer sciences, from
Stanford instructors Andrew Ng and Daphne Koller. Thrun went on to found Udacity, and Ng and Koller
established Coursera. These are for-profit companies using their own specially developed software that

                                                                   213
214 Chapter 5: MOOCs

enable massive numbers of registrations and a platform for the teaching. Udacity and Coursera formed
partnerships with other leading universities where the universities pay a fee to offer their own MOOCs
through these platforms. Udacity in 2013 changed direction to focus on the vocational and corporate
training market.

   The Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and Harvard University in March 2012 developed
an open source platform for MOOCs called edX, which also acts as a platform for online registration and
teaching. edX has also developed partnerships with leading universities to offer MOOCs without direct
charge for hosting their courses, although some may pay to become partners in edX. Other platforms
for MOOCs, such as the U.K. Open University's FutureLearn, have also been developed. Because the
majority of MOOCs offered through these various platforms are based mainly on video lectures and
computer-marked tests, Downes has classified these as xMOOCs, to distinguish them from the more
connectivist cMOOCs.

   In March, 2019 there were more than 11,000 MOOC courses from 900 universities globally, with just
over 100 million registrations (Shah and Pickard, 2019). The big change in 2017-2018 was a move to
MOOC-based degrees, with seven universities announcing 15 degrees in 2017, and in 2018, 30 more
universities joined in, and launched more than 45 degrees (Johnson, 2019).

   In addition to full degrees, EdX and Coursera both offer multiple micro-credentials, each with their
own branding. Overall, 630 micro-credentials existed at the end of 2018, but most of the new credentials
came from just two credentials, Coursera specialization, and edX professional certificate (Johnson,
2019).

References

Downes, S. (2012) Massively Open Online Courses are here to stay, Stephen's Web, July 20
   Johnson, S. (2019) Much ado about MOOCs: Where are we in the evolution of MOOCs? Edsurge On

Air, 26 February
   Shah, D. and Pickard. L. (2019) Massive list of MOOC providers around the world Class Central, 30

July
5.2 What is a MOOC?

Figure 5.2.1 Making sense of MOOCs © Giulia Forsythe, 2012 and JISC, 2012

5.2.1 MOOCS: a massive disruption?
Probably no development in teaching in recent years has been as controversial as the development of
Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs). In 2013, the writer Thomas Friedman wrote in the New York
Times:

                                                                   215
216 Chapter 5: MOOCs

     ...nothing has more potential to enable us to reimagine higher education than the massive open
     online course ....For relatively little money, the U.S. could rent space in an Egyptian village, install
     two dozen computers and high-speed satellite Internet access, hire a local teacher as a facilitator,
     and invite in any Egyptian who wanted to take online courses with the best professors in the world,
     subtitled in Arabic...I can see a day soon where you'll create your own college degree by taking the
     best online courses from the best professors from around the world ....paying only the nominal fee
     for the certificates of completion. It will change teaching, learning and the pathway to employment.

   Many others have referred to MOOCs as a prime example of the kind of disruptive technology that
Clayton Christensen (2010) has argued will change the world of education. Others have argued that
MOOCs are not a big deal, just a more modern version of educational broadcasting, and do not really
affect the basic fundamentals of education, and in particular do not address the type of learning needed
in a digital age.

   MOOCs can be seen then as either a major revolution in education or just another example of the
overblown hyperbole often surrounding technology, particularly in the USA. I shall be arguing that
MOOCs are a significant development, but they have severe limitations for developing the knowledge
and skills needed in a digital age.

5.2.2 Key characteristics

All MOOCs have some common features, although we shall see that the term MOOC covers an
increasingly wide range of designs.

5.2.2.1 Massive

By 2019, Coursera claimed over 35 million sign-ups with its largest course claiming 240,000
participants. The huge numbers (in the hundred of thousands) enrolling in the earliest MOOCs are
not always replicated in later MOOCs, but the numbers are still substantial. For instance, in 2013, the
University of British Columbia offered several MOOCs through Coursera, with the numbers initially
signing up ranging from 25,000 to 190,000 per course (Engle, 2014).

   However, even more important than the actual numbers is that in principle MOOCs have infinite
scalability. There is technically no limit to their final size, because the marginal cost of adding each
extra participant is nil for the institutions offering MOOCs. (In practice this is not quite true, as central
technology, backup and bandwidth costs increase, and as we shall see, there can be some knock-on costs
for an institution offering MOOCs as numbers increase. However, the cost of each additional participant
is so small, given the very large numbers, that it can be more or less ignored). The scalability of MOOCs
is probably the characteristic that has attracted the most attention, especially from governments, but it
should be noted that this is also a characteristic of broadcast television and radio, so it is not unique to
MOOCs.

5.2.2.2 Open

At least for the initial MOOCs, access was free for participants, although an increasing number of
MOOCs are charging a fee for assessment leading to a badge or certificate or other fees. For instance, in
2019 Coursera was charging between US$29-$99 per course.

   There are no pre-requisites for participants other than access to a computer/mobile device and the
                                                                                                                                  5.2 What is a MOOC? 217

Internet. However, broadband access is essential for MOOCs that use video streaming, which severely
limits their potential for widening access to higher education in the least developed countries.

   There is another significant way in which MOOCs through Coursera and some other MOOC
platforms are not fully open (see Chapter 11 for more on what constitutes `open' in education). Coursera
owns the rights to the materials, so they cannot be repurposed or reused without permission, and the
material may be removed from the Coursera site when the course ends. Also, Coursera decides which
institutions can host MOOCs on its platform - this is not an open access for institutions. On the other
hand, edX is an open source platform, so any institution that joins edX can develop their own MOOCs
with their own rules regarding rights to the material. cMOOCs are generally completely open, but since
individual participants of cMOOCs create a lot if not all of the material it is not always clear whether
they own the rights and how long the MOOC materials will remain available.

   Indeed, there are many other kinds of online material that are also open and free over the Internet,
such as open textbooks and open educational resources, often in ways that are more accessible for reuse
than MOOC material (see Chapter 11).

5.2.2.3 Online

MOOCs are offered at least initially wholly online, but increasingly institutions are negotiating with
the rights holders to use MOOC materials in a blended format for use on campus. In other words,
the institution provides learner support for the MOOC materials through the use of campus-based
instructors. For instance at San Jose State University, on-campus students used MOOC materials from
Udacity courses, including lectures, readings and quizzes, and then instructors spent classroom time
on small-group activities, projects and quizzes to check progress (Collins, 2013). More variations in the
design of MOOCs will be discussed in more detail in Section 5.3.

   Again though it should be noted that MOOCs are not unique in offering courses online. In 2017, there
were 6.3 million students in the USA alone taking online courses for credit, as part of regular degree
programs (Seaman et. al, 2018).

5.2.2.4 Courses

One characteristic that distinguishes MOOCs from most other open educational resources is that they are
organized into a whole course. However, what this actually means for participants is not exactly clear.
Although many MOOCs offer certificates or badges for successful completion of a course, to date these
have not in most cases been accepted for admission to universities or for advanced standing or credit,
even (or especially) by the institutions offering the MOOCs.

5.2.3 Summary

It can be seen that all the key characteristics of MOOCs exist in some form or other outside MOOCs.
What makes MOOCs unique though is the combination of the four key characteristics, and in particular
the fact that they scale massively and are open for participants (although not always free).

References

Christensen, C. (2010) Disrupting Class, Expanded Edition: How Disruptive Innovation Will Change
the Way the World Learns New York: McGraw-Hill
218 Chapter 5: MOOCs

   Collins, E. (2013) SJSU Plus Augmented Online Learning Environment Pilot Project Report San Jose
CA: San Jose State University

   Engle, W. (2104) UBC MOOC Pilot: Design and Delivery Vancouver BC: University of British
Columbia

   Friedman, T. (2013) Revolution Hits the Universities New York Times, January 26
   Seaman, J.E., Allen, I.E., and Seaman, J. (2018) Grade Increase: Tracking Distance Education in the
United States Wellesley MA: The Babson Survey Research Group

                                                                      Activity 5.2

             1. When is a MOOC not a MOOC? What are the essential characteristics for a course to be a
                 MOOC?

             2. Can you find examples of MOOCs from providers within your own state or province? Do they
                 differ in any way from the main MOOC platforms such as Coursera or edX? In what ways?

             3. Are they an inferior or low quality form of education? If so, why? What criteria would you use
                 for judging the quality of a MOOC? Write down your answers then check these when you have
                 read the rest of this chapter and see if you have changed your mind.

      For my feedback on these questions click the podcast below

                           An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                        https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=150
5.3 A Taxonomy of MOOCs

Figure 5.3 There are many variations of the basic MOOC design
Image: © Dairy Cattle, India, 2014© Dairy Cattle, India, 2014

                                                                   219
220 Chapter 5: MOOCs

   In this section the main MOOC designs will be analysed. However, MOOCs are still a relatively new
phenomenon, and design models are still evolving.

5.3.1 xMOOCs

MOOCs developed initially by Stanford University professors and a little later by MIT and Harvard
instructors are based primarily on a strongly behaviourist, information transmission model, the core
teaching being through online recorded videos of short lectures, combined with computer automated
testing, and sometimes also through the use of peer assessment. These MOOCs are offered through
special cloud-based software platforms such as Coursera, edX and FutureLearn.

   xMOOCs is a term coined by Stephen Downes (2012) for courses developed by Coursera, Udacity
and edX. At the time of writing (2019) xMOOCs are by far the most common MOOC. Instructors have
considerable flexibility in the design of the course, so there is considerable variation in the details, but
in general xMOOCs have the following common design features:

5.3.1.1 Specially designed platform software

Most very large xMOOCs use specially designed platform software such as Coursera, edX or
FutureLearn that allows for the registration of very large numbers of participants, provides facilities
for the storing and streaming on demand of digital materials, and automates assessment procedures
and student performance tracking. The software platform also allows the companies that provide the
software to collect and analyse student data.

   However, more and more smaller institutions are offering their own xMOOCs through using or
adapting their continuing education online registration process, their own video servers, and `off-the-
shelf' automated feedback, testing and marking tools.

5.3.1.2 Video lectures

xMOOCs use the standard lecture mode, delivered online by participants downloading on demand
recorded video lectures. These video lectures are normally available on a weekly basis over a period of
10-13 weeks. Initially these were often 50 minute lectures, but as a result of experience some xMOOCs
now are using shorter recordings (sometimes down to 15 minutes in length) and thus there may be more
video segments. As well, xMOOC courses are becoming shorter in length, some now lasting only five
weeks. Various video production methods have been used, including lecture capture (recording face-
to-face on-campus lectures, then storing them and streaming them on demand), full studio production,
or desk-top recording by the instructor.

5.3.1.3 Computer-marked assignments

Students complete an online test and receive immediate computerised feedback. These tests are usually
offered throughout the course, and may be used just for participant feedback. Alternatively the tests
may be used for determining the award of a certificate. Another option is for an end of course grade or
                                                                                                                           5.3 A Taxonomy of MOOCs 221

certificate based solely on an end-of-course online test. Most xMOOC assignments are based on
multiple-choice, computer-marked questions, but some MOOCs have also used text or formula boxes for
participants to enter answers, such as coding in a computer science course, or mathematical formulae,
and in one or two cases, short text answers, but in most cases these will be computer-marked.

5.3.1.4 Peer assessment

Some xMOOCs have experimented with assigning students randomly to small groups for peer
assessment, especially for more open-ended or more evaluative assignment questions. This has often
proved problematic though because of wide variations in expertise between the different members of a
group, and because of the different levels of involvement in the course of different participants.

5.3.1.5 Supporting materials

Sometimes copies of slides, supplementary audio files, urls to other resources, and online articles may
be included for downloading by participants.

5.3.1.6 A shared comment/discussion space

These are places where participants can post questions, ask for help, or comment on the content of the
course.

5.3.1.7 No, or very light, discussion moderation

The extent to which the discussion or comments are moderated varies probably more than any other
feature in xMOOCs, but at its most, moderation is directed at all participants rather than to individuals.
Because of the very large numbers participating and commenting, moderation of individual comments
by the instructor(s) offering the MOOC is rarely possible. Some instructors offer no moderation
whatsoever, so participants rely on other participants to respond to questions or comments. Some
instructors `sample' comments and questions, and post comments in response to these. Some instructors
use volunteers or paid teaching assistants to comb comments to identify common areas of concern shared
by a number of participants then the instructor and/or the teaching assistants will respond. However, in
most cases, participants moderate each other's comments or questions.

5.3.1.8 Badges or certificates

Most xMOOCs award some kind of recognition for successful completion of a course, based on a
final computer-marked assessment. However, at the time of writing, MOOC badges or certificates have
in most cases not been recognised for credit or admission purposes even by the institutions offering
a MOOC - even when the lectures are the same as for on-campus students. Little evidence exists
to date about employer acceptance of MOOC qualifications (see for instance, Banks and Meinart,
2016 or Gatuguta-Gitau, 2017). However, with the increasing development of partnerships between
major employers and MOOC providers to develop microcredentials, this may change (see for example,
Gordon, 2018).
222 Chapter 5: MOOCs

5.3.1.9 Learning analytics

Although to date there has not been a great deal of published information about the use of learning
analytics in xMOOCs, the xMOOC platforms have the capacity to collect and analyse `big data' about
participants and their performance, enabling, at least in theory, for immediate feedback to instructors
about areas where the content or design needs improving and possibly directing automated cues or hints
for individuals. For examples of the use of learning analytics in MOOCs, see Laveti et al., 2017 or
Eradze and Tammets, 2017.

5.3.1.10 xMOOCs Summary

xMOOCs therefore primarily use a teaching model focused on the transmission of information, with
high quality content delivery, computer-marked assessment (mainly for student feedback purposes),
and automation of all key transactions between participants and the learning platform. There is rarely
any direct interaction between an individual participant and the instructor responsible for the course,
although instructors may post general comments in response to a range of participants' comments. Thus
there is a highly behaviouristic/objectivist epistemology underlying xMOOCs.

5.3.2 cMOOCs

cMOOCs, the first of which was developed by three instructors for a course at the University of
Manitoba in 2008, are based on network learning, where learning develops through the connections
and discussions between participants over social media. There is no standard technology platform for
cMOOCs, which use a combination of webcasts, participant blogs, tweets, software that connects blogs
and tweets on the same topic via hashtags, and online discussion forums. Although usually there are
some experts who initiate and participate in cMOOCs, they are by and large driven by the interests and
contributions of the participants. Usually there is no attempt at formal assessment.

5.3.2.1 Key design principles for cMOOCs

Downes (2014) has identified four key design principles for cMOOCs:

         · autonomy of the learner: although whoever organises the MOOC will usually choose a
            main topic and invite participants, there is no formal curriculum; participants decide what to
            discuss, what to read, and what they wish to contribute towards the topic;

         · diversity: in the tools used, the range of participants, their knowledge levels, and the varied
            content;

         · interactivity: in terms of co-operative learning, communication between participants,
            resulting in 'emergent' knowledge

         · open-ness: in terms of access, content, activities and assessment.

Thus for the proponents of cMOOCs, learning results not from the transmission of information from an
expert to novices, as in xMOOCs, but from the sharing and flow of knowledge between participants.
                                     5.3 A Taxonomy of MOOCs 223

5.3.2.2 From principles to practice

Identifying how these key design features for cMOOCs are turned into practice is somewhat more
difficult to pinpoint, because cMOOCs depend on an evolving set of practices. Most cMOOCs to date
have in fact made some use of `experts', both in the organization and promotion of the MOOC, and
in providing `nodes' of content around which discussion tends to revolve. In other words, the design
practices of cMOOCs are still more a work in progress than those of xMOOCs.

   Nevertheless, at the moment the following are key design practices in cMOOCs:

· use of social media Partly because most cMOOCs are not institutionally based or supported,
   they do not at present use a shared platform or platforms but are more loosely supported by a
   range of openly accessible `connected' tools and media. These may include a simple online
   registration system, and the use of web conferencing tools such as Blackboard Collaborate or
   Adobe Connect, streamed video or audio files, blogs, wikis, `open' learning management
   systems such as Moodle or Canvas, Twitter, LinkedIn or Facebook, all enabling participants
   to share their contributions. Indeed, as new apps and social media tools develop, they too are
   likely to be incorporated into cMOOCs. All these tools are connected through web-based
   hashtags or other web-based linking mechanisms, enabling participants to identify social
   media contributions from other participants. Thus the use of loosely linked or connected
   social media is a key design component of cMOOCs;

· participant-driven content In principle, other than a common topic that may be decided by
   someone wanting to organise a cMOOC, content is decided upon and contributed by the
   participants themselves. Indeed, there may be no formally identified instructor. In practice
   though cMOOC organisers (who themselves tend to have some expertise in the topic of the
   MOOC) are likely to invite potential participants who have expertise or are known already to
   have a well articulated approach to a topic, to make contributions which form the basis of
   discussion and debate. Participants choose their own ways to contribute or communicate, the
   most common being through blog posts, tweets, or comments on other participants' blog
   posts, although some cMOOCs use wikis or open source online discussion forums. The key
   design practice with regard to content is that all participants contribute to and share content;

· distributed communication This is probably the most difficult design practice to understand
   for those not familiar with cMOOCs - and even for those who have participated. With
   participants numbering in the hundreds or even thousands, each contributing individually
   through a variety of social media, there are a myriad different inter-connections between
   participants that are impossible to track (in total) by any single participant. This results in
   many sub-conversations, more commonly at a binary level of two people communicating
   with each other than an integrated group discussion, although all conversations are `open'
   and all other participants are able to contribute to a conversation if they know it exists. The
   key design practice then with regard to communication is a self-organising network with
   many sub-components;

· assessment There is no formal assessment, although participants may seek feedback from
   other, more knowledgeable participants, on an informal basis. Basically participants decide
   for themselves whether what they have learned is appropriate to them.
224 Chapter 5: MOOCs

5.3.2.3 cMOOCs summary

cMOOCs therefore primarily use a networked approach to learning based on autonomous learners
connecting with each other across open and connected social media and sharing knowledge through their
own personal contributions. There is no pre-set curriculum and no formal teacher-student relationship,
either for delivery of content or for learner support. Participants learn from the contributions of others,
from the meta-level knowledge generated through the community, and from self-reflection on their own
contributions, thus reflecting many of the features of communities of interest or practice.

   cMOOCs have a very different educational philosophy from xMOOCs. Downes and Siemens have
argued that cMOOCs reflect a new theory of learning, `connectivism', based on exploiting online social
networks (see Chapter 2.6). cMOOCs certainly reflect a constructivist epistemology.

5.3.3 Other variations of MOOCs

I have deliberately focused on the differences in design between xMOOCs and cMOOCs, and Mackness
(2103) and Yousef et al. (2014) also emphasise similar differences in philosophy/theory between
cMOOCs and xMOOCs, as well as Downes himself (2012), one of the original designers of cMOOCs.

   However, it should be noted that the design of MOOCs continues to evolve, with all kinds of
variations. Pilli and Admiraal (2016) have identified 27 types of MOOC, including:

         · cMOOCs;

         · xMOOCs;

         · BOOCs (a big open online course) - a cross between an xMOOC and a cMOOC;

         · COOCs (community open online courses) - small-scale, non-profit courses that corporations
            open online to provide courses for customers and/or employees

         · DOCCs (distributed open collaborative course): this involves 17 universities sharing and
            adapting the same basic MOOC;

         · LOOC s(little open online course): as well as 15-20 tuition-paying campus-based students,
            such courses also allow a limited number of non-registered students to also take the course,
            but also paying a fee;

         · MOORs (massive open online research): a mix of video-based lecturers and student research
            projects guided by the instructors;

         · SPOCs (small, private, online courses): the example given is from Harvard Law School,
            which pre-selected 500 students from over 4,000 applicants, who take the same video-
            delivered lectures as on-campus students enrolled at Harvard;

The MOOCs developed by the University of British Columbia and a number of other institutions
use volunteers, paid academic assistants or even the instructor to moderate the online discussions and
participant comments, making such MOOCs closer in design to regular for-credit online courses -
except that they are open to anyone.
                             5.3 A Taxonomy of MOOCs 225

5.3.4 What's going on here?

It is not surprising that over time, the design of MOOCs is evolving. There seem to be three distinct
kinds of development:

         · some of the newer MOOCs, especially those from institutions with a history of credit-based
            online learning prior to the introduction of MOOCs, are beginning to apply some of the best
            practices, such as organised and moderated discussion groups, from online credit courses to
            MOOCs (see Chapter 4, Section 4);

         · others are trying to open up their regular campus classes also, simultaneously, to non-
            registered students (which in fact is how the first MOOC, from Cormier, Downes and
            Siemens, originated);

         · yet others are trying to blend online MOOC materials or content with their on-campus
            teaching.

It is likely that innovation in MOOC design and the way MOOCs are used will continue. In particular,
different kinds of MOOC come and go. Finding extant examples of some of the types of MOOC listed
in Section 5.3.3 has been difficult in revising this chapter.

   However, some of these developments also indicate a good deal of confusion around the
definition and goals of MOOCs, especially regarding massiveness and open-ness. If participants from
outside a university have to pay a hefty fee to participate in an otherwise `closed', on-campus course, or
if off-campus participants have to be selected on certain criteria before they can participate, is it really
open? Is the term MOOC now being used to describe any unconventional online offering or any online
continuing education course? It's difficult to see how a SPOC for instance differs from a typical online
continuing education course, except perhaps in that it uses a recorded lecture rather than a learning
management system. There is a danger of having any online course ending up being described as a
MOOC, when in fact there are major differences in design and philosophy.

   Although each of these individual innovations, often the result of the initiative of an individual
instructor, are to be welcomed in principle, the consequences need to be carefully considered in fairness
to potential participants. Individual instructors designing MOOCs really need to make sure that the
design is consistent in terms of educational philosophy, and be clear as to why they are opting for a
MOOC rather than a conventional online course. This is particularly important if there is to be any form
of formal assessment. The status of such an assessment for participants who are not formally admitted
to or registered as a student in an institution needs to be clear and consistent.

   There is even more confusion about mixing MOOCs with on-campus teaching. At the moment the
strategy appears to be to first develop a MOOC then see how it can be adapted for on-campus teaching.
However, a better strategy might be to develop a conventional, for-credit online course, in terms of
design, then see how it could be scaled for open access to other participants. Another strategy might be
to use open social media, such as a course wiki and student blogs, to widen access to the teaching of a
formal course, rather than develop a full-blown MOOC.

   Thinking through the policy implications of incorporating MOOCs or MOOC materials with on-
campus teaching does not appear to be happening at the moment in most institutions experimenting
with `blended' MOOCs. If MOOC participants are taking exactly the same course and assessment as
registered on-campus for-credit students, will the institution award the external MOOC participants who
successfully complete the assessment credit for it and/or admit them to the institution? If not, why not?
226 Chapter 5: MOOCs

For an excellent discussion of these issues framed for an institution's Board of Governors, see Green,
2013.

   Thus some of these MOOC developments seem to be operating in a policy vacuum regarding open
learning in general. At some point, institutions will need to develop a clearer, more consistent strategy
for open learning, in terms of how it can best be provided, how it calibrates with formal learning, and
how open learning can be accommodated within the fiscal constraints of the institution, and then where
MOOCs, other OERs and conventional for-credit online courses might fit with the strategy. For more on
this topic, see Chapter 11.

References

Banks, C. and Meinert, E. (2016) The acceptability of MOOC certificates in the workplace International
Conference eLearning 2016

   Downes, S. (2012) Massively Open Online Courses are here to stay, Stephen's Web, July 20
   Downes, S. (2014) The MOOC of One, Valencia, Spain, March 10
   Eradze M., Tammets K. (2017) Learning Analytics in MOOCs: EMMA Case. In: Lauro N., Amaturo
E., Grassia M., Aragona B., Marino M. (eds) Data Science and Social Research: Studies in
Classification, Data Analysis, and Knowledge Organization Springer: Cham
   Gatuguta-Gitau, S. (2017) MOOCs: Employers View, a brief snapshot QS, London, UK
   Gordon, A. (2018) `Micromasters surge as MOOCs go from education to qualification`, Forbes, 13
February
   Green, K. (2013) Mission, money and MOOCs Association of Governing Boards Trusteeship, No. 1,
Volume 21
   Laveti, R. et al. (2017) Implementation of learning analytics framework for MOOCs using state-of-
the-art in-memory computing, IEEE Xplore, 19 October
   Mackness, J. (2013) cMOOCs and xMOOCs - key differences, Jenny Mackness, October 22
   Pilli, O. amd Admiraal, W. (2016) A Taxonomy of Massive Open Online Courses Contemporary
Educational Technology, Vol. 7, No. 3, pp. 223-240
   Yousef, A. et al. (2014) MOOCs: A Review of the State-of-the-Art Proceedings of 6th International
Conference on Computer Supported Education - CSEDU 2014, Barcelona, Spain, pp. 9-20

                                                         Activity 5.3: Thinking about MOOC design

      1. When is a MOOC a MOOC and when is it not a MOOC? Can you identify the common features? Is
   MOOC still a useful term?

      2. If you were to design a MOOC, who would be the target audience? What kind of MOOC would it be?
   What form of assessment could you use? What would make you think your MOOC was a success, after it was
   delivered? What criteria would you use?

      3. Could you think of other ways to make one or more of your courses more open, other than creating a
   MOOC from scratch? What would be the advantages and disadvantages of these other methods, compared to
   a MOOC?

      For my comments on these questions click on the podcast below:
                                                                                                   5.3 A Taxonomy of MOOCs 227

   An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=154
5.4 Strengths and weaknesses of MOOCs

   Figure 5.4.1 MOOC users tend to be male, well-educated, with about 40-60% from other countries. Image: Depositphotos,
   2019

         In-depth analysis by standard academic criteria shows that MOOCs have more academic rigor and are a
                                                           far more effective teaching methodology than in-house teaching

                                                                                      Benton R. Groves, Ph.D. student

          My big concern with xMOOCs is their limitation, as currently designed, for developing the higher order
                                                                                    intellectual skills needed in a digital world.

                                                                                                                Tony Bates
5.4.1 The research on MOOCs
At the time of writing (2019), MOOCs are still less than ten years old, whereas online courses for
credit have been around for more than 20 years. The latter have been subject to much more independent
research, although this prior research was largely ignored in the design of the early MOOCs. A lot of the

                                                                   229
230 Chapter 5: MOOCs

research to date on MOOCs comes from the institutions offering MOOCs, mainly in the form of reports
on enrolments, or self-evaluation by instructors. The commercial platform providers such as Coursera
and Udacity have provided limited research information overall, which is a pity, because they have
access to really big data sets. However, MIT and Harvard, the founding partners in edX, are conducting
some research, mainly on their own courses.

   In this chapter, I have drawn on available evidence-based research that provides insight into the
strengths and weaknesses of MOOCs. At the same time, we should be clear that we are discussing a
phenomenon that to date has been marked largely by political, emotional and often irrational discourse,
rather than something based on evidence-based research.

   Lastly, it should be remembered in this evaluation I am applying the criteria of whether MOOCs are
likely to lead to the kinds of learning needed in a digital age: in other words, do they help develop the

knowledge and skills defined in Chapter 1?

5.4.2 Open and free education

5.4.2.1 The `open-ness' of MOOCs

MOOCs, particularly xMOOCs, deliver high quality content from some of the world's best universities
to anyone with a computer and an Internet connection. This in itself is an amazing value proposition. In
this sense, MOOCs are an incredibly valuable addition to education. Who could argue against this?

   However, MOOCs are not the only form of open and free education. Libraries, open textbooks and
educational broadcasting are also open and free and have been for some time. There are also lessons we
can learn from these earlier forms of open and free education that also apply to MOOCs.

   Furthermore, MOOCs are not always open as in the sense of open educational resources. Coursera and
Udacity for instance offer limited access to their material for re-use without permission. On other more
open platforms, such as edX, individual faculty or institutions may restrict re-use of material. Lastly,
many MOOCs exist for only one or two years then disappear, which limits their use as open educational
resources for re-use in other courses or programs.

5.4.2.2 A replacement for conventional education?

It is worth noting that these earlier forms of open and free education did not replace the need for formal,
credit-based education, but were used to supplement or strengthen it. In other words, MOOCs are a tool
for continuing and informal education, which has high value in its own right. As we shall see, though,
MOOCs work best when people are already reasonably well educated. There is no reason to believe
then that because MOOCs are open and free to end-users, they will inevitably force down the cost of
conventional higher education, or eliminate the need for it altogether.

5.4.2.3 The answer for education in developing countries?

There have been many attempts to use educational broadcasting and satellite broadcasting in
developing countries to open up education for the masses (see Bates, 1984), and they all substantially
failed to increase access or reduce cost for a variety of reasons, the most important being:

         · the high cost of ground equipment (including security from theft or damage);

         · the need for local face-to-face support for learners without high levels of education;
                                                                                                       5.4 Strengths and weaknesses of MOOCs 231

         · the need to adapt content to the culture and needs of the receiving countries;

         · the difficulty of covering the operational costs of management and administration, especially
            for assessment, qualifications and local accreditation.

Also the priority in most developing countries is not for university courses from high-level Stanford
University professors, but for low cost, good quality high school education.

   Although mobile phones and to a lesser extent tablets are widespread in Africa, they are relatively
expensive to use. For instance, it costs US$2 to download a typical YouTube video - equivalent to a
day's salary for many Africans. Streamed 50 minute video lectures then have limited applicability.

   Lastly, it is frankly immoral to allow people in developing countries to believe that successful
completion of MOOCs will lead to a recognised degree or to university entrance in the USA or in any
other economically advanced country, at least under present circumstances.

   This is not to say that MOOCs could not be valuable in developing countries, but this will mean:

         · being realistic as to what they can actually deliver;

         · working in partnership with educational institutions and systems and other partners in
            developing countries;

         · ensuring that the necessary local support - which costs real money - is put in place;

         · adapting the design, content and delivery of MOOCs to the cultural and economic
            requirements of those countries.

Finally, although MOOCs are in the main free for participants, they are not without substantial cost to
MOOC providers, an issue that will be discussed in more detail in Section 5.4.8.

5.4.3 The audience that MOOCs mainly serve

In a research report from Ho et al. (2014), researchers at Harvard University and MIT found that on the
first 17 MOOCs offered through edX,

         · 66 per cent of all participants, and 74 per cent of all who obtained a certificate, have a
            bachelor's degree or above,

         · 71 per cent were male, and the average age was 26.

         · this and other studies also found that a high proportion of participants came from outside the
            USA, ranging from 40-60 per cent of all participants, indicating strong interest internationally
            in open access to high quality university teaching.

In a study based on over 80 interviews in 62 institutions `active in the MOOC space', Hollands and
Tirthali (2014), researchers at Columbia University Teachers' College, found that:

     Data from MOOC platforms indicate that MOOCs are providing educational opportunities to
     millions of individuals across the world. However, most MOOC participants are already well-
     educated and employed, and only a small fraction of them fully engages with the courses. Overall,
     the evidence suggests that MOOCs are currently falling far short of "democratizing" education and
     may, for now, be doing more to increase gaps in access to education than to diminish them.
232 Chapter 5: MOOCs

   Thus MOOCs, as is common with most forms of university continuing education, cater to the better
educated, older and employed sectors of society.

5.4.4 Persistence and commitment: the onion hypothesis

The edX researchers (Ho et al., 2014) identified different levels of commitment as follows across 17 edX
MOOCs:

         · only registered: registrants who never access the courseware (35 per cent);
         · only viewed: non-certified registrants who access the courseware, accessing less than half of

            the available chapters (56 per cent);
         · only explored: non-certified registrants who access more than half of the available chapters

            in the courseware, but did not get a certificate (4 per cent);
         · certified: registrants who earn a certificate in the course (5 per cent).

Hill (2013) has identified five types of participants in Coursera courses:
                                                                                                       5.4 Strengths and weaknesses of MOOCs 233

Figure 5.4.2 Image: Phil Hill, 2013

   Engle (2014) found similar patterns (also replicated in other studies) for the University of British
Columbia MOOCs on Coursera :

         · of those that initially sign up, between one third and a half do not participate in any other
            active way;

         · of those that participate in at least one activity, between 5-10 per cent go on to successfully
            complete a certificate.

Those going on to achieve certificates usually are within the 5-10 per cent range of those that sign up and
in the 10-20 per cent range for those who actively engaged with the MOOC at least once. Nevertheless,
the numbers obtaining certificates are still large in absolute terms: over 43,000 across 17 courses on edX
and 8,000 across four courses at UBC (between 2,000-2,500 certificates per course).

   Milligan et al. (2013) found a similar pattern of commitment in cMOOCs, from interviewing a small
sample of participants (29 out of 2,300 registrants) about halfway through a cMOOC:

         · passive participants: in Milligan's study these were those that felt lost in the MOOC and
            rarely but occasionally logged in;
234 Chapter 5: MOOCs

         · lurkers: they were actively following the course but did not engage in any of the activities
            (just under half those interviewed);

         · active participants (again, just under half those interviewed) who were fully engaged in the
            course activities.

MOOCs need to be judged for what they are, a somewhat unique - and valuable - form of non-formal
education. These results are very similar to research into non-formal educational broadcasts (e.g. the
History Channel). One would not expect a viewer to watch every episode of a History Channel series
then take an exam at the end. Ho et al. (p.13) produced the following diagram to show the different levels
of commitment to xMOOCs:
                                                                                                       5.4 Strengths and weaknesses of MOOCs 235

Figure 5.4.3 Level of participation in MOOCs © Ho et al., 2014
236 Chapter 5: MOOCs

   This is remarkably similar to what I wrote in 1984 about the onion hypothesis of educational
broadcasting in Britain (Bates, 1984):

     (p.99): At the centre of the onion is a small core of fully committed students who work through the
     whole course, and, where available, take an end-of-course assessment or examination. Around the
     small core will be a rather larger layer of students who do not take any examination but do enrol
     with a local class or correspondence school. There may be an even larger layer of students who, as
     well as watching and listening, also buy the accompanying textbook, but who do not enrol in any
     courses. Then, by far the largest group, are those that just watch or listen to the programmes. Even
     within this last group, there will be considerable variations, from those who watch or listen fairly
     regularly, to those, again a much larger number, who watch or listen to just one programme.

   I also wrote (p.100):

     A sceptic may say that the only ones who can be said to have learned effectively are the tiny
     minority that worked right through the course and successfully took the final assessment...A counter
     argument would be that broadcasting can be considered successful if it merely attracts viewers or
     listeners who might otherwise have shown no interest in the topic; it is the numbers exposed to the
     material that matter...the key issue then is whether broadcasting does attract to education those
     who would not otherwise have been interested, or merely provides yet another opportunity for those
     who are already well educated...There is a good deal of evidence that it is still the better educated
     in Britain and Europe that make the most use of non-formal educational broadcasting.

   Exactly the same could be said about MOOCs. In a digital age where easy and open access to new
knowledge is critical for those working in knowledge-based industries, MOOCs will be one valuable
source or means of accessing that knowledge. The issue is though whether there are more effective ways
to do this. Thus MOOCs can be considered a useful - but not really revolutionary - contribution to non-
formal continuing education.

5.4.5 What do students learn in MOOCs?

This is a much more difficult question to answer, because so little of the research to date (2019) has tried
to answer this question. (One reason, as we shall see in the next section, is that assessment of learning
in MOOCs remains a major challenge). There are at least two kinds of study: quantitative studies that
seek to quantify learning gains; and qualitative studies that describe the experience of learners within
MOOCs, which indirectly provide some insight into what they have learned.

5.4.5.1 Conceptual learning

At the time of writing, the most quantitative study of learning in MOOCs has been by Colvin et
al.(2014), who investigated `conceptual learning' in an MIT Introductory Physics MOOC. Colvin and
colleagues compared learner performance not only between different sub-categories of learners within
the MOOC, such as those with no physics or math background with those such as physic teachers who
had considerable prior knowledge, but also with on-campus students taking the same curriculum in a
traditional campus teaching format. In essence, the study found no significant differences in learning
                                                                                                       5.4 Strengths and weaknesses of MOOCs 237

gains between or within the two types of teaching, but it should be noted that the on-campus students
were students who had failed an earlier version of the course and were retaking it.

   This research is a classic example of the no significant difference in comparative studies in
educational technology; other variables, such as differences in the types of students, were as important
as the mode of delivery (for more on the `no significant difference' phenomenon in media comparisons,
see Chapter 10, Section 2.2). Also, this MOOC design represents a behaviourist-cognitivist approach
to learning that places heavy emphasis on correct answers to conceptual questions. It doesn't attempt
to develop the skills needed in a digital age as identified in Chapter 1.

5.4.5.2 The student experience

There have been far more studies of the experience of learners within MOOCs, particularly focusing on
the discussions within MOOCs (see for instance, Kop, 2011). In general (although there are exceptions),
discussions are unmonitored, and it is left to participants to make connections and respond to other
students comments.

   However, there are some strong criticisms of the effectiveness of the discussion element of MOOCs
for developing the high-level conceptual analysis required for academic learning. There is evidence from
studies of credit-based online learning that to develop deep, conceptual learning, there is a need in most
cases for intervention by a subject expert to clarify misunderstandings or misconceptions, to provide
accurate feedback, to ensure that the criteria for academic learning, such as use of evidence, clarity
of argument, and so on, are being met, and to ensure the necessary input and guidance to seek deeper
understanding (see in particular Harasim, 2017).

   Furthermore, the more massive the course, the more likely participants are to feel `overload, anxiety
and a sense of loss', if there is not some instructor intervention or structure imposed (Knox, 2014).
Firmin et al. (2014) have shown that when there is some form of instructor `encouragement and support
of student effort and engagement', results improve for all participants in MOOCs. Without a structured
role for subject experts, participants are faced with a wide variety of quality in terms of comments and
feedback from other participants. There is again a great deal of research on the conditions necessary
for the successful conduct of collaborative and co-operative group learning (see for instance, Lave and
Wenger, 1991, or Barkley, Major and Cross, 2014), and these findings certainly have not been generally
applied to the management of MOOC discussions.

5.4.5.3 Networked and collaborative learning

One counter argument is that cMOOCs in particular develop a new form of learning based on
networking and collaboration that is essentially different from academic learning, and cMOOCs are
thus more appropriate to the needs of learners in a digital age. Adult participants in particular, it
is claimed by Downes and Siemens, have the ability to self-manage the development of high level
conceptual learning. cMOOCs are `demand' driven, meeting the interests of individual students who
seek out others with similar interests and the necessary expertise to support them in their learning, and
for many this interest may well not include the need for deep, conceptual learning but more likely the
appropriate applications of prior knowledge in new or specific contexts. All MOOCs do appear to work
best for those who already have a high level of education and therefore bring many of the conceptual
skills developed in formal education with them when they join a MOOC, and therefore contribute to
helping those who come without such prior knowledge or skills.
238 Chapter 5: MOOCs

5.4.5.4 The need for learner support

Over time, as more experience is gained, MOOCs are likely to incorporate and adapt some of the
findings from research on smaller group work to the much larger numbers in MOOCs. For instance,
some MOOCs are using `volunteer' or community tutors. The US State Department organized MOOC
camps through US missions and consulates abroad to mentor MOOC participants. The camps included
Fulbright scholars and embassy staff who lead discussions on content and topics for MOOC participants
in countries abroad (Haynie, 2014).

   Some MOOC providers, such as the University of British Columbia, paid a small cohort of
academic assistants to monitor and contribute to the MOOC discussion forums (Engle, 2014). Engle
reported that the use of academic assistants, as well as limited but effective interventions from the
instructors themselves, made the UBC MOOCs more interactive and engaging.

   However, paying for people to monitor and support MOOCs will of course increase the cost to
providers. Consequently, MOOCs are likely to develop new automated ways to manage discussion
effectively in very large groups. For instance, the University of Edinburgh experimented with an
automated `teacherbot' that crawled through student and instructor Twitter posts associated with a
MOOC and directed predetermined comments to students to prompt discussion and reflection (Bayne,
2015). These results and approaches are consistent with prior research on the importance of instructor
presence for successful online learning in credit-based courses (see Chapter 4.4.3).

   In the meantime, though, there is much work still to be done if MOOCs are to provide the support and
structure needed to ensure deep, conceptual learning where this does not already exist in students. The
development of the skills needed in a digital age is likely to be an even greater challenge when dealing
with massive numbers. However, we need much more research into what participants actually learn in
MOOCs and under what conditions before any firm conclusions can be drawn.

5.4.6 Assessment

Assessment of the massive numbers of participants in MOOCs has proved to be a major challenge. It
is a complex topic that can be dealt with only briefly here. However, Chapter 6, Section 8 provides
a general analysis of different types of assessment, and Suen (2014) provides a comprehensive and
balanced overview of the way assessment has been used in MOOCs to date. This section draws heavily
on Suen's paper.

5.4.6.1 Computer marked assignments

Assessment to date in MOOCs has been primarily of two kinds. The first is based on quantitative
multiple-choice tests, or response boxes where formulae or `correct code' can be entered and
automatically checked. Usually participants are given immediate automated feedback on their answers,
ranging from simple right or wrong answers to more complex responses depending on the type of
response checked, but in all cases, the process is usually fully automated.

   For straight testing of facts, principles, formulae, equations and other forms of conceptual learning
where there are clear, correct answers, this works well. In fact, multiple choice computer marked
assignments were used by the UK Open University as long ago as the 1970s, although the means to
give immediate online feedback were not available then. However, this method of assessment is limited
for testing deep or `transformative' learning, and particularly weak for assessing the intellectual skills
needed in a digital age, such as creative or original thinking.
                                                   5.4 Strengths and weaknesses of MOOCs 239

5.4.6.2 Peer assessment

Another type of assessment that has been tried in MOOCs has been peer assessment, where participants
assess each other's work. Peer assessment is not new. It has been successfully used for formative
assessment in traditional classrooms and in some online teaching for credit (Falchikov and Goldfinch,
2000; van Zundert et al., 2010). More importantly, peer assessment is seen as a powerful way to improve
deep understanding and knowledge through the process of students evaluating the work of others, and at
the same time, it can be useful for developing some of the skills needed in a digital age, such as critical
thinking, for those participants assessing other participants.

   However, a key feature of the successful use of peer assessment has been the close involvement of an
instructor or teacher, in providing benchmarks, rubrics or criteria for assessment, and for monitoring and
adjusting peer assessments to ensure consistency and a match with the benchmarks set by the instructor.
Although an instructor can provide the benchmarks and rubrics in MOOCs, close monitoring of the
multiple peer assessments is difficult if not impossible with the very large numbers of participants. As
a result, MOOC participants often become incensed at being randomly assessed by other participants
who may not and often do not have the knowledge or ability to give a `fair' or accurate assessment of
another participant's work.

   Various attempts to get round the limitations of peer assessment in MOOCs have been tried such as
calibrated peer reviews, based on averaging all the peer ratings, and Bayesian post hoc stabilization
(Piech at al. 2013), but although these statistical techniques reduce the error (or spread) of peer review
somewhat they still do not remove the problems of systematic errors of judgement in raters due to
misconceptions. This is particularly a problem where a majority of participants fail to understand key
concepts in a MOOC, in which case peer assessment becomes the blind leading the blind.

5.4.6.3 Automated essay scoring

This is another area where there have been attempts to automate scoring (Balfour, 2013). Although such
methods are increasingly sophisticated they are currently limited in terms of accurate assessment to
measuring primarily technical writing skills, such as grammar, spelling and sentence construction. Once
again they do not measure accurately longer essays where higher level intellectual skills are demanded.

5.4.6.4 Badges, certificates and microcredentials

Particularly in xMOOCs, participants may be awarded a certificate or a `badge' for successful
completion of the MOOC, based on a final test (usually computer-marked) which measures the level

of learning in a course. However, most of the institutions offering MOOCs will not accept
their own certificates for admission or credit within their own, campus-based programs.
Probably nothing says more about the confidence in the quality of the assessment than
this failure of MOOC providers to recognize their own teaching.

   MOOC-based microcredentials are a more recent development.A microcredential is any one of a
number of new certifications that covers more than a single course but is less than a full degree. Pickard
(2018) provides an analysis of more than 450 MOOC-based microcredentials. Pickard states:

     Microcredentials can be seen as part of a trend toward modularity and stackability in higher
     education, the idea being that each little piece of an education can be consumed on its own or can
     be aggregated with other pieces up to something larger. Each course is made of units, each unit is
     made of lessons; courses can stack up to Specializations or XSeries; these can stack up to partial
240 Chapter 5: MOOCs

     degrees such as MicroMasters, or all the way up to full degrees (though only some microcredentials
     are structured as pieces of degrees).

   However, in her analysis, Pickard found that in the micro-credentials offered through the main MOOC
platforms, such as Coursera, edX, Udacity and FutureLearn.;

         · student fees range from US$250 to US$17,000;

         · some microcredentials, though not all, offer some opportunity to earn credit towards a degree
            program. Typically, university credit is awarded if and only if a student goes on to enroll in
            the particular degree program connected with the microcredential;

         · they are not accredited, recognized, or evaluated by third party organizations (except insofar
            as they pertain to university degree programs). This variability and lack of standardization
            poses a problem for both learners and employers, as it makes it difficult to compare the
            various microcredentials;

         · with so much variability, how would a prospective learner choose among the various
            options? Furthermore, without a detailed understanding of these options, how would an
            employer interpret or compare these microcredentials when they come up on a resume?

Nevertheless, in a digital age, both workers and employers will increasingly look for ways to `accredit'
smaller units of learning than a degree, but in ways that they can be stacked towards eventually a full
degree. The issue is whether tying this to the MOOC movement is the best way to go.

   Surely a better way would be to develop microcredentials as part of or in parallel with a regular
online masters program. For instance as early as 2003, the University of British Columbia in its online
Master of Educational Technology was allowing students to take single courses at a time, or the five
foundation courses for a post-graduate certificate, or add four more courses and a project to the
certificate for a full Master's degree. Such microcredentials would not be MOOCs, unless (a) they are
open to anyone and (b) they are free or at such a low cost anyone can take them. Then the issue
becomes whether the institution will accept such MOOC-like credentials as part of a full degree. If not,
employers are unlikely to recognise such microcredentials, because they will not know what they are
worth.

5.4.6.5 The intent behind assessment

To evaluate assessment in MOOCs requires an examination of the intent behind assessment. There are
many different purposes behind assessment (see Chapter 6, Section 8). Peer assessment and immediate
feedback on computer-marked tests can be extremely valuable for formative assessment or feedback,
enabling participants to see what they have understood and to help develop further their understanding
of key concepts. In cMOOCs, as Suen points out, learning is measured as the communication that takes
place between MOOC participants, resulting in crowdsourced validation of knowledge - it's what the
sum of all the participants come to believe to be true as a result of participating in the MOOC, so
formal assessment is unnecessary. However, what is learned in this way is not necessarily academically
validated knowledge, which to be fair, is not the concern of cMOOC proponents.

   Academic assessment is a form of currency, related not only to measuring student achievement but
also affecting student mobility (for example, entrance to graduate school) and perhaps more importantly
employment opportunities and promotion. From a learner's perspective, the validity of the currency -
the recognition and transferability of the qualification - is essential. To date, MOOCs have been unable
                                                                                                       5.4 Strengths and weaknesses of MOOCs 241

to demonstrate that they are able to assess accurately the learning achievements of participants beyond
comprehension and knowledge of ideas, principles and processes (recognizing that there is some value
in this alone). What MOOCs have not been able to demonstrate is that they can either develop or assess
deep understanding or the intellectual skills required in a digital age. Indeed, this may not be possible
within the constraints of massiveness, which is their major distinguishing feature from other forms of
online learning.

5.4.7 Branding

Hollands and Tirthali (2014) in their survey on institutional expectations for MOOCs, found that
building and maintaining brand was the second most important reason for institutions launching MOOCs
(the most important was extending reach, which can also be seen as partly a branding exercise).
Institutional branding through the use of MOOCs has been helped by elite Ivy League universities such
as Stanford, MIT and Harvard leading the charge, and by Coursera limiting access to its platform to
only `top tier' universities. This of course has led to a bandwagon effect, especially since many of
the universities launching MOOCs had previously disdained to move into credit-based online learning.
MOOCs provided a way for these elite institutions to jump to the head of the queue in terms of status
as `innovators' of online learning, even though they arrived late to the party.

   It obviously makes sense for institutions to use MOOCs to bring their areas of specialist expertise
to a much wider public, such as the University of Alberta offering a MOOC on dinosaurs, MIT on
electronics, and Harvard on Ancient Greek Heroes. MOOCs certainly help to widen knowledge of the
quality of an individual professor (who is usually delighted to reach more students in one MOOC than
in a lifetime of on-campus teaching). MOOCs are also a good way to give a glimpse of the quality of
courses and programs offered by an institution.

   However, it is difficult to measure the real impact of MOOCs on branding. As Hollands and Tirthali
put it:

     While many institutions have received significant media attention as a result of their MOOC
     activities, isolating and measuring impact of any new initiative on brand is a difficult exercise. Most
     institutions are only just beginning to think about how to capture and quantify branding-related
     benefits.

   In particular, these elite institutions do not need MOOCs to boost the number of applicants for
their campus-based programs (none to date is willing to accept successful completion of a MOOC for
admission to credit programs), since elite institutions have no difficulty in attracting already highly
qualified students.

   Furthermore, once every other institution starts offering MOOCs, the branding effect gets lost to
some extent. Indeed, exposing poor quality teaching or course planning to many thousands can have
a negative impact on an institution's brand, as Georgia Institute of Technology found when one of its
MOOCs crashed and burned (Jaschik, 2013). However, by and large, most MOOCs succeed in the sense
of bringing an institution's reputation in terms of knowledge and expertise to many more people than it
would through any other form of teaching or publicity.
242 Chapter 5: MOOCs

5.4.8 Costs and economies of scale

Figure 5.4.8 The MOOC value proposition is that MOOCs can eliminate the variable costs of course delivery. Image:
© OpenTuition.com, 2014

   One main strength claimed for MOOCs is that they are free to participants. Once again this is more
true in principle than in practice, because MOOC providers may charge a range of fees, especially for
assessment. Furthermore, although MOOCs may be free for participants, they are not without substantial
cost to the provider institutions. Also, there are large differences in the costs of xMOOCs and cMOOCs,
the latter being generally much cheaper to develop, although there are still some opportunity or actual
costs even for cMOOCs.

5.4.8.1 The cost of MOOC production and delivery

There is still very little information to date on the actual costs of designing and delivering a MOOC as
there are not enough published studies to draw firm conclusions about the costs of MOOCs. However we
do have some data. The University of Ottawa (2013) estimated the cost of developing an xMOOC, based
on figures provided to the university by Coursera, and on their own knowledge of the cost of developing
online courses for credit, at around $100,000.

   Engle (2014) has reported on the actual cost of five MOOCs from the University of British Columbia.
There are two important features concerning the UBC MOOCs that do not necessarily apply to other
MOOCs. First, the UBC MOOCs used a wide variety of video production methods, from full studio
production to desktop recording, so development costs varied considerably, depending on the
sophistication of the video production technique. Second, the UBC MOOCs made extensive use of paid
                                                                                                       5.4 Strengths and weaknesses of MOOCs 243

academic assistants, who monitored discussions and adapted or changed course materials as a result of
student feedback, so there were substantial delivery costs as well.

   Appendix B of the UBC report gives a pilot total of $217,657, but this excludes academic assistance
or, perhaps the most significant cost, instructor time. Academic assistance came to 25 per cent of the
overall cost in the first year (excluding the cost of faculty). Working from the video production costs
($95,350) and the proportion of costs (44 per cent) devoted to video production in Figure 1 in the report,
I estimate the direct cost at $216,700, or approximately $54,000 per MOOC, excluding faculty time and
co-ordination support (that is, excluding program administration and overheads), but including academic
assistance. However, the range of cost is almost as important. The video production costs for the MOOC
which used intensive studio production were more than six times the video production costs of one of
the other MOOCs.

5.4.8.2 The comparative costs of credit-based online courses

The main cost factors or variables in credit-based online and distance learning are relatively well
understood, from previous research by Rumble (2001) and Hülsmann (2003). Using a similar costing
methodology, I tracked and analysed the cost of an online master's program at the University of British
Columbia over a seven year period (Bates and Sangrà, 2011). This program used mainly a learning
management system as the core technology, with instructors both developing the course and providing
online learner support and assessment, assisted where necessary by extra adjunct faculty for handling
larger class enrolments.

   I found in my analysis of the costs of the UBC program that in 2003, development costs were
approximately $20,000 to $25,000 per course. However, over a seven year period, course
development constituted less than 15 per cent of the total cost, and occurred mainly in the first year or so
of the program. Delivery costs, which included providing online learner support and student assessment,
constituted more than a third of the total cost, and of course continued each year the course was offered.
Thus in credit-based online learning, delivery costs tend to be more than double the development costs
over the life of a program.

   The main difference then between MOOCs, credit-based online teaching, and campus-based teaching
is that in principle MOOCs eliminate all delivery costs, because MOOCs do not provide learner support
or instructor-delivered assessment, although again in practice this is not always true.

5.4.8.3 Opportunity costs

There is also clearly a large opportunity cost involved in offering xMOOCs. By definition, the most
highly valued faculty are involved in offering MOOCs. In a large research university, such faculty are
likely to have, at a maximum, a teaching load of four to six courses a year. Although most instructors
volunteer to do MOOCs, their time is limited. Either it means dropping one credit course for at least
one semester, equivalent to 25 per cent or more of their teaching load, or xMOOC development and
delivery replaces time spent doing research. Furthermore, unlike credit-based courses, which run from
anywhere between five to seven years, MOOCs are often offered only once or twice.

5.4.8.4 Comparing the cost of MOOCs with online credit courses

However one looks at it, the cost of xMOOC development, without including the time of the MOOC
instructor, tends to be almost double the cost of developing an online credit course using a learning
management system, because of the use of video in MOOCs. If the cost of the instructor is included,
244 Chapter 5: MOOCs

xMOOC production costs come closer to three times that of a similar length online credit course,
especially given the extra time faculty tend put in for such a public demonstration of their teaching in
a MOOC. xMOOCs could (and some do) use cheaper production methods, such as an LMS instead of
video, for content delivery, or using and re-editing video recordings of classroom lectures via lecture
capture.

   Without learner support or academic assistance, though, delivery costs for MOOCs are zero, and this
is where the huge potential for savings exist. If the cost per participant is calculated the MOOC unit costs
are very low, combining both production and delivery costs. Even if the cost per student successfully
obtaining an end of course certificate is calculated it will be many times lower than the cost of an online
or campus-based successful student. If we take a MOOC costing roughly $100,000 to develop, and 5,000
participants complete the end of course certificate, the average cost per successful participant is $20.
However, this assumes that the same type of knowledge and skills is being assessed for both a MOOC
and for a graduate masters program; usually this not the case.

5.4.8.5 Costs versus outputs

The issue then is whether MOOCs can succeed without the cost of learner support and human
assessment, or more likely, whether MOOCs can substantially reduce delivery costs through automation
without loss of quality in learner performance. There is no evidence to date though that they can do this
in terms of higher order learning skills and `deep' knowledge. To assess this kind of learning requires
setting assignments that test such knowledge, and such assessments usually need human marking,
which then adds to cost. We also know from prior research from successful online credit programs
that active instructor online presence is a critical factor for successful online learning. Thus adequate
learner support and assessment remains a major challenge for MOOCs. MOOCs then are a good way
to teach certain levels of knowledge but will have major structural problems in teaching other types
of knowledge. Unfortunately, it is the type of knowledge most needed in a digital world that MOOCs
struggle to teach.

5.4.8.6 MOOC business models and cost-benefits

In terms of sustainable business models, Baker and Passmore (2016) examined several different possible
business models to support MOOCs (but do not offer any actual costing). The elite universities have
been able to move into xMOOCs because of generous donations from private foundations and use of
endowment funds, but these forms of funding are limited for most institutions. Coursera and Udacity
have the opportunity to develop successful business models through various means, such as charging
MOOC provider institutions for use of their platform, by collecting fees for badges or certificates,
through the sale of participant data, through corporate sponsorship, or through direct advertising.

   However, particularly for publicly funded universities or colleges, most of these sources of income
are not available or permitted, so it is hard to see how they can begin to recover the cost of a
substantial investment in MOOCs, even with `cannibalising' MOOC material for or from on-campus
use. Every time a MOOC is offered, this takes away resources that could be used for online credit
programs. Thus institutions are faced with some hard decisions about where to invest their resources for
online learning. The case for putting scarce resources into MOOCs is far from clear, unless some way
can be found to give credit for successful MOOC completion.
                                           5.4 Strengths and weaknesses of MOOCs 245

5.4.9 Summary of strengths and weaknesses

The main points of this analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of MOOCs can be summarised as
follows:

5.4.9.1 Strengths

         · MOOCs, particularly xMOOCs, deliver high quality content from some of the world's best
            universities for free or at little cost to anyone with a computer and an Internet connection;

         · MOOCs can be useful for opening access to high quality content, particularly in
            developing countries, but to do so successfully will require a good deal of adaptation, and
            substantial investment in local support and partnerships;

         · MOOCs are valuable for developing basic conceptual learning, and for creating large online
            communities of interest or practice;

         · MOOCs are an extremely valuable form of lifelong learning and continuing education;

         · MOOCs have forced conventional and especially elite institutions to reappraise their
            strategies towards online and open learning;

         · institutions have been able to extend their brand and status by making public their expertise
            and excellence in certain academic areas;

         · MOOCs main value proposition is to eliminate through computer automation and/or peer-to-
            peer communication the very large variable costs in higher education associated with
            providing learner support and quality assessment.

5.4.9.2 Weaknesses

         · the high registration numbers for MOOCs are misleading; less than half of registrants
            actively participate, and of these, only a small proportion successfully complete the course;
            nevertheless, absolute numbers completing are still higher than for conventional courses;

         · MOOCs are expensive to develop, and although commercial organisations offering MOOC
            platforms have opportunities for sustainable business models, it is difficult to see how
            publicly funded higher education institutions can develop sustainable business models for
            MOOCs;

         · MOOCs tend to attract those with already a high level of education, rather than widen access;

         · MOOCs so far have been limited in the ability to develop high level academic learning, or
            the high level intellectual skills needed in a digital society;

         · assessment of the higher levels of learning remains a challenge for MOOCs, to the extent that
            most MOOC providers will not recognise their own MOOCs for credit;

         · MOOC materials may be limited by copyright or time restrictions for re-use as open
            educational resources.
246 Chapter 5: MOOCs

References

Baker, R. and Passmore, D. (2016) Value and Pricing of MOOCs Education Sciences, 27 May
   Balfour, S. P. (2013) Assessing writing in MOOCs: Automated essay scoring and calibrated peer

review Research & Practice in Assessment, Vol. 8
   Barkley, E, Major, C.H. and Cross, K.P. (2014) Collaborative Learning Techniques San Francisco:

Jossey-Bass/Wiley
   Bates, A. (1984) Broadcasting in Education: An Evaluation London: Constables (out of print)
   Bates, A. and Sangrà, A. (2011) Managing Technology in Higher Education San Francisco: Jossey-

Bass/John Wiley and Co
   Bayne, S. (2015) Teacherbot: interventions in automated teaching, Teaching in Higher Education,

Vol. 20, No.4, pp. 455-467
   Colvin, K. et al. (2014) Learning an Introductory Physics MOOC: All Cohorts Learn Equally,

Including On-Campus Class, IRRODL, Vol. 15, No. 4
   Engle, W. (2104) UBC MOOC Pilot: Design and Delivery Vancouver BC: University of British

Columbia
   Falchikov, N. and Goldfinch, J. (2000) Student Peer Assessment in Higher Education: A Meta-

Analysis Comparing Peer and Teacher Marks Review of Educational Research, Vol. 70, No. 3
   Firmin, R. et al. (2014) Case study: using MOOCs for conventional college coursework Distance

Education, Vol. 35, No. 2
   Harasim, L. (2017) Learning Theory and Online Technologies 2nd edition New York/London:

Routledge
   Haynie, D. (2014). State Department hosts `MOOC Camp' for online learners. US News, January 20
   Hill, P. (2013) Some validation of MOOC student patterns graphic, e-Literate, August 30
   Ho, A. et al. (2014) HarvardX and MITx: The First Year of Open Online Courses Fall 2012-Summer

2013 (HarvardX and MITx Working Paper No. 1), January 21
   Hollands, F. and Tirthali, D. (2014) MOOCs: Expectations and Reality New York: Columbia

University Teachers' College, Center for Benefit-Cost Studies of Education
   Hülsmann, T. (2003) Costs without camouflage: a cost analysis of Oldenburg University's two

graduate certificate programs offered as part of the online Master of Distance Education (MDE): a
case study, in Bernath, U. and Rubin, E., (eds.) Reflections on Teaching in an Online Program: A Case
Study Oldenburg, Germany: Bibliothecks-und Informationssystem der Carl von Ossietsky Universität
Oldenburg

   Jaschik, S. (2013) MOOC Mess, Inside Higher Education, February 4
   Knox, J. (2014) Digital culture clash: `massive' education in the e-Learning and Digital
Cultures Distance Education, Vol. 35, No. 2
   Kop, R. (2011) The Challenges to Connectivist Learning on Open Online Networks: Learning
Experiences during a Massive Open Online Course International Review of Research into Open and
Distance Learning, Vol. 12, No. 3
   Lave, J. and Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press
   Milligan, C., Littlejohn, A. and Margaryan, A. (2013) Patterns of engagement in connectivist
MOOCs, Merlot Journal of Online Learning and Teaching, Vol. 9, No. 2
   Pickard, L. (2018) Analysis of 450 MOOC-Based Microcredentials Reveals Many Options But Little
Consistency, Class Central, July 18
                                                                                                       5.4 Strengths and weaknesses of MOOCs 247

   Piech, C., Huang, J., Chen, Z., Do, C., Ng, A., & Koller, D. (2013) Tuned models of peer assessment
in MOOCs. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University

   Rumble, G. (2001) The costs and costing of networked learning, Journal of Asynchronous Learning
Networks, Vol. 5, No. 2

   Suen, H. (2104) Peer assessment for massive open online courses (MOOCs) International Review of
Research into Open and Distance Learning, Vol. 15, No. 3

   University of Ottawa (2013) Report of the e-Learning Working Group Ottawa ON: The University of
Ottawa

   van Zundert, M., Sluijsmans, D., van Merriënboer, J. (2010). Effective peer assessment processes:
Research findings and future directions Learning and Instruction, 20, 270-279

                                           Activity 5.4 Assessing the strengths and weaknesses of MOOCs

      1. Do you agree that MOOCs are just another form of educational broadcasting? What are your reasons?
      2. Is it reasonable to compare the costs of xMOOCs to the costs of online credit courses? Are they competing
   for the same funds, or are they categorically different in their funding source and goals? If so, how?
      3. Could you make the case that cMOOCs are a better value proposition than xMOOCs - or are they again
   too different to compare?
      4. MOOCs are clearly cheaper than either face-to-face or online credit courses if judged on the cost per
   participant successfully completing a course. Is this a fair comparison, and if not, why not?
      5. Do you think institutions should give credit for students successfully completing MOOCs? If so, why, and
   what are the implications?
      I give my own personal views on these questions in the podcast below, but I'd like you to come to your own
   conclusions before listening to my response, because there are no right or wrong answers here:

                           An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                        https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=159
5.5 Political, social and economic drivers of MOOCs

Figure 5.5 MOOC mania
Image: © Park Ridge Underground, 2010

5.5.1 Why the fuss about MOOCs?
It can be seen from the previous section that the pros and cons of MOOCs are finely balanced. Given
though the obvious questions about the value of MOOCs, and the fact that before MOOCs arrived, there
had been substantial but quiet progress for over ten years in the use of online learning for undergraduate
and graduate programs, you might be wondering why MOOCs have commanded so much media interest,
and especially why a large number of government policy makers, economists, and computer scientists
have become so ardently supportive of MOOCs, and why there has been such a strong, negative reaction,
not only from many university and college instructors, who understandably feel threatened by the
implications of MOOCs, but also from many professionals in online learning (see for instance, Hill,

                                                                   249
250 Chapter 5: MOOCs

2012; Bates, 2012; Daniel, 2012; Watters, 2012), who might be expected to be more supportive of
MOOCs.

   It needs to be recognised that the discourse around MOOCs is not usually based on a cool, rational,
evidence-based analysis of the pros and cons of MOOCs, but is more likely to be driven by emotion,
self-interest, fear, or ignorance of what education is actually about. Thus it is important to explore the
political, social and economic factors that have driven MOOC mania.

5.5.2 Massive, free and Made in America!

This is what I will call the intrinsic reason for MOOC mania. It is not surprising that, since the first
MOOC from Stanford professors Sebastian Thrun, Andrew Ng and Daphne Koller each attracted over
200,000 sign-ups from around the world, since the courses were free, and since it came from professors
at one of the most prestigious private universities in the USA, the American media were all over it. It
was big news in its own right, however you look at it.

5.5.3 It's the Ivy Leagues!

Until MOOCs came along, the major Ivy League universities in the USA, such as Stanford, MIT,
Harvard and UC Berkeley, as well as many of the most prestigious universities in Canada, such as
the University of Toronto and McGill, and elsewhere, had largely ignored online learning in any
form (the exception was MIT, which made much of its teaching material available for free via the
OpenCourseWare project.).

   However, by 2011, online learning, in the form of for credit undergraduate and graduate courses, was
making big inroads at many other, very respectable universities, such as Carnegie Mellon, Penn State,
and the University of Maryland in the USA, and also in many of the top tier public universities in Canada
and elsewhere, to the extent that one in three students in the USA were were taking online courses
(Allen and Seaman, 2014). Furthermore, at least in Canada, the online courses were often getting good
completion rates and matching on-campus courses for quality (Ontario, 2011).

   The Ivy League and other highly prestigious universities that had ignored online learning were
beginning to look increasingly out of touch by 2011. By launching into MOOCs, these prestigious
universities could jump to the head of the queue in terms of technology innovation, while at the same
time protecting their selective and highly personal and high cost campus programs from direct contact
with online learning. In other words, MOOCs gave these prestigious universities a safe sandbox in which
to explore online learning. At the same time, the involvement of the Ivy League universities in online
learning for the first time gave credibility to MOOCs, and, inadvertently, online learning as a whole.

5.5.4 It's disruptive!

For years before 2011, various economists, philosophers and industrial gurus had been predicting that
education was the next big area for disruptive change due to the march of new technologies (see for
instance Lyotard, 1979; Tapscott (undated); Christensen, 2016).

   However, although online learning in credit courses had been quietly absorbed into the mainstream of
university teaching, without any signs of major disruption, MOOCs were a potentially massive change,
evidence at long last for the theory of disruption in the education sector.
                            5.5 Political, social and economic drivers of MOOCs 251

5.5.5 It's Silicon Valley!

It is no coincidence that the first MOOCs were all developed by entrepreneurial computer scientists. Ng
and Koller very quickly went on to create Coursera as a private, commercial company, followed shortly
by Thrun, who created Udacity. Anant Agarwal, a computer scientist at MIT, went on to head up edX.

   The first MOOCs were very typical of Silicon Valley start-ups: a bright idea (massive, open online
courses with cloud-based, relatively simple software to handle the numbers), thrown out into the market
to see how it might work, supported by more technology and ideas (in this case, learning analytics,
automated marking, peer assessment) to deal with any snags or problems. Building a sustainable
business model would come later, when some of the dust had settled.

   As a result it is not surprising that almost all the early MOOCs completely ignored any pedagogical
theory about best practices in teaching online, or any prior research on factors associated with success
or failure in online learning. It is also not surprising as a result that a very low percentage of participants
actually successfully completed MOOCs.

5.5.6 It's the economy, stupid!

Of all the reasons for MOOC mania, Bill Clinton's famous election slogan resonates the most. It should
be remembered that by 2011, the consequences of the disastrous financial collapse of 2008 were working
their way through the economy, and particularly were impacting on the finances of state governments in
the USA.

   The recession meant that states were suddenly desperately short of tax revenues, and were unable
to meet the financial demands of state higher education systems. For instance, California's community
college system, the nation's largest, suffered about $809 million in state funding cuts between
2008-2012, resulting in a shortfall of 500,000 places in its campus-based colleges (Rivera, 2012). Free
MOOCs were seen as manna from heaven by the state governor, Jerry Brown (see for instance, To,
2014).

   One consequence of rapid cuts to government funding was a sharp spike in tuition fees, bringing the
real cost of higher education sharply into focus. Tuition fees in the USA have increased by 7 per cent per
annum over the last 10 years, compared with an inflation rate of 4 per cent per annum. Here at last was a
possible way to rein in the high cost of higher education. By 2015 though the economy in the USA had
picked up and revenues were flowing back into state coffers, and so the immediate pressure for more
radical solutions to the cost of higher education began to ease.

5.5.7 The future of MOOCs

It will be interesting to see if MOOC mania continues as the economy grows. Class Central provides
ongoing monitoring of developments in MOOCs around the world. The overall numbers up to 2019 are
impressive but the number of learners added in 2018 was just 20 million, which was less than 23 million
for the previous two years (Shah, 2019). So the rate at which new users are coming into the MOOC
space is decreasing.

   However, MOOCs continue to evolve. For a start, there has been a slow growth in complete degrees
that can be offered through MOOCs. In 2018 there were 45 degrees on offer. While this is a significant
development, though, the numbers are still quite small, given the number of conventional degrees
available worldwide. The other main market is corporate training. Business models are also evolving
with revenues continuing to increase into 2018, with Coursera alone recording $140 million in revenues.
252 Chapter 5: MOOCs

However, although the number of MOOC courses offered continues to increase, the average number of
students is decreasing as more choices become available.

   The rate of adoption also varies considerably by country. For instance in 2017, only 18% of Canadian
post-secondary institutions were offering MOOCs, compared with 82% that were offering fully online
courses for credit (Donovan et al., 2018). However, the growth of MOOCs in China, India and Europe
continues apace. What is not clear is whether the institutions providing MOOCs are getting any direct
financial returns for their investments as distinct from the platform providers.

5.5.8 Don't panic!

These are all very powerful drivers of MOOC mania, which makes it all the more important to try to be
clear and cool headed about the strengths and weaknesses of MOOCs. The real test is whether MOOCs
can help develop the knowledge and skills that learners need in a knowledge-based society. The answer
of course is yes and no.

   As a low-cost supplement to formal education, they can be quite valuable, but not as a complete
replacement. They can at present teach basic conceptual learning, comprehension and in a narrow range
of activities, application of knowledge. They can be useful for building communities of practice, where
already well educated people or people with a deep, shared passion for a topic can learn from one
another, another form of continuing education.

   However, certainly to date, MOOCs have not been able to demonstrate that they can lead to
transformative learning, deep intellectual understanding, evaluation of complex alternatives, and
evidence-based decision-making, and without greater emphasis on expert-based learner support and
more qualitative forms of assessment, they probably never will, at least without substantial increases in
their costs.

   At the end of the day, there is a choice for institutions between throwing more resources into MOOCs
and hoping that some of their fundamental flaws can be overcome without too dramatic an increase in
costs, or investing in other forms of online learning and educational technology that could lead to more
cost-effective learning outcomes in terms of the needs of learners in a digital age.

References

Allen, I. and Seaman, J. (2014) Grade Change: Tracking Online learning in the United States Babson
Survey Research Group/Pearson/Sloan

   Bates, T. (2012) What's right and what's wrong with Coursera-style MOOCs Online Learning and
Distance Education Resources, August 5

   Christensen, C. (2016) Disrupting Class, Expanded Edition: How Disruptive Innovation Will Change
the Way the World Learns: Expanded Edition New York: McGraw-Hill

   Daniel, J. (2012) Making sense of MOOCs: Musings in a maze of myth, paradox and possibility
Journal of Interactive Media, No. 18

   Donovan, T. et al. (2018) Tracking Online and Distance Education in Canadian Universities and
Colleges: 2018 Halifax NS: Canadian Digital Learning Research Association

   Hill, P. (2012) Four Barriers that MOOCs Must Overcome to Build a Sustainable Model e-Literate,
July 24

   Lyotard, J-J. (1979) La Condition postmoderne: rapport sur le savoir: Paris: Minuit
   Ontario (2011) Fact Sheet: Summary of Ontario eLearning Surveys of Publicly Assisted PSE
Institutions, Toronto: Government of Ontario
                                                                                         5.5 Political, social and economic drivers of MOOCs 253

   Rivera, C. (2012) Survey offers dire picture of California's two-year colleges Los Angeles Times, 29
August

   Tapscott, D. (undated) The transformation of education dontapscott.com
   To, K. (2014) UC Regents announce online course expansion, The Guardian, UC San Diego, undated,
but probably February 5
   Shah, D. (2019) Year of MOOC-based degrees: A Review of MOOC Stats and Trends in 2018 Class
Central, 6 January
   Watters, A. (2012) Top 10 Ed-Tech Trends of 2012: MOOCs Inside Higher Education, 18 December
   For a more light-hearted look at MOOC mania see:
   North Korea Launches Two MOOCs
   "What should we do about MOOCs?" - the Board of Governors discusses
   NOTE: Both the two blog posts above are satirical: they are fictional!

                                               Activity 5.5 Assessing the importance of MOOCs

             1. Do you think MOOCs have improved or weakened public acceptance of online learning? Why?
             2. On a scale of 1 to 10, where 1 is no importance and 10 is extremely important, where would you

                 rank MOOCs in terms of their importance for the future of higher education? Why?
             3. Do you think MOOCs will improve to the point where they are a serious alternative to other

                 forms of higher education, or do you think they will never be a real challenge to conventional
                 university teaching? What are your reasons?

      Once again, my views should carry no more weight than yours on these questions, as they are value rather
   than fact based, but here are my thoughts, for what they are worth:

                           An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                        https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=162
5.6 Why MOOCs are only part of the answer

Image: Your Training Edge, 2015

5.6.1 The importance of context and design
I am frequently labelled as a major critic of MOOCs, which is somewhat surprising since I have been a
longtime advocate of online learning. In fact I do believe MOOCs are an important development, and
under certain circumstances they can be of tremendous value in education.

   But as always, context is important. There is not one but many different markets and needs for
education. A student leaving high school at eighteen has very different needs and will want to learn in a
very different context from a 35 year old employed engineer with a family who needs some management
education. Similarly a 65 year old man struggling to cope with his wife's early onset of Alzheimer's
and desperate for help is in a totally different situation to either the high school student or the engineer.
When designing educational programs, it has to be horses for courses. There is no single silver bullet or
solution for every one of these various contexts.

   Secondly, as with all forms of education, how MOOCs are designed matters a great deal. If they are
designed inappropriately, in the sense of not developing the knowledge and skills needed by a particular

                                                                   255
256 Chapter 5: MOOCs

learner in a particular context, then they have little or no value for that learner. However, designed
differently and a MOOC may well meet that learner's needs.

5.6.2 The limitations of xMOOCs

The real threat of xMOOCs is to the very large face-to-face lecture classes found in many universities
at the undergraduate level. MOOCs are a more effective way of replacing such lectures. They are more
interactive and permanent so students can go over the materials many times. I have heard MOOC
instructors argue that their MOOCs are better than their classroom lectures. They put more care and
effort into them.

   However, we should question why we are teaching in this way on campus. Content is now freely
available anywhere on the Internet - including MOOCs. What is needed is information management:
how to identify the knowledge you need, how to evaluate it, how to apply it. xMOOCs do not do
that. They pre-select and package the information. My big concern with xMOOCs is their limitation,
as currently designed, for developing the higher order intellectual skills needed in a digital world.
Unfortunately, xMOOCs are taking the least appropriate design model for developing 21st century
skills from on-campus teaching, and moving this inappropriate design model online. Just because
the lectures come from elite universities does not necessarily mean that learners will develop high
level intellectual skills, even though the content is of the highest quality. More importantly, with
MOOCs, relatively few students succeed, in terms of assessment, and those that do are tested mainly on
comprehension and limited application of knowledge.

   We can and have done much better in terms of skills for a digital age with other pedagogical
approaches, both on campus, such as problem- or inquiry-based learning, and online using more
constructivist approaches in credit courses, such as online collaborative learning. However these
alternative methods to lectures do not scale so easily. The interaction between an expert and a novice
still remains critical for developing deep understanding, transformative learning resulting in the learner
seeing the world differently, and for developing high levels of evidence-based critical thinking,
evaluation of complex alternatives, and high level decision-making. Computer technology to date
is extremely poor at enabling this kind of learning to develop. This is why credit-based classroom and
online learning still aim to have a relatively low instructor:student ratio and still need to focus a great
deal on interaction between instructor and students.

   However xMOOCs are valuable as a form of continuing education, or as a source of open educational
materials that can be part of a broader educational offering. They can be a valuable supplement to
campus-based education. They are not a replacement though for either conventional education or the
current design of online credit programs. As a form of continuing education, low completion rates
and the lack of formal credit is not of great significance. However, completion rates and quality
assessment DO matter if MOOCs are being seen as a substitute or a replacement for formal education,
even classroom lectures.

5.6.3 Undermining the public higher education system?

The real danger is that xMOOCs may be used to undermine what is admittedly an expensive public
higher education system. If elite universities can deliver MOOCs for free, why do we need low
quality and high cost state universities? The risk is a sharply divided two tier system, with a relatively
small number of campus-based elite universities catering to the rich and privileged, and developing
the knowledge and skills that will provide rich rewards, and the masses being fed xMOOC-delivered
                                                                                                  5.6 Why MOOCs are only part of the answer 257

courses, with state universities providing minimal and low cost learner support for such courses. This
would be both a social and economic disaster, because it would fail to produce enough learners with the
high-level skills that are going to be needed for good jobs in the the coming years - unless you believe
that automation will remove all decently paid jobs except for a tiny elite (bring on the Hunger Games).

   Content accounts for less than 15 per cent of the total cost over five years for credit-based online
programs; the main costs required to ensure high quality outcomes and high rates of completion are spent
on learner support, providing the learning that matters most. The kind of MOOCs being promoted by
politicians and the media fail spectacularly to do this. We do need to be careful that the open education
movement in general, and MOOCs in particular, are not used as a stick by those in the United States
and elsewhere who are deliberately trying to undermine public education for ideological and commercial
reasons. On their own, open content, OERs and MOOCs do not automatically lead to open access to
high quality credentials for everyone. In the end, a well-funded public higher education system remains
the best way to assure access to higher education for all.

5.6.3 The potential of cMOOCs

cMOOCs have the most potential, because lifelong learning will become increasingly important, and
the power of bringing a mix of already well educated and knowledgeable people from around the world
to work with other committed and enthusiastic learners on common problems or areas of interest could
truly revolutionise not just education, but the world in general.

   However, cMOOCs at present are unable to do this, because they lack organisation and do not apply
what is already known about how online groups work best. Once we learn these lessons and apply them,
though, cMOOCs can be a tremendous tool for tackling some of the great challenges we face in the areas
of global health, climate change, civil rights, and other `good civil ventures'. The beauty of cMOOCs is
that they every participant has the power to define and solve the problems being tackled.

   Scenario F that ends this chapter is an example of how cMOOCs could be used for such `good civil
ventures.' In Scenario F, the MOOC is not a replacement for formal education, but a rocket that needs
formal education as its launch pad. Behind this MOOC are the resources of a very powerful institution,
that provides the initial impetus, simple to use software, overall structure, organization and co-ordination
within the MOOC, and some essential human resources for supporting the MOOC when running. At the
same time, it does not have to be an educational institution. It could be a public health authority, or a
broadcasting organization, or an international charity, or a consortium of organisations with a common
interest. Also, of course, there is the danger that even cMOOCs could be manipulated by corporate or
government interests.

5.6.5 In conclusion

Having said that, there is enormous scope for improvements within the public higher education system.
MOOCs, open education and new media offer promising ways to bring about some much needed
improvements. Scenario F (next) is one possible way in which MOOCs could bring about much needed
social change.

   However, MOOCs must build on what we already know from the use of credit based online learning,
from prior experience in open and distance learning, and designing courses and programs in a variety
of ways appropriate to the wide range of learning needs. MOOCs can be one important part of that
environment, but not a replacement for other forms of educational provision that meet different needs.
258 Chapter 5: MOOCs

                                                           Activity 5.6: Strategising about MOOCs

      You are the Vice President Academic of a middle sized research university, which is under financial
   pressure. The President has been asked by the Board to come forward with a strategy for innovation in teaching
   and learning, with the university facing a cut of approximately 5 per cent in next year's operating budget.

      One powerful Board member is pushing really hard for the university to develop MOOCs as a solution to
   the economic pressure..

      The President has asked for a briefing paper from you for the Board on what the university's strategy
   should be regarding MOOCs, and how they would fit into the overall strategy for teaching and learning. How
   would you respond?

      Since there are many pros and cons regarding MOOCs, I am not going to give direct feedback on this
   activity, because the `best' briefing will take account of local contexts, such as existing online provision for
   credit courses, learning technology support and enrolment goals, for instance.

                                                                    Chapter 5: Key Takeaways

      1. MOOCs are forcing every higher education institution to think carefully both about its strategy for online
   teaching and its approach to open education.

      2. MOOCs are not the only form of online learning nor of open educational resources. It is important to look
   at the strengths and weaknesses of MOOCs within the overall context of online learning and open-ness.

      3. There are considerable differences in the design of MOOCs, reflecting different purposes and
   philosophies.

      4. There are currently major structural limitations in MOOCs for developing deep or transformative
   learning, or for developing the high level knowledge and skills needed in a digital age.

      5. MOOCs are at still a relatively early stage of maturity. As their strengths and weaknesses become clearer,
   and as experience in improving their design grows, they are likely to occupy a significant niche within the
   higher education learning environment

      6. MOOCs could well replace some forms of traditional teaching (such as large lecture classes). However,
   MOOCs are more likely to remain an important supplement or alternative to other conventional education
   methods. They are not on their own a solution to the high cost of higher education, although MOOCs are and
   will continue to be an important factor in forcing change.

      7. Perhaps the greatest value of MOOCs in the future will be for providing a means for tackling large global
   problems through community action.

5.6.6 Next

This completes the discussion about different design models for teaching and learning. The next chapter
looks at the importance of building an effective learning environment in which these different design
models can best operate.

   But first, Scenario F, which envisions what MOOCs could look like in the future.
Scenario F: How to cope with being old

   Figure F 1. Image: WhatSheSaidradio.com

Beth Carter Good evening, everyone. This is Beth Carter, for BBC Radio. The Open University
yesterday announced that it had signed up half a million participants in what they claim is now the
world's largest online course. The OU's MOOC is about something many of you will be familiar with -
getting old, and the many challenges and opportunities that come with that.
In the studio with me is Jane Dyson, who is the course co-ordinator. Jane: at 55, and coming from a social
services background, you seem to be the least likely person to be running such a massive, technology-
based program. How did that happen?
Jane Dyson: (laughing). Well, it's all my own fault! I've been an OU graduate for many years, and they
have an online alumni forum, where they ask former students for ideas about what are the most pressing
issues we see in the world, and what the OU could do to address some of these issues. I do a lot of work
advising elderly people, their families and even employers these days about the many different kinds of
issues that arise with aging.

                                                                   259
260 Chapter 5: MOOCs

The OU has many courses and online materials that deal with lots of these issues, but you have to sign
up for a degree or diploma or you can just get the materials online but without any support. Also, there
are just too many different issues for even the OU to cover in its formal courses. So I suggested that they
should do a MOOC where all the different people involved - health care workers, social workers, care
givers, family, and most important of all, old people themselves - could talk about their problems and
challenges, and what services are available, what people can do for themselves and so on.

Beth Carter. So what happened then?

Jane Dyson. The OU asked me to come in to my local OU regional office, and I met with several people
from the OU, and after that meeting, they asked me if I would be willing to co-ordinate such a course.

Beth Carter. Now tell me more about MOOCs. I remember they were big about 10 years ago, then they
went all quiet, and we haven't heard much about them since. So what's made this MOOC so popular?

Jane Dyson. The problem with the earlier MOOCs was that participants just got lost in them. Many of
the MOOCs were just lectures and then it was up to the participants to help each other out. There was no
organization.

What the OU did was to ask those who signed up for the `Aging' MOOC to fill in a very simple online
questionnaire that asked for just a few details such as where they lived, whether they were professionals
in aging, or family, or elderly people themselves, and then used that data to automatically allocate
participants into groups, so that there was a mix of participants in each group.

Beth Carter. Why was that important?

Jane Dyson. Well, at the OU, the Institute of Educational Technology had done some research on the
early MOOCs, and had identified this problem of how to get groups to work in large online classes. They
worked with another research group in the OU called the KMI, who developed the software we are using
that allocates participants into groups so that there is enough expertise and support in each group to help
with the issues raised in the group discussions.

Beth Carter. And how does that work?

Jane Dyson. You wouldn't believe the range of issues or problems that come up. For instance, we have
family members desperate because their father or mother is suffering from dementia, but don't know
what to do to help them. We have some seniors who feel that their family are trying to force them out of
their homes, while they feel they are quite capable of looking after themselves. We have social workers
who feel that they are liable to get fired or even prosecuted because they can't handle their case load.
And we have some participants who are just old and lonely, and want someone to talk to.

When we put all these participants into an online discussion forum, the results are amazing. What's
really critical is getting the right mix of people in the same group, with enough expertise to provide help,
and having someone in that group who knows how to moderate the discussions. We have a huge list of
services available not just in Britain but in many of the other countries from which we have students. So
the course is a kind of self-help, support service within a broader community of practice.
                                                                                                          Scenario F: How to cope with being old 261

Beth Carter. Let's talk about the international students. As I understand it, almost half the participants
are from outside the U.K..

Jane Dyson. That's right. The problems of an aging population aren't just British. The OU is part of
a very powerful network of open universities around the world. When we were talking about starting
this course, the OU went to several other open universities and asked them if they were interested in
participating. So we have participants from the Netherlands, Germany, France, Spain, Japan, Canada,
the USA, and many other countries, who participate in the English language version.

In Spain, though, we have a `mirror' site, with materials in Spanish, Basque and Catalan, and the
discussion forums are managed by the Open University of Catalonia. That brings in not only participants
from Spain, but also from Latin America. We are about to develop a similar agreement with the Open
University of China, which we expect will bring in another half million participants. What's really neat
is that because we have so many participants, there are always enough dual language participants to
move stuff from one language discussion forum to another.

Beth Carter. So what's next?

Jane Dyson. One of the big issues that keeps coming up in the Aging course is the issue of mental
health. This of course is not just about elderly people. The Aging course has already resulted in petitions
to parliament about better services for isolated elderly people, and I think we will see some positive
developments on this front over the next couple of years. So I think the OU is thinking about a similar
MOOC on mental health, and I'd really like to be part of that initiative.

Beth Carter. Well, thank you, Jane. Next week we will be discussing online gambling, with an addiction
counsellor.

[This was developed as a `what if?' scenario for the U.K. Open University as part of its planning for
teaching and learning in 2014.]
Chapter 6: Building an effective learning
environment

Figure 6.1 An example of a learning environment
                                                                   263
264 A.W. (Tony) Bates

                       Purpose of this appendix

   When you have completed this chapter you should be able to:

              · design and implement a learning environment that best meets the needs of your course and
                 students

Building a comprehensive and effective learning environment is an important condition for
implementing teaching and learning for the digital age. This appendix discusses the key components of
a learning environment and how these are affected by developments in a digital age. The chapter covers
the following topics:

         · 6.1 Integrating design principles within a rich learning environment
         · 6.2 What is a learning environment?
         · 6.3 Learner characteristics
         · 6.4 Managing content
         · 6.5 Developing skills
         · 6.6 Learner support
         · 6.7 Resources
         · 6.8 Assessment of learning
         · 6.9 Culture and learning environments
         · 6.10 Conclusions

Also in this chapter you will find the following activities:

         · Activity 6.1 Your students' learning environment
         · Activity 6.2 Influencing a learning environment
         · Activity 6.3 Who are your students?
         · Activity 6.4 Managing content
         · Activity 6.5 Developing skills
         · Activity 6.6 Building learner support
         · Activity 6.7 What resources matter?
         · Activity 6.8 What assessments work in a digital age?
         · Activity 6.9 Considering culture in a learning environment
         · Activity 6.10 Designing your own learning environment
                                                                                                         Teahing in a Digital Age - 2e 265

                                                            Key Takeaways

1. Context - the learning environment - will influence or determine teaching strategies, as well as
    epistemology and pedagogy

2. Thus to be able to design effective teaching, it is necessary to create an effective learning
    environment.

3. Effective learning environments will have a number of different components, and these
    components will vary, depending on context and the epistemology that drives teaching

4. The aim of building an effective learning environment is to enable more flexible models of
    learning design to be created and applied.
6.1 Integrating design principles within a rich learning environment

Nature as a learning environment

6.1.1 The importance of creating an effective learning environment
Chapters 1 to 5 provide a set of methods for teaching in a digital age. These methods though will not
operate in a vacuum. Both teachers and learners are faced with a rapidly changing world, with new
technology, new teaching approaches and external pressures from government, employers, parents, and
the media. It is easy to be tossed around in such a stormy environment. Learning always takes place

                                                                   267
268 Chapter 6: Building an effective learning environment

within a context that can influence how and what we learn. Good teachers and instructors try to shape the
environment in which they are teaching to create the right conditions for learning. This becomes even
more important in a volatile, uncertain, complex and ambiguous world.

6.1.2 Learning environments and epistemology

First though we need to examine two very different approaches to teaching and learning. One approach
starts with an objectivist view of the world. Knowledge is like coal. It is there to be mined by the teacher
and transported to the learner. The learner's job is to acquire that coal or knowledge and then use it as
necessary, either with or without the help of the teacher. This seems to me to be the approach of most
xMOOCs and most classroom lectures. There is little attention if any paid to the conditions in which
such learning will best take place.

   Another approach starts from the assumption that learning is a fundamental human activity. Humans
have become the dominant species because they have a need and above all an inherited ability to learn. If
we had not been reasonably good at learning, we would have been killed off early in the earth's history
by faster, bigger and more ferocious animals. The ability not only to learn, but to learn in abstract and
conscious ways, is therefore part of human nature.

   If that is the case, a teacher's job is not to do the learning for the student, but to build a rich
environment that facilitates the kind of learning that will benefit the learner. It is not a question of
pouring knowledge into a student's head, but enabling the learner to develop concepts, think critically,
and apply and evaluate what they have learned, by providing opportunities and experiences that are
relevant to such goals.

   The analogy here is gardening. Humans are like plants: all we need to do is to provide the right
conditions for them to grow: the right soil, sufficient sunshine and water, and help eliminating pests and
weeds. In terms of humans, this means providing security, and the best conditions for learning. This is a
very constructivist view of the world. This seems to me to be the approach of most cMOOCs and most
early childhood education. However, there is little attention paid to priorities or to efficiency in learning.

   A second premise is that knowledge is not fixed or static, but is continually developing. Our concept
of heat changes and becomes richer as we grow older and become more educated, from understanding
heat through touch, to providing a quantitative way of measuring it, to understanding its physical
properties, to being able to apply that knowledge to solving problems, such as designing refrigerators. In
a knowledge-based society, knowledge is constantly developing and growing, and our understanding is
always developing.

6.1.3 What learning environments do we want?

Why thinking about effective learning environments is important is because most teachers currently
inherit a teaching environment, usually based on a campus, physical classrooms, regularly scheduled
lessons, with the expectation of the teacher in control at the front of the class. However, new
technologies provide us with the opportunity to design other kinds of learning environments. What do
we want to be: coal miners - or gardeners? Or something else? My own view is that the ideal learning
environment is somewhere in between coal mining and gardening. Most learners require structure and
guidance, but within an environment that enables freedom and exploration.

   In developing an effective learning environment, there are another two issues that need to be
addressed:
                                                                    6.1 Integrating design principles within a rich learning environment 269

         · First, it is the learner who has to do the learning.
         · Second, any learning environment is much more than the technology used to support it.

With regard to the first, teachers cannot do the learning for the learner. All teachers or instructors can do
is to create and manage an environment that enables and encourages learning. My focus then in terms
of building an effective learning environment is on what the teacher or instructor can do, because in the
end that is all they can control. However, the focus of what the teacher does should be on the learner,
and what the learner needs. That of course will require good communication between the learners and
the teacher.

   For this reason, I want to examine some of the fundamental components of most effective teaching
environments. Not only will this provide some general guidance for the design of teaching, it will
also allow consideration of technology-based learning environments that can fundamentally differ from
traditional campus-based environments, while at the same time ensuring conditions for successful
learning. I set out these components or conditions in the following sections.

                                           Activity 6.1 Your current students' learning environment

             1. If you are currently teaching, describe briefly the student learning environment within which they
                 are learning. What are the restrictions, if any, on their learning as a result of this environment?

             2. What do you think are the most important components for effective learning within this
                 environment (as well as your teaching)?

             3. Are you more of a coal miner or a gardener in your approach to teaching?

      There is no feedback from me on this activity. It is for your own reflection.
6.2 What is a learning environment?

Figure 6.2.1 A technology-based personal learning environment
Image: Jason Hews, Flikr

6.2.1 Definition

         `Learning environment refers to the diverse physical locations, contexts, and cultures in which students
         learn. Since students may learn in a wide variety of settings, such as outside-of-school locations and
         outdoor environments, the term is often used as a more accurate or preferred alternative to classroom,
         which has more limited and traditional connotations--a room with rows of desks and a chalkboard, for
         example.

            The term also encompasses the culture of a school or class--its presiding ethos and characteristics,
                                                                   271
272 Chapter 6: Building an effective learning environment

         including how individuals interact with and treat one another--as well as the ways in which teachers may
         organize an educational setting to facilitate learning.....'

                                                           The Glossary of Educational Reform, 29 August, 2014

   This definition recognises that students learn in many different ways in very different contexts. Since
learners must do the learning, the aim is to create a total environment for learning that optimises the
ability of students to learn. There is of course no single optimum learning environment. There is an
infinite number of possible learning environments, which is what makes teaching so interesting.

6.2.2 Types of learning environments

Here are some examples of different learning environments:

         · a school or college campus
         · an online course
         · military training
         · friends, family and work
         · nature
         · personal, technology-based, learning environments

Nevertheless I will argue that despite the differences in context, there are certain elements or
components that will be found in most effective learning environments.

6.2.3 Components of an effective learning environment

Developing a total learning environment for students in a particular course or program is probably
the most creative part of teaching. Although there is a tendency to focus on either
physical institutional learning environments (such as classrooms, lecture theatres and labs), or on the
technologies used to to create online learning environments such as learning management systems,
learning environments are broader than just these physical components. They will also include:

         · the characteristics of the learners and their means of inter-communication;
         · the goals for teaching and learning;
         · the activities that support learning;
         · the resources that are available, such as textbooks, technology, or learning spaces;
         · the assessment strategies that will best measure and drive learning;
         · the culture that infuses the learning environment.
                                                                                                               6.2 What is a learning environment? 273

Figure 6.2.2 An example of a learning environment

   Figure 6.2.2 illustrates one possible learning environment from the perspective of a teacher or
instructor. A teacher may have little or no control over some components, such as learner characteristics
or resources, but may have full control over other components such as choice of content and how
learners will be supported. Within each of the main components there are a set of sub-components that
will need to be considered. In fact, it is in the sub-components (content structure, practical activities,
feedback, use of technology, assessment methods, and so on) where the real decisions need to be made.

   I have listed just a few components in Figure 6.2.2 and the set is not meant to be comprehensive. For
instance it could have included other components, such as developing ethical behaviour, institutional
factors, or external accreditation, each of which might also affect the learning environment in which a
teacher or instructor has to work. Creating a model of a learning environment then is a heuristic device
that aims to provide a comprehensive view of the whole teaching context for a particular course or
program, by a particular instructor or teacher with a particular view of learning. Once again, the choice
274 Chapter 6: Building an effective learning environment

of components and their perceived importance will be driven to some extent by personal epistemologies
and beliefs about knowledge, learning and teaching methods.

   Lastly, I have deliberately suggested a learning environment from the perspective of a teacher, as
the teacher has the main responsibility for creating an appropriate learning environment, but it is also
important to consider learning environments from the learners' perspectives. Indeed, adult or mature
learners are often capable of creating their own, personal, relatively autonomous learning environments.

   The significant point is that it is important to identify those components that need to be considered
in teaching a course or program. In particular that there are other components besides content or
curriculum. Each of the key components of the learning environment I have chosen as an example are
discussed briefly in the following sections, with a focus on the components of a learning environment
that are particularly relevant for a digital age.

                                                      Activity 6.2 Influencing a learning environment

             1. Why do you think I focused on learning environments from a teacher's perspective rather than a
                 learner's perspective? Could you design a similar model of a learning environment from the
                 perspective of a learner? What would be the main differences?

             2. In order to create the learning environment for HIST 305 in Scenario D, Ralph Goodyear
                 carefully considered the learning environment he wanted to create and ones he had little or no
                 control over. What components do you think he had little or no control over?

             3. What would you add (or remove) from the learning environment in Figure 6.2.2?
             4. What is missing in Figure 6.2.1 - the technology-based personal learning environment? For what

                 kind of purpose would it work really well?
             5. Does thinking about the whole learning environment overly complicate the teaching endeavour?

                 Why not just get on with it?

      For my feedback on this activity, click on the podcast below.

                           An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                        https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=360
6.3 Learner characteristics

                      Figure 6.3 Learner characteristics

   Probably nothing more reflects teaching in a digital age than the change in learner characteristics from
the industrial age.
6.3.1 Increased diversity
I noted in Chapter 1 (Section 6) that in developed countries such as Canada:

     public post-secondary institutions are expected to represent the same kind of socio-economic and
     cultural diversity as in society at large, rather than being institutions reserved for an elite minority.
   In an age where economic development is tightly associated with higher levels of education, the goal
now is to bring as many students as possible to the standards required, rather than focus on just the
needs of the most able students. This means finding ways of helping a very wide range of students
with very different levels of ability and/or prior knowledge to succeed. One size clearly does not fit all

                                                                   275
276 Chapter 6: Building an effective learning environment

today. Dealing with an increasingly diverse student population is perhaps the greatest of all challenges
then that teachers and instructors face in a digital age, particularly but not exclusively at a post-secondary
level. This is not something for which instructors primarily qualified in subject matter expertise are well
prepared.

   A combination of good design and an appropriate use of technology will greatly facilitate the
personalization of learning, allowing for instance for different students to work at different speeds, and
to focus learning on students' specific interests and needs, thus ensuring engagement and motivation for
a diverse range of students. However, the first and perhaps most important step is for instructors to know
their students, and in particular, to identify from the vast range of information regarding students and
their differences, which are the most important for the design of teaching and learning in a digital age. I
list some of the characteristics that I think are important from the perspective of designing teaching.

6.3.2 The work and home context

Two factors make the work and home context an important consideration in the design of teaching and
learning: students are increasingly working while studying (about half of all Canadian post-secondary
students also work, and those that do work average 16 hours a week - Marshall, 2010); and the age
range of students continues to spread, with the average age of students slowly increasing (in 2016, at the
University of British Columbia Vancouver, the average age of undergraduates was 21, and the mean age

for graduate students was 31 - UBC, 2017.)

   There are several reasons for the average age of students increasing, at least in North America:

         · students are taking longer to graduate (partly because they tend to take a smaller study load
            when working);

         · increasing numbers of students are going on to graduate school;

         · more students are coming back for additional courses and programs after graduating (lifelong
            learners), mainly for economic reasons.

Partly or fully employed students, or students with families, increasingly need more flexibility in their
studying, and especially avoiding long commutes between home, work and college. These students
increasingly want hybrid or fully online courses, and smaller modules, certificates or programs that they
can fit around their work and family life.

6.3.3 Learners' goals

Understanding the motivation of students and what they expect to get out of a course or program should
also influence the design of a course or program. For academic learning, it is often necessary to find
ways to move students whose approach to learning is initially driven by extrinsic rewards such as grades
or qualifications to an approach that engages and motivates students in the subject matter itself. Potential
students already with a post-secondary qualification and a good job may not want to work through a pre-
determined set of courses but may want just specific areas of content from existing courses, tailored to
meet their needs (for instance, on demand and delivered online). Thus it is important to have some kind
of knowledge or understanding of why learners are likely to take your course or program, and what they
are hoping to get out of it.
                                 6.3 Learner characteristics 277

6.3.4 Prior knowledge or skills

Future learning often depends on students having prior knowledge or an ability to do things at a certain
level. Teachers aim to bridge the difference between what a learner can do without help and what
he or she can do with help, what Vygotsky (1978) termed the zone of proximal development. If the
difficulty level of the teaching is aimed too far beyond the capability or prior knowledge and skills of a
learner, then learning fails to occur.

   However, the more diverse the students in a program, the more diverse the knowledge and skill levels
they are likely to bring with them. Indeed, lifelong learners, or new immigrants repeating a subject
because their foreign qualifications are not recognised, may bring specialist or advanced knowledge that
can be drawn on to enrich the learning experience for everyone. At the same time, some students may
not have the same basic knowledge as others in a course and will need more help. In such a context it is
important to design the learning experience so that it is flexible enough to accommodate students with a
wide range of prior knowledge and skills.

6.3.5 Digital natives

Most students today have grown up with digital technologies such as mobile phones, tablets and
social media, including Facebook, Twitter, blogs and wikis. Prensky (2010) and others (e.g. Tapscott,
2008) argue that not only are such students more proficient in using such technologies than previous
generations, but that they also think differently (Tapscott, 2008).

   However, it is particularly important to understand that students themselves vary a great deal in their
use of social media and new technologies, that their use is largely driven by social and personal demands,
and their use of digital technologies does not naturally flow across into educational use. They will use
new technologies and social media for learning though where instructors make a good case for it and
when students can see that the use of digital media will directly help them in their studies. For this to
happen though deliberate design choices are required on the part of the instructor. (For more on the issue
of digital natives, see Chapter 9, Section 2.3)

6.3.6 In conclusion

The work and home context, learners' goals, and students' prior knowledge and skills (including
their competence with digital media) are some of the critical factors that should influence the design
of teaching. For some instructors, other characteristics of learners, such as learning styles, gender
differences or cultural background, may be more important, depending on the context. Whatever the
context, good design in teaching requires good information about the learners we are going to teach, and
in particular good design needs to address the increasing diversity of our students.

References

Marshall, K. (2011) Employment patterns of post-secondary students, Ottawa: Statistics Canada
   Prensky, M. (2001) `Digital natives, Digital Immigrants' On the Horizon Vol. 9, No. 5
   Tapscott, D. (2008) Grown Up Digital New York: McGraw Hill
   University of British Columbia (2017) 2016/2017 Annual Report on Enrolment Vancouver BC:

University of British Columbia
278 Chapter 6: Building an effective learning environment

   Vygotsky, L. (1978) Mind in Society: Development of Higher Psychological Processes Cambridge
MA: Harvard University Press

                                                              Activity 6.3 Who are your students?

      1. How would you characterise the students you are teaching: full-time students from high school; students
   who are working part-time; or students working full-time? How would a typical class of yours break down
   between these three groups? Do you have the information necessary to do this analysis?

      2. Do you think students think or study differently these days because of social media? How does that affect
   their studying? Do you feel you need to respond in some way to this?

      3. How much variance is there between your students in prior knowledge and/or language ability? How does
   this affect the way you teach?

      You may want to read Chapter 9, Section 2 and Chapter 10, Section 3 before you answer these questions.
      This exercise is mainly for your reflection, but I do have a few comments on these issues in the podcast
   below:

                           An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                        https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=363
6.4 Managing content

                      Figure 6.4.1 Managing content

6.4.1 The importance of content
For most teachers and instructors, content is often the key focus when designing courses.
Content includes facts, ideas, principles, evidence, and descriptions of processes or procedures. A great
deal of time is spent on discussing what content should be included in the curriculum, what needs to be
covered in a course or a program, what content sources such as text-books students should access, and so
on. Teachers and instructors often feel pressured to cover the whole curriculum in the time available. In
particular, lecturing or face-to-face classes remain a prime means for organising and delivering content.

   The case for balancing content with skills development is made several times through this book,
but issues around content remain critically important in teaching. In particular, instructors need to ask
themselves these two questions:

                                                                   279
280 Chapter 6: Building an effective learning environment

         · `What specific content will add value to the overall goals of this course or program?'
         · `What content is essential for meeting the learning outcomes for this course, and what

            desirable but not necessarily obligatory?'

6.4.2 Goals for content
Especially in post-secondary education, instructors tend to take content for granted - this is what we
teach. However, it is important, when designing teaching for a digital age, to be clear in our goals for
teaching content. Why do we require students to know facts, ideas, principles, evidence, and descriptions
of processes or procedures? Is learning specific content a goal in itself, or is it a means to an end? For
instance, is there an intrinsic value in knowing the periodic table, or the dates of battles, or are they
means to an end, such as designing experiments, or understanding why French is an official language in
Canada?

   The question is important, because in a digital age, some would argue that learning or memorising
content becomes less important or even irrelevant when it is easy just to look up facts or definitions
or equations. Cognitivists will argue that content needs to be framed or put in context for it to have
meaning. As content is now so easy to access, do we need only to draw on content as and when needed,
such as to solve problems, or make decisions? In many cases, of course, skills depend essentially on
prior knowledge, so it is not an either/or question.

   Probably more important than the teacher or instructor being clear on why content is being taught is
for the students to understand this. One way of stating this is to ask: what value is added to the overall
goals of this course or program by teaching this specific content? Do students need to memorise this
content, or know where to find it, and when it is important to use it? This depends of course on having
very clear goals for the course or program as a whole.

6.4.3 Quantity and depth

Figure A.4.2 Is there too much content in your course?
Image: © handyguyspodcast.com
                                                                                                                                   6.4 Managing content 281

   In many contexts, instructors have little choice over content. External bodies, such as accreditation
agencies, state or provincial governments, or professional licensing boards, may well dictate what
content a particular course or program needs to cover. However, the rapid growth of scientific and
technological knowledge increasingly challenges the idea of a fixed body of content that students must
learn. Engineering and medical programs struggle to cover even in six or eight years of formal education
all the knowledge that professionals need to know to practice effectively. Professionals will need to go
on learning well past graduation if they are to keep up with new developments in the field.

   In particular, covering content quickly or overloading students with content are not effective teaching
strategies, because even working harder all waking hours will not enable students in these subject
domains to master all the information they need in their professions. Specialization has been a traditional
way of handling the growth of knowledge, but that does not help in dealing with complex problems
or issues in the real world, which often require inter-disciplinary and broader based approaches. Thus
instructors need to develop strategies that enable students to cope with the massive and growing amounts
of knowledge in their field.

   One way to handle the problem of knowledge explosion is to focus on the development of skills,
such as knowledge management, problem-solving and decision-making. However, these skills are not
content-free. In order to solve problems or make decisions, you need access to facts, principles, ideas,
concepts and data. To manage knowledge, you need to know what content is important and why, where
to find it, and how to evaluate it. In particular there may be core or basic knowledge or content that needs
to be mastered for many if not most of their professional activities. One teaching skill then will be the
ability to differentiate between essential and desirable areas of content, and to ensure that whatever is
done to develop skills, in the process core content is covered.

6.4.4 Sources

Another critical decision for teachers in a digital age is where students should source or find content.
In medieval times, books were scarce, and the library was an essential source of content not only for
students but also for professors. Professors had to select, mediate and filter content because the sources
of content were extremely scarce. We are not in that situation today. Content is literally everywhere: on
the Internet, in social media, on mass media, in libraries and books, as well as in the lecture theatre.

   Often, a great deal of time is spent in departmental or program meetings on discussing what textbooks
or articles students should be required to read. Part of the reason for selecting or limiting content is to
limit the cost to students, as well as the need to focus on a limited range of material within a course or
program. But today, content is increasingly open, free and available on demand over the Internet. Most
students will need to continue learning after graduation. They will increasingly resort to digital media
for their sources of knowledge. Therefore when deciding on content we should be considering:

        (a) to what extent does the instructor need to choose the content for a program (other than a broad
     set of curriculum topics) and to what extent should students be free to choose both content and the
     source of that content?

        (b) to what extent does the instructor need to deliver content themselves, such as through a lecture
     or Powerpoint slides, when content is so freely available elsewhere? What is the added value you
     are providing by delivering the content yourself? Could your time be better used in other ways?

        (c) to what extent do we need to provide criteria or guidelines to students for choosing and using
     openly accessible content, and what is the best way to do that?
282 Chapter 6: Building an effective learning environment

   When answering such questions, we should also be asking whether our decisions will help students
manage content better themselves after graduating.

6.4.5 Structure

One of the most critical supports that teachers and instructors provide is to structure the sequence and
inter-relationship of different content elements. I include within structure:

         · the selection and sequencing of content,

         · developing a particular focus or approach to specific content areas,

         · helping students with the analysis, interpretation or application of content

         · integrating and relating different content areas.

Traditionally, content has been structured by breaking a course into a number of topic-related
classes delivered in a particular sequence, and within the classes, by instructors `framing' and
interpreting content. (You can see how this mirrors an industrial manufacturing process). However,
new technologies provide alternative means to structure content. Learning management systems such as
Blackboard or Moodle still enable instructors to select and sequence content material, but students can
access this - and other - content anywhere, at any time - and in any order. The availability of a wide
range of content over the Internet, and the ability to collect and sort content through blogs, wikis, and
e-portfolios, enable students increasingly to impose their own structures on content.

   Students need some form of structure within content areas, partly because some things need to be
learned in `the right order', partly because without structure content becomes a jumble of unrelated
topics, and partly because students can't know or work out what is important and what is not within
a total content domain, at least until they have started studying it. Novice students in particular need
to know what they must study each week. There is a good deal of research evidence to suggest that
novice students benefit a great deal from tightly structured, sequential approaches to content, but as they
become more knowledgeable or experienced in the domain, they seek to develop their own approaches
to the selection, ordering and interpretation of content.

   Therefore in deciding on the structure of the content in a course or program instructors need to ask:
        (a) how much structure should I provide in managing content, and how much should I leave to

     the students?
        (b) how do new technologies affect the way I should structure the content? Will they enable me

     to provide more flexible structures that will suit a diverse range of student needs?
   Similarly, when answering these questions we should ask how important it is for students themselves
to be able to structure content, and whether our answers to the two questions above will further help
them to do this.

6.4.6 Learner activities

Lastly, what activities do we need to ask students to do to help them learn content? To answer this
question will mean returning to the goals for learning content and the overall goals of the course:

         · if memorization is important, then automated tests such as computer-marked assignments
            with correct answers being provided can be used;
                                                                                                                                   6.4 Managing content 283

         · if the aim is to enable students to draw on content such as facts, principles, data or evidence
            to construct an argument, to solve equations, or to design an experiment, then opportunities
            for practising such skills will be needed;

         · if the aim is to help students to manage knowledge, then we may need to set tasks that require
            them to select, evaluate, analyse and apply content.

We shall see that technology enables us to widen considerably the range of activities that students can
use to master content, but these need to be related to the learning goals set for the course of program.
Without a planned set of activities, though, content may just enter the brain one day and leave it the next.

6.4.7 In conclusion

Even or especially in a digital age, content, in terms of things to know, remains critically important, but
in a digital age the role of content is subtly changing, in some ways becoming a means to other ends,
such as skills development, rather than an end in itself. Because of the rapid growth in knowledge in
nearly all subject areas, being clear about the role and purpose of content in a course, and communicating
that effectively to students, becomes particularly important.

                                                           Activity 6.4 Managing content

             1. Look at the overall content in one of the courses or classes you are teaching.

                             How much choice do you have over the content in this course? (In at least two ways:
                               the choice of topics; the way content is approached. For instance often in high schools
                               in many economically advanced countries, the curriculum is decided at a state or
                               provincial level, but within that, teachers have a good deal of freedom about how to
                               teach that curriculum.)

                             What purpose does this content serve? Does it have value in its own right or is it there
                               to serve other purposes (such as skills development)?

                             What would be the best source of this content for students: textbook, lecture, online
                               search, other, all of these? Why?

                             What activities are provided to enable students to learn or apply the content in this
                               course? Given the goals of this course, are the activities appropriate?

                             How does the content in this course link to content in related courses (both prior and
                               subsequent to this course)? Is it essential to what follows, does it duplicate what
                               students have covered elsewhere? How do you know this? (e.g. is there a curriculum
                               development process?)

                             Given the goals or learning outcomes for this course, what content could be removed
                               without compromising the achievement of these goals?

      There is no feedback on this activity.
6.5 Developing skills

                      Figure 6.5 Skills

6.5.1 Skills in a digital age
In Chapter 1, Section 1.2, I listed some of the skills that graduates need in a digital age, and argued
that consequently a greater focus is now needed on developing such skills, at all levels of education,
but particularly at a post-secondary level, where the focus is often on specialised content. Although
skills such as critical thinking, problem solving and creative thinking have always been valued in higher
education, the identification and development of such skills is often implicit and almost accidental, as if
students will somehow pick up these skills from observing faculty themselves demonstrating such skills
or through some form of osmosis resulting from the study of content.

   It is of course somewhat artificial to separate content from skills, because content is the fuel that
drives the development of intellectual skills. My aim here is not to downplay the importance of content,
but to ensure that skills development receives as much focus and attention from instructors, and that we
approach intellectual skills development in the same rigorous and explicit way as apprentices are trained
in manual skills.

                                                                   285
286 Chapter 6: Building an effective learning environment

6.5.2 Setting goals for skills development

Thus a critical step is to be explicit about what skills a particular course or program is trying to develop,
and to define these goals in such a way that they can be implemented and assessed. In other words it is
not enough to say that a course aims to develop critical thinking, but to state clearly what this would look
like in the context of the particular course or content area, in ways that are clear to students. In particular
skills should be defined in such a way that they can be assessed, and students should be aware of the
criteria or rubrics that will be used for assessment. Skills development is discussed throughout the book,
but particularly in:

         · Chapter 1, Section 2

         · Chapter 3, Section 5 and Section 6

         · Chapter 4, Section 5

         · Chapter 11, Section 4

6.5.3 Thinking activities

These include activities that enable students to practice a range of skills, such as critical thinking,
problem solving, and decision-making. A skill is not binary, in the sense that you either have it or you
don't. There is a tendency to talk about skills and competencies in terms of novice, intermediate, expert,
and master, but in reality skills require constant practice and application and there is, at least with regard
to intellectual skills, no final destination. With practice and experience, for instance, our critical thinking
skills should be much better at 65 than at 25 (although some might call that `wisdom').

   A major challenge over a full program is to ensure a steady progression in the level of a skill, so,
for instance, a student's critical thinking skills are better when they graduate than when they started
the program. This means identifying what level of skill they have before entering a course, as well
as measuring it when they leave. So it is critically important when designing a course or program to
design activities that require students to develop, practice and apply thinking skills on a continuous basis,
preferably in a way that starts with small steps and leads eventually to larger ones.

   There are many ways in which intellectual skills can be developed and assessed, such as written
assignments, project work, and focused discussion, but these thinking activities need to be designed,
then implemented, on a consistent basis by the instructor.

6.5.4 Practical activities

It is a given in vocational programs that students need lots of practical activities to develop their manual
skills. This though is equally true for intellectual skills. Students need to be able to demonstrate where
they are along the road to mastery, get feedback on it, and retry as a result. This means doing work that
enables them to practice specific skills.

   In the history scenario (Scenario D), students had to cover and understand the essential content in the
first three weeks, do research in a group, develop an agreed project report, in the form of an e-portfolio,
share it with other students and the instructor for comments, feedback and assessment, and present their
report orally and online. Ideally, they will have the opportunity to carry over many of these skills into
other courses where the skills can be further refined and developed. Thus, with skills development, a
                                                                                                                                    6.5 Developing skills 287

longer term horizon than a single course will be necessary, so integrated program as well as course
planning is important.

6.5.5 Discussion as a tool for developing intellectual skills

Discussion is a very important tool for developing thinking skills. However, not any kind of discussion.
It was argued in Chapter 2 that academic knowledge requires a different kind of thinking to everyday
thinking. It usually requires students to see the world differently, in terms of underlying principles,
abstractions and ideas.

   Thus discussion needs to be carefully managed by the instructor, so that it focuses on the development
of skills in thinking that are integral to the area of study. This requires the instructor to plan, structure
and support discussion within the class, keeping the discussions in focus, and providing opportunities to
demonstrate how experts in the field approach topics under discussion, and comparing students' efforts.
The role of discussion is covered more fully in Chapter 3, Section 4, Chapter 4, Section 4 and Chapter
12, Section 10.

6.5.6 In conclusion

There are many opportunities in even the most academic courses to develop intellectual and practical
skills that will carry over into work and life activities in a digital age, without corrupting the values or
standards of academia. Even in vocational courses, students need opportunities to practice intellectual or
conceptual skills such as problem-solving, communication skills, and collaborative learning. However,
this won't happen merely through the delivery of content. Instructors need to:

         · think carefully about exactly what skills their students need;
         · how this fits with the nature of the subject matter;
         · the kind of activities that will allow students to develop and improve their intellectual skills;
         · how to give feedback and to assess those skills, within the time and resources available.

This is a very brief discussion of how and why skills development should be an integral part of any
learning environment.

                                                                  Activity 6.5 Developing skills

             1. Returning to the HIST 305 scenario, what specific skills was Ralph Goodyear trying to develop in
                 his course?

             2. Are the skills being developed by students in the history scenario relevant to a digital age?
             3. Is this section likely to change the way you think about teaching your subject, or do you already

                 cover skills development adequately? If you feel you do cover skills development well, does your
                 approach differ from mine?

      For feedback in the first two questions, click on the podcast below.
288 Chapter 6: Building an effective learning environment

                           An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                        https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=370
6.6 Learner support

                      Figure 6.6.1 Learner support

6.6.1 Learner support within a learning environment
Learner support focuses on forms of assistance to learners beyond the delivery of content, skills
development, or formal assessment. Learner support covers a wide range of functions, and is discussed
throughout the book, but particularly in:

         · Chapter 3, Section 7
         · Chapter 4, Section 4
         · Chapter 9, Section 6
         · Chapter 12, Section 10.
Brindley et al. (2004) provide an extensive overview of the full range of activities in providing learner

                                                                   289
290 Chapter 6: Building an effective learning environment

support for online and distance education learners. Here though my focus is limited to indicating why it
is an essential element of an effective learning environment, and to describe briefly some of the main
sub-components of learner support.

6.6.2 Scaffolding

Figure 6.6.2 Learner support

   I use the term scaffolding to cover the many functions in diagnosing and responding to learners'
difficulties, including:

         · helping students when they struggle with new concepts or ideas;
         · helping students to gain a deeper understanding of a topic or subject;
         · helping students to evaluate a range of different ideas or practices;
         · helping students to understand the limits of knowledge;
         · above all challenging students to go beyond their current level of thinking or practice to

            acquire deeper understanding or a higher level of competency.
These activities normally take the form of personal interventions and communication between an
instructor and an individual or a group of students, in face-to-face contexts or online. These activities
tend not to be pre-planned, requiring a good deal of spontaneity and responsiveness on the part of the
teacher or instructor.

   However, more recently there have been examples of automated learner support, such as virtual
assistants or chatbots (for a review of research on chatbots in education, see Winkler and Söllner, 2018).
                                                                                                                                     6.6 Learner support 291

Also learning analytics have been used to determine a student's performance and where necessary to
direct them to further readings or work (see for instance, Vesin et al., 2018).

   Scaffolding is usually a means of individualising the learning, enabling student differences in learning
to be better accommodated as they occur.

6.6.3 Feedback

This could be seen as a sub-category of scaffolding, but it covers the role of providing feedback on
student performance of activities such as writing assignments, project work, creative activities, and other
student activities beyond the current and perhaps future scope of automated computer feedback. Again,
the instructor's role here is to provide more individualisation of feedback to deal with more qualitatively
assessed student activities, and may or may not be associated with formal assessment or grading.

6.6.4 Counselling

As well as direct support within their academic studying, learners often need help and guidance on
administrative or personal issues, such as financial difficulties, or whether to repeat a course, delay an
assignment because of sickness in the family, or cancel enrollment in a course and postpone it to another
date. Although such services may be available outside the provision of a particular course, this potential
source of help needs to be considered in the design of an effective learning environment, with the aim
of doing all that can be done to ensure that students can manage external pressures while meeting the
academic standards of a program.

6.6.5 Other students

Other students can be a great support for learners. Much of this will happen informally, through students
talking after class, through social media, or helping each other with assignments. However, instructors
can make more formal use of other students by designing collaborative learning activities, group work,
and designing online discussions so that students need to work together rather than individually.

6.6.6 Why learner support is so important

We shall see in Chapter 12 that good design can substantially reduce demand for learner support, by
ensuring clarity and by building in appropriate learning activities. Students also vary enormously in their
need for support in learning. Many lifelong learners, who have already been through a post-secondary
education, have families, careers and a great deal of life experience, can be self-managed, autonomous
learners, identifying what they need to learn and how best to do this. At the other extreme, there are
students for whom the formal school system was a disaster, who lack basic learning skills or foundations,
such as reading, writing and mathematical skills, and therefore lack confidence in learning. These will
need a lot of support to succeed.

   However the vast majority of learners are somewhere in the middle of the spectrum, occasionally
running into problems, unsure what standards are expected, and needing to know how they are doing
in their studying. Indeed, there is a good deal of research that indicates that `instructor presence' is
associated with student success or failure in a course, at least in online learning (see, for instance, Shea
et al., 2010). Where students feel the instructor is not present, both learner performance and completion
292 Chapter 6: Building an effective learning environment

rates decline. For such students, good, timely learner support is the difference between success and
failure.

   It should be noted that the need for good learner support, and the ability to provide it, is not dependent
on the medium of instruction. The kind of credit online courses that have been designed and delivered
long before MOOCs came along often provided high levels of learner support, through having a strong
instructor presence and careful design to ensure students were supported.

   At the same time, although computer programs can go some way to providing learner support, many
of the most important functions of learner support associated with high-level conceptual learning and
skills development still need to be provided by an expert teacher or instructor, whether present or at a
distance. Furthermore, this kind of learner support is difficult to scale up, as it tends to be relatively
labour intensive and requires instructors with a deep level of knowledge within the subject area. Thus,
the need to provide adequate levels of learner support cannot just be wished away, if we are to achieve
successful learning on a large scale.

   This may seem obvious to teachers, but the importance of learner support for student success is not
always recognised or appreciated, as can be seen from the design of many MOOCs, and the reaction of
politicians and the media to the cost savings promised by the kind of MOOCs that focus on eliminating
learner support. There are also different attitudes from instructors and institutions towards the need for
learner support. Some faculty may believe that `It's my job to instruct and yours to learn'; in other words,
once students are presented with the necessary content through lectures or reading, the rest is up to them.

   Nevertheless, the reality is that in any system with a wide diversity of students, as is so common today,
effective learner support is essential for student success.

References

Brindley, J., Walti, C. and Zawacki-Richter, O. (eds.) (2004) Learner Support in Open, Distance and
Online Learning Environments Oldenburg, Germany: Biblioteks- und informationssystem der
Universität Oldenburg

   Shea, P. et al. (2010) Online Instructional Effort Measured through the Lens of Teaching Presence
in the Community of Inquiry Framework: A Re-Examination of Measures and Approach International
Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning, Vol. 11, No. 3

   Vesin, B. at al. (2018) Learning in smart environments: user-centered design and analytics of an
adaptive learning system Smart Learning Environments, Vol. 5, No. 24

   Winkler, R. & Söllner, M. (2018): Unleashing the Potential of Chatbots in Education: A State-Of-The-
Art Analysis. Academy of Management Annual Meeting (AOM) Chicago: Illinois

                                                             Activity 6.6 Building learner support

             1. Do you think it is possible to design an effective course or program without the need for high
                 levels of learner support? If so, what would it look like? A development of MOOCs or something
                 completely different?

             2. Do you share my views about the limitations of computers for providing the kind of high-level
                 learner support needed for conceptual learning in a digital age? What do computers or AI do well
                 in terms of supporting learners?

             3. Is `scaffolding' the best term to describe the kind of learning support I described in that section?
                                                                6.6 Learner support 293

           If not is there a better term for this?
For my feedback on these questions click on the podcast below:

   An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=374
6.7 Resources

                      Figure 6.7.1 Resources

   As in the case of learner characteristics, you may not have a lot of control over the resources
available, but resources (or the lack of them) will impact a great deal on the design of teaching. Securing
appropriate resources is often one of the most challenging tasks for many teachers and instructors. The
role of resources in the design of learning is also discussed throughout the book, but particularly in:

         · Chapter 1, Section 5
         · Chapter 9, Section 7
         · Chapter 10, Section 4.2
         · Chapter 12, Section 6
         · Chapter 13, Section 3
         · Chapter 13, Section 4

                                                                   295
296 Chapter 6: Building an effective learning environment

Here the focus is just on outlining the overall role of resources in creating an effective learning
environment.

6.7.1 Teaching assistance

Teaching assistance is the equivalent for instructors to what learner support is for students. Adjunct
or sessional instructors, teaching assistants, librarians, faculty development workshops, and technical
support staff, including instructional designers, media producers and IT technical support are all forms
of teaching assistance.

   It is important to think about the best way to use supporting staff. In universities, the tendency is to
chop a large class into sections, with each section with its own sessional instructor or teaching assistant,
which then operate relatively independently, with often large differences in the quality of the teaching
in different sections, depending on the ability of the teaching assistants. However, new technologies
enable the teaching to be organised differently and more consistently.

   For instance, a senior professor may determine the overall curriculum and assessment strategy, and
working with an instructional designer, provide the overall design of a course. Sessionals and/or teaching
assistants then are hired to deliver the course either face-to-face or online or more often a mix of both,
under the supervision of the senior professor (see the National Center for Academic Transformation for
examples). Flipped classrooms are another way to organise resources differently (see Blended Learning
in Introductory Psychology as an example.) One model is for the senior professor to record lectures
which students view in their own time, then for students to meet in sub-groups with a teaching assistant
or assistants to clarify concepts, discuss topics, or other class activities. These sub-groups may meet
either face-to-face or online.

   There are also opportunities to increase resources through the use of technology. Online learning
may bring in more new students (for instance from outside the normal catchment area) and hence more
revenues through government grants for the extra students and/or direct tuition revenue, so there may be
economies of scale which would enable the institution to hire more core faculty or sessionals from the
extra revenues generated by the additional online students.

   Indeed, there are now examples of fully online masters' programs more than covering their full
cost, including the hiring of research professors to teach the program, from tuition revenues alone (the
University of British Columbia's online Master in Educational Technology is one example, even though
its tuition fees are the same as those for masters' programs offered on campus - see Bates and Sangra,
2011).

   Thus resources (or the lack of them) can have a profound influence on the effectiveness of a learning
environment.

6.7.2 Facilities

Physical facilities available to an instructor and students include classrooms, labs, and the library.
These are the more traditional components of a learning environment. However, physical facilities
also can constrain the design of learning, because for example the physical set-up of a lecture hall
or classroom may limit opportunities for discussion or project work, or an instructor may be forced
to organise the teaching around three hours of lecturing and six hours of labs per week, to `fit' with
broader institutional requirements for classroom allocations (see How Online Learning is Going to
Affect Classroom Design regarding attempts to re-design classrooms for the digital age.)

   Online learning can free instructors and students from such rigid physical constraints, but there is still
                                                                                                                                             6.7 Resources 297

a need for structure and organization of units or modules of teaching, even or especially when teaching
online. For instance learning management systems such as Blackboard or Moodle provide a structured
online environment, but they too come with their own constraints.

6.7.3 Technology

Classroom technology such as whiteboards, projectors and computers for presentation are traditional
technology support. I would also include textbooks here because we will see in Chapter 8 that they
are a form of technology. However, the development of new technologies, and especially learning
management systems, lecture capture, video streaming, and social media, have radical implications
for the design of teaching and learning. This is discussed in much more depth in Chapters 7, 8 and
9, but for the purpose of describing an effective learning environment, the technologies available to
an instructor can contribute immensely to creating interactive and engaging learning environments for
students. However, it is important to emphasise that technology is just one component within any
effective learning environment, and needs to be balanced and integrated with all the other components.

6.7.4 The instructor's time

This is the greatest and most precious resource of all! Building an effective learning environment is an
iterative process, but in the end, the teaching design, and to some extent the learning environment as a
whole, will be dependent on the time available from the instructor (and his or her team) for teaching. The
less time available, the more restrictive the learning environment is likely to be, unless the instructor's
time is very carefully managed. Again, though, good design takes into account the time available for
teaching (see Chapter 12, Section 9 in particular).

6.7.5 Resources, class size and control

Nothing drives an instructor to distraction more than trying to manage with inadequate resources.
Certainly, if a teacher or instructor is allocated a class of 200 students, in a large lecture hall, with no
additional teaching support, then the instructor is going to have difficulty creating a rich and effective
learning environment, because the lack of resources limits the options. On the other hand, an instructor
with 30 students, access to a wide range of technology, freedom to organise and structure the
curriculum, and with support from an instructional designer and a web designer, has the luxury
of exploring a range of different designs and possible learning environments.

   Nevertheless it is probably when resources are most scarce that the most creativity is needed to break
out of traditional teaching models. New technology, if properly used and available, does enable even
large classes with otherwise few resources to be designed with a relatively rich learning environment.
This is discussed in more detail in Chapter 13, Section 5. At the same time, expectations need to be
realistic. Providing adequate learner support with an instructor:student ratio of 1:200 or more will always
be a challenge. Improvements are possible through re-design - but not miracles. (For more on increasing
productivity through online teaching, see Productivity and Online Learning Redux.)
298 Chapter 6: Building an effective learning environment

References

Bates, A. and Sangrà, A. (2011) Managing Technology in Higher Education: Strategies for
Transforming Teaching and Learning San Francisco: Jossey Bass

                                                             Activity 6.7 What resources matter?

             1. Are there other resources that influence the design of an effective learning environment that I
                 should have included?

             2. Winston Churchill once said `We shape our buildings and in turn our buildings shape us.' To what
                 extent do you think online learning can free us of some of the constraints that buildings impose on
                 the design of teaching and learning? What new constraints does online learning bring in terms of
                 design?

             3. How do you feel about the whole issue of teaching assistance? I have grave reservations myself
                 about the use of students as teaching assistants in universities, in terms of the quality of the
                 teaching (not so much the principle, but the practice.). I also believe that sessionals and adjunct
                 instructors are badly treated in terms of how they are managed. In British Columbia we have had
                 two Supreme Court cases and a major teachers' strike over class size and composition in schools,
                 and in particular how much help school teachers should receive for coping with students with
                 learning disabilities. But by bringing in less qualified (and cheaper) support for instructors, do we
                 strengthen or weaken the learning environment for students?

      No podcast from me - this activity is for your personal reflection - my views are stated above.
6.8 Assessment of learning

Figure 6.8.1 Assessment

      `I was struck by the way assessment always came at the end, not only in the unit of work but also in teachers'
   planning....Assessment was almost an afterthought...

      Teachers...are being caught between competing purposes of ...assessment and are often confused and
   frustrated by the difficulties that they experience as they try to reconcile the demands.'

                                                                                                               Earle, 2003
6.8.1 Learner assessment in a digital age
Because assessment is a huge topic, it is important to be clear that the purpose of this section is:

        (a) to look at one of the components that constitute an effective and comprehensive learning
     environment, and;

        (b) briefly to examine the extent to which assessment is or should be changing in a digital age.
   Assessment again is discussed throughout the book, but particularly in:

         · Scenario C
         · Chapter 5, Section 4.6
         · Chapter 8.7 c

                                                                   299
300 Chapter 6: Building an effective learning environment

         · Chapter 11, Section 4.3
         · Chapter 12, Section 11.

However, assessment requires a section on its own. Probably nothing drives the behaviour of students
more than how they will be assessed. Not all students are instrumental in their learning, but given the
competing pressures on students' time in a digital age, most `successful' learners focus on what will
be examined and how they can most effectively meet the assessment requirements (which for most
students means in as little time as possible). Therefore decisions about methods of assessment will in
most contexts be fundamental to building an effective learning environment.

6.8.2 The purpose of assessment

There are many different reasons for assessing learners. It is important to be clear about the purpose
of the assessment, because it is unlikely that one single assessment instrument will meet all assessment
needs. Here are some reasons (you can probably think of many more):

         · to improve and extend students' learning;
         · to assess students' knowledge and competence in terms of desired learning goals or

            outcomes;
         · to provide the teacher/instructor with feedback on the effectiveness of their teaching and how

            it might be improved;
         · to provide information for employers about what the student knows and/or can do;
         · to filter students for further study, jobs or professional advancement;
         · for institutional accountability and/or financial purposes.

I leave it to you to decide the order of importance of these reasons for creating an effective learning
environment.

6.8.3 Methods of assessment

The form the assessment takes, as well as the purpose, will be influenced by the instructors' or
examiners' underlying epistemology: what they believe constitutes knowledge, and therefore how
students need to demonstrate their knowledge. The form of assessment should also be influenced
by the knowledge and skills that students need in a digital age, which means focusing as much on
assessing skills as on assessing knowledge of content. Thus continuous or formative assessment will be
as important a consideration as summative or `end-of-course' assessment.

   There is a wide range of possible assessment methods. I have selected just a few to illustrate how
technology can change the way we assess learners in ways that are relevant to a digital age:

6.8.3.1 No assessment

A question to be considered is whether there is a need for assessment of learning in the first place.
There may be contexts, such as a community of practice, where learning is informal, and the learners
themselves decide what they wish to learn, and whether they are satisfied with what they have learned.
                                                                                                                            6.8 Assessment of learning 301

In other cases, learners may not want or need to be formally evaluated or graded, but do want or need
feedback on how they are doing with their learning. `Do I really understand this?' or `How am I doing
compared to other learners?'

   However, even in these contexts, some informal methods of assessment by experts, specialists or
more experienced participants could help other participants extend their learning by providing feedback
and indicating the level of competence or understanding that a participant has achieved or has yet
to accomplish. Lastly, students themselves can extend their learning by participating in both self-
assessment and peer assessment, preferably with guidance and monitoring from a more knowledgeable
or skilled instructor.

6.8.3.2 Computer-based multiple-choice tests

This method is good for testing `objective' knowledge of facts, ideas, principles, laws, and quantitative
procedures in mathematics, science and engineering etc., and is cost-effective for these purposes. This
form of testing though tends to be limited for assessing higher-level intellectual skills, such as complex
problem-solving, creativity, and evaluation, and therefore less likely to be useful for developing or
assessing many of the skills needed in a digital age.

6.8.3.3 Written essays or short answers

This method is good for assessing comprehension and some of the more advanced intellectual skills,
such as critical thinking, but it is labour intensive, open to subjectivity, and not good for assessing
practical skills.

   Experiments are taking place with automated essay marking, using developments in artificial
intelligence, but so far automated essay marking still struggles to identify valid semantic meaning,
especially at a higher education level. For more discussion of automated essay marking, see Chapter
8.7c.4.4

6.8.3.4 Peer assessment

This is a very large and specialised topic, which I touched on in Chapter 5, Section 4.6.2. There are three
main advantages of peer assessment:

         · if conducted properly, it can be an excellent pedagogical benefit to student learning as it
            requires students to think critically about what they have learned in order to judge other
            students' work. It enables them to see other students' perspectives on the concepts and ideas,
            thus widening and deepening their understanding;

         · it enables learner support to be scaled up, allowing instructors to handle larger numbers of
            students;

         · it develops a core 21st century skill of peer evaluation that will be critical when working in a
            digital society.

However, if not done properly, peer assessment can have disastrous consequences. I am not a specialist
in this area but I have used peer assessment in online learning, but only at a graduate level. These are
some of the lessons I learned:
302 Chapter 6: Building an effective learning environment

         · There must be an intrinsic benefit to students doing the assessment. They must see how this
            will be useful to their own learning.

         · The instructor must give clear criteria or rubrics for assessment, preferably with examples of
            good or poor answers.

         · Students should be rewarded either with marks or praise by the instructor for excellent peer
            reviews.

         · Students must know that the instructor will not only monitor the peer assessments but also
            will take responsibility for final decisions on student-awarded grades or marks and will over-
            rule poor assessments by students.

         · Don't put all your eggs in one basket. It is wise to have a parallel or independent method of
            assessment, such as multiple-choice tests or having half the total course assessment done in
            more traditional ways.

Thus there are best practices that must be followed. Anyone intending to use peer assessment should
prepare themselves properly by looking carefully into the literature. Macdonald (2015) or Topping
(2018) offer guides for teachers. For an example of the successful use of peer assessment at a post-
secondary level, see Peer Evaluation as a Learning and Assessment Strategy at the School of Business
at Simon Fraser University

6.8.3.5 Project work

Project work encourages the development of authentic skills that require understanding of content,
knowledge management, problem-solving, collaborative learning, evaluation, creativity and practical
outcomes. Designing valid and practical project work needs a high level of skill and imagination from
the instructor, and the assessment process can be labour-intensive, but project work is one of the best
ways to assess the high level skills needed in a digital age.

   `Assessing student project work` by Melinda Kolk on The Creative Educator web site provides an
excellent guideline on assessing student project work. Although intended for k-12 teachers, it is also
very appropriate for post-secondary educators.

6.8.3.6 e-Portfolios (an online compendium of student work)

E-portfolios enable self-assessment through reflection, knowledge management, recording and
evaluation of learning activities, such as teaching or nursing practice, and recording of an individual's
contribution to project work (as an example, see the use of e-portfolios in Visual Arts and Built
Environment at the University of Windsor.); e-portfolios are usually self-managed by the learner but can
be made available or adapted for formal assessment purposes or job interviews.

6.8.3.7 Simulations, educational games (usually online) and virtual worlds

These enable the practice and evaluation of skills, such as:

         · complex and real time decision-making,

         · operation of (simulated or remote) complex equipment,

         · the development of safety procedures and awareness,
                                                                                                                            6.8 Assessment of learning 303

         · risk taking and decision-making in a safe environment, activities that require a combination
            of manual and cognitive skills (see the training of Canadian Border Service officers at
            Loyalist College, Ontario).

Figure 6.8.2 Virtual world border crossing, Loyalist
College, Ontario

   Simulations and serious or educational games (discussed more extensively in Chapter 13) are
currently expensive to develop, but cost-effective with multiple use, where they replace the use of
extremely expensive equipment, where operational activities cannot be halted for training purposes,
or where available as open educational resources. Because students' actions and decision-making are
recorded, authentic assessment is embedded in the process.
6.8.4 In conclusion
Nothing is likely to drive student learning more than the method of assessment. At the same
time, assessment methods are rapidly changing and are likely to continue to change. It can be seen that
some of these assessment methods are both formative, in helping students to develop and increase their
competence and knowledge, as well as summative, in assessing knowledge and skill levels at the end of
a course or program. In a digital age, assessment and teaching will become even more closely integrated
and contiguous.There is an increasing range of digitally based tools that can enrich the quality and
range of student assessment. Therefore the choice of assessment methods, and their relevance to other
components, are vital elements of any effective learning environment.
References
Earle, L. (2003) Assessment as Learning Thousand Oaks CA: Corwin Press

   Macdonald, B. (2015) Peer assessment that works: A guide for teachers Lanham MD: Rowan and
Littlefield
304 Chapter 6: Building an effective learning environment

   Topping, K. (2108) Using Peer Assessment to Inspire Reflection and Learning London UK: Routledge

                                                   Activity 6. 8 What assessments work in a digital age?

             1. Are there other methods of assessment relevant to a digital age that I should have included?
             2. There is still a heavy reliance on computer-based multiple-choice tests in much teaching, mainly

                 for cost reasons. However, although there are exceptions, I would argue in general that these
                 really don't assess the high level conceptual skills needed in a digital age. Do you agree?
             3. Are there other methods that are equally as economical, particularly in terms of instructor time,
                 that are more suitable for assessment in a digital age? For instance, do you think automated essay
                 grading is a viable alternative?
             4. Would it be helpful to think about assessment right at the start of course planning, rather than at
                 the end? Is this feasible?
             5. In Scenario D, `Developing historical thinking`, did the instructor use assessment to help develop
                 and assess the skills needed in a digital age in an effective manner? If so, how and if not, why
                 not?
      For my comments on this activity, click on the podcast below:

                           An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                        https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=380
6.9 Culture and learning environments

Figure 6.9.1 Old Sun Anglican Aboriginal School, Southern Alberta: note the Union Jack on the board at the back.

6.9.1 The importance of culture
Within every learning environment there is a prevailing culture that influences all the other
components. In most learning environments, culture is often taken for granted or may be even beyond
the consciousness of learners or even teachers. I will try to show why faculty, instructors and teachers
should pay special attention to cultural factors, so that they can make conscious decisions about how
the different components of a learning environment are implemented. Although the concept of culture
may seem a little abstract at this stage, I will show how critical it is for designing an effective online
learning environment,
6.9.2 Defining culture
I define culture as

   the dominant values and beliefs that influence decision-making.

The choice of content, the skills and attitudes that are promoted, the relationship between instructors
and students, and many other aspects of a learning environment, will all be deeply influenced by the

                                                                   305
306 Chapter 6: Building an effective learning environment

prevailing culture of an institution or class (used to mean any grouping of students and a teacher). Thus
in a learning environment, every one of the components I described will be influenced by the dominant
culture.

   For instance, parents tend to place their children in schools that reflect their owns values and beliefs,
and so the characteristics of learners in that school will also often be influenced by the culture not only
of their parents but also of their school. This is one of the many ways that culture can be self-reinforcing.

6.9.3 Identifying cultures

I first noticed the impact of different cultures many years ago, when I was doing research in the U.K.
on the administration of large comprehensive (high) schools. Given that these schools had deliberately
been created by a left-of-centre government in Britain in the 1960s to provide equal access to secondary
education for all, and that these schools had many things in common (their large size - often with
1,500 students or more, their curricula, the idea that every student should have the same educational
opportunities) one would have expected that they all would have had a similar prevailing culture.
However, I visited over 50 such schools to collect information on the how they were managed and the
key issues they faced, and every one was different.

   Some were created from formerly highly selective grammar schools, and operated on a strict system
of sorting students by tests, so that each year successful students would go up a level and the `weakest'
students would drop down a level, in order to identify the best prospects for university. Here the
dominant value was academic excellence.

   Some schools were single sex (I am still puzzled by how a school segregated by sex could be
considered `comprehensive'). One of the key objectives of a girls' school I visited was to teach girls
about `poise'. (This led to a very confused miscommunication between me and the headmistress, as I
initially thought she had said `boys'.) Here the dominant value was on developing `ladylike qualities'.

   Others were inner city schools, where the focus was often on bringing the best out of each child,
whatever their abilities. In such schools, each class would contain children with as wide a range of
abilities as possible, but they were often rowdy, raucous places in comparison to the more elite-oriented
institutions. Here the emphasis was on inclusiveness and equal opportunity.

   The differing cultures of each of these schools was so strong I could sometimes detect it just by
walking in the door, by the way students reacted with staff and each other in the corridors, or even by
the way the students walked (or ran).

6.9.4 Culture and learning environments

Whether you consider culture to be a good or bad influence in a learning environment will depend on
whether you share or reject the underlying values and beliefs of the dominant culture.

   Residential schools in Canada into which aboriginal children were often forcibly placed are a prime
example of how culture drives the way schools operate. The main purpose of such schools was
deliberately to destroy aboriginal cultures and replace them with a religious-influenced Western culture.
In these schools children were punished for being what they were. In such schools, all the other
components of their learning environment were used to reinforce the dominant culture that was being
imposed.

   Although the outcomes for most children that attended these schools have turned out to be disastrous,
those responsible (state and church working together) truly believed they were doing the right thing. We
                                                                                                            6.9 Culture and learning environments 307

are still struggling in Canada to `do the right thing' for aboriginal education, but any successful solution
must take into account aboriginal cultures, as well as the surrounding predominant `Western' culture.

   Culture is perhaps more nebulous in higher education institutions, but it is still a powerful influence,
differing not just between institutions but often between academic departments within the same
institution.

6.9.5 Culture and new learning environments

Because prevailing cultures are often so dominant, they are very difficult to change. It is particularly
difficult for a single individual to change a dominant culture. Even charismatic leaders will struggle, as
many university presidents have found.

   However, as new technologies allow us to develop new learning environments, instructors now have
a rare opportunity consciously to create a culture that can support those values and beliefs that they
consider to be important for today's learners.

   For instance, in an online learning environment, I consciously attempt to create a culture that reflects
the following:

         · mutual respect (between instructor and students, and especially between students)

         · open-ness to differing views and opinions; respect for diversity

         · evidence-based argument and reasoning

         · making learning engaging and fun

         · making explicit and encouraging the underlying values and epistemology of a subject
            discipline

         · transparency in assessment (e.g. rubrics and criteria)

         · recognition of and respect for the personalities of each student in the class

         · collaboration and mutual support.

The above cultural elements of course reflect my beliefs and values; yours may well be different.
However, it is important that you are aware of your beliefs and values, so that you can design the learning
environment in a way that best supports them.

   You may also consider these cultural elements to be more like learning outcomes but I disagree. These
cultural elements are broader and more general, and reflect what I believe are really necessary conditions
for building an effective learning environment in a digital age.

   Lastly you may question the right of an instructor to impose their personal cultural conditions on a
learning environment. For myself, I have no problems with this. As a subject expert or professional in
teaching, you are usually in a better position than learners to know the learning requirements and the
cultural elements that will best achieve these. In any case, if you believe that learners should have more
say in determining the culture in which they learn, that too is your choice and could be accommodated
within the culture.

6.9.6 Summary

Culture is a critical component of any learning environment. It is important to be aware of the influence
308 Chapter 6: Building an effective learning environment

of culture within any particular learning context, and to try and shape that culture as much as possible
towards supporting the kind of learning environment that you believe will be most effective. However,
changing a pre-existing, dominant culture is very difficult. Nevertheless, new technologies enable new
learning environments to be developed, and thus provide an opportunity to develop the kind of culture
within that learning environment that will best serve your learners.

   However, in every learning environment there will be cultural elements that prevail through all
components, which is why I have added culture as a background to all the components of a learning
environment in the graphic below.

                    Figure 6.9.2: All the components of an effective learning environment
6.9.7 Next
Section 6.10 provides a brief conclusion to this chapter on building effective learning environments.

                                          Activity 6.9 Considering culture in a learning environment

             1. Do you agree with my definition of `culture' as used in describing an effective learning
                 environment? If not, how would you define it? Would you use another term for what I am
                                                                                                    6.9 Culture and learning environments 309

           discussing?
      2. Can you describe the culture of the institution in which you work? What are its prime

           characteristics or goals? Or are there many cultures?
      3. Can you describe the culture within your own class or classes? What do you `inherit' and what

           can you create or change?
      4. Do you share my views on the importance of understanding the culture within a learning

           environment? Or is culture something a teacher should/can ignore?
      5. What would be the ideal culture for your classes/teaching? How could you foster or create such a

           culture?

These questions are for your reflection. There is no feedback provided for this activity.
6.10 Conclusions

Figure 6.10 What kind of learning environment do you want to create? Image: Vidyo.com

   There is no one way to build an effective learning environment. The learning environment needs to
be appropriate for the context in which students will learn. However, before even beginning to design a
course or program, we should be thinking of what this learning environment could look like. Whatever
the learning environment, though, the learners must do the learning. We need to make sure that learners
are able to work within an environment that helps them do this. In other words, our job as teachers is to
create the conditions for success.

   One component within an effective learning environment that I have not discussed is the actual teacher
(although in Figure 6.9.2 you will see that she is at the centre of the learning environment). In some
sense the importance of a teacher or instructor within a learning environment is a given, but really
the rest of the book is about the role of the teacher within this environment. Also by concentrating on
the other components, this chapter enables the possibility of a learning environment without an actual
teacher, although someone such as a teacher or educator or even an individual learner (but definitely
not a computer scientist) may need to be responsible for the design and maintenance of such a learning
environment.

   Technology now enables us to build a wide variety of effective learning environments that can differ
significantly from the traditional classroom. But technology alone is not enough. Many technology-
based learning environments are bereft of some of the key components that make an effective learning
environment. An effective learning environment needs to include the other components for learner

                                                                   311
312 Chapter 6: Building an effective learning environment

success. This is not to say that self-managing learners cannot build their own effective, personal
learning environments, but they need to consider the other components as well as the technology.

                                                         Activity 6.10 Designing your own learning environment

             1. Describe the current learning environment in which you are teaching a particular course or
                 program.

             2. What are the main components to which you give the most attention?
             3. Would you make changes to that learning environment as a result of reading this chapter? Why?
             4. Now: can you design a completely different learning environment that would better fit the needs

                 of the course and your students? For instance if you moved your course from classroom to online,
                 or from fully online to blended, how would you accommodate the main components of this
                 learning environment? Or could you re-design the learning environment within the current mode
                 of delivery? If so, what elements would you change, and what would you keep?
      I provide no feedback for this activity. It is for your own reflection.

This concludes Part 1 of the book, which focuses on the fundamentals of teaching and learning in a
digital age. Part 2 of the book (Chapters 7-13) pays special attention to the impact of digital technologies
on teaching and learning, starting with Chapter 7, which examines the nature and role of media and
technologies in education.
Chapter 7: Understanding technology in education

                                                                      Purpose of this chapter

      When you have completed this chapter you should:
              · be able to understand the difference between media and technologies in educational contexts;
              · be able to place different media and technologies, including new and emerging
                 technologies, within an analytical framework.

                                                 For a my personal introduction to
                                                 the next few chapters, please click
                                                 on the podcast below.

                       An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                    https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=168

What is covered in this chapter
Understanding the nature and role of media and technologies in education, and being able to use media
and technologies appropriately, are critical to teaching well in a digital age. This is the first of three
chapters that discuss media choice and use.

                                                                   313
314 A.W. (Tony) Bates

   In this chapter, which focuses on the foundations of educational technology, you will cover the
following topics

         · 7.1 Choosing technologies for teaching and learning: the challenge
         · 7.2 A short history of educational technology
         · 7.3 Media or technology?
         · 7.4. Assessing media affordances: the SAMR model
         · 7.5 Broadcast vs communicative media
         · 7.6 The time and space dimensions of media
         · 7.7 Media richness
         · 7.8 Understanding the foundations of educational media

Also in this chapter you will find the following activities:

         · Activity 7.1 How do you currently make decisions about what technology to use for
            teaching?

         · Activity 7.2 What does history tell us?
         · Activity 7.3 Media or technology?
         · Activity 7.4. Assessing the SAMR model
         · Activity 7.5 Broadcast or communicative?
         · Activity 7.6 Time and space dimensions of technology
         · Activity 7.7 How rich is your medium?
         · Activity 7.8 Analysing your current use of technology

                                                                            Key Takeaways

             1. Technologies are merely tools that can be used in a variety of ways. What matters more is how
                 technologies are applied. The same technology can be applied in different ways, even or
                 especially in education. So in judging the value of a technology, we need to look more closely at
                 the ways in which it is being or could be used. In essence this means focusing more on media -
                 which represent the more holistic use of technologies - than on individual tools or technologies
                 themselves, while still recognising that technology is an essential component of almost all media.

             2. By focusing on media rather than technologies, we can then include face-to-face teaching as a
                 medium, enabling comparisons with more technology-based media to be made along a number of
                 dimensions or characteristics.

             3. Recognising that in education media are usually used in combination, the six key building blocks
                 of media are:

                           1. face-to-face teaching
                                                                                                           Teahing in a Digital Age - 2e 315

               2. text

               3. (still) graphics

               4. audio (including speech)

               5. video

               6. computing (including animation, simulations and virtual reality).

 4. Media differ in terms of their formats, symbols systems, and cultural values. These unique
      features are increasingly referred to as the affordances of media or technology. Thus different
      media can be used to assist learners to learn in different ways and achieve different outcomes,
      thus also individualising learning more.

 5. There are many dimensions along which some technologies are similar and others are different.
      By focusing on these dimensions, we have a basis for analysing new media and technologies, to
      see where they `fit' within the existing landscape, and to evaluate their potential benefits or
      limitations for teaching and learning.

 6. There are probably other characteristics or dimensions of educational media that might also be
      identified, but three key characteristics or dimensions are particularly important:

                  broadcast vs communicative

                  synchronous (live) vs asynchronous (recorded)

                  single vs rich media

 7. However, the identification of where a particular medium fits along any specific characteristic or
      dimension will depend in most cases on how that medium is designed. On the other hand, there is
      usually a limit to how far a technology can be forced along one of these dimensions; there is
      likely to be a single, `natural' position on each dimension, subject to good design, in terms of
      exploiting the educational affordances of the medium.

 8. These characteristics or dimensions of media then need to be evaluated against the learning goals
      and outcomes desired, while recognising that a new educational medium or application
      might enable goals to be achieved that had not been previously considered possible.

 9. Over time, media have tended to become more communicative, asynchronous, and `rich', thus
      offering teachers and learners more powerful tools for teaching and learning.

10. The Internet is an extremely powerful medium because through a combination of tools and media
      it can encompass all the characteristics and dimensions of educational media.
7.1 Choosing technologies for teaching and learning: the challenge

Figure 7.1 How many technologies can you identify in this
home entertainment system? Image: Tony Bates, 2014

                                                                   317
318 Chapter 7: Understanding technology in education

7.1 Defining the role of technology in education
Even an electronics engineer will be hard pressed to identify all the technologies in the photo of a not
untypical home entertainment system in a North American home in 2014. The answer will depend on
what you mean by technology:

         · hardware? (e.g. TV monitor, laptop computer)
         · software? (e.g. computer operating system, channel selection)
         · networks? (e.g. Internet, cable)
         · services? (e.g. television, telephone)
The answer of course is all these, plus the systems that enable everything to be integrated. Indeed, the
technologies represented in just this one photograph are too many to list (although I make an attempt in
the feedback on Activity 7.1 at the end of the book. Nevertheless it is a futile exercise as I was forced to
change the whole system a couple of years later due to technological `upgrades' by the service provider.)
   In a digital age we are immersed in technology. Education, although often a laggard in technology
adoption, is nevertheless no exception today. Yet learning is also a fundamental human activity that
can function quite well (some would say better) without any technological intervention. So in an age
immersed in technology, what is its role in education? What are the strengths (or affordances) and what
                                                                     7.1 Choosing technologies for teaching and learning: the challenge 319

are the limitations of technology in education? When should we use technology, and which technologies
should we use for what purposes?

7.2 The need for decision models

The aim of this and the next two chapters is to provide some frameworks or models for decision-
making that are both soundly based on theory and research and are also pragmatic within the context
of education. This will not be an easy exercise. There are deep philosophical, technical and pragmatic
challenges in trying to provide a model or set of models flexible but practical enough to handle the
complexity.

   For instance, theories and beliefs about education will influence strongly the choice and use of
different technologies. On the technical side, it is becoming increasingly difficult to classify or
categorize technologies, not just because they are changing so quickly, but also because technologies
have many different qualities and affordances that change according to the contexts in which they are
used. On the pragmatic side, it would be a mistake to focus solely on the pedagogical characteristics of
technologies. There are social, organizational, cost and accessibility issues also to be considered.

   The selection and use of technologies for teaching and learning is driven as much by context and
values and beliefs as by hard scientific evidence or rigorous theory. So there will not be one `best'
framework or model. On the other hand, given the rapidly escalating range of technologies, educators
are increasingly caught between technological determinism (inappropriate applications of artificial
intelligence, for instance) or the total rejection of technology for teaching because it is so complex.Thus
we need some models to guide their selection and use.

   We shall also see though that even with such models or frameworks for decision-making, there are
in fact still some fundamental, unanswered questions regarding the use of technology for teaching,
including:

         · what is best done face-to-face and what online, and in what contexts?

         · what is the role of the human teacher, and can/should/will the human teacher be replaced by
            technology?

Nevertheless, if we consider a teacher facing a group of students and a curriculum to teach, or a learner
seeking to develop their own learning, there is need for practical guidance now about when to use
one technology or another. In this and the next two chapters I will provide some theoretical models or
frameworks that will enable such questions to be answered effectively and pragmatically so that the
learning experience is optimized.

   In the meantime let's start with what your views are at the moment about choosing technology for
teaching and learning.

                       Activity 6.1 How do you currently make decisions about what technology to use for teaching?

      1. How do you decide at the moment about what technologies to use for teaching?

              · Use what's in the room?

              · Ask the IT support people?
320 Chapter 7: Understanding technology in education

              · Use a theory or set of principles for making such a decision? If so, what are these?
      2. Is justifying your use of technology (or lack of it) in teaching easy to do? What are the reasons for your
   answer?
      3. How many technologies can you see in Figure 7.1? List them
      For my answer to question 3, see Feedback on Activity 7.1 at the end of the book. There is no feedback on
   questions 1 and 2.
7.2 A short history of educational technology

Figure 7.2.1 Charlton Heston as Moses. Are the tablets of stone an educational technology? (See Selwood, 2014, for a
discussion of the possible language of the Ten Commandments)
Image: Allstar/Cinetext/Paramount

   Arguments about the role of technology in education go back at least 2,500 years. To understand
better the role and influence of technology on teaching, we need a little history, because as always
there are lessons to be learned from history. Paul Saettler's `The Evolution of American Educational
Technology` (1990) is one of the most extensive historical accounts, but only goes up to 1989. A lot has
happened since then. What I'm giving you here is the postage stamp version of ed tech history, and a
personal one at that.
7.2.1 Oral communication
One of the earliest means of formal teaching was oral - through human speech - although over time,
technology has been increasingly used to facilitate or `back-up' oral communication. In ancient times,
stories, folklore, histories and news were transmitted and maintained through oral communication,

                                                                   321
322 Chapter 7: Understanding technology in education

making accurate memorization a critical skill, and the oral tradition is still the case in many aboriginal
cultures. For the ancient Greeks, oratory and speech were the means by which people learned and passed
on learning. Homer's Iliad and the Odyssey were recitative poems, intended for public performance. To
be learned, they had to be memorized by listening, not by reading, and transmitted by recitation, not
by writing. Lectures go back at least as far as the ancient Greeks. Demosthenes (384-322 BC) was an
outstanding orator whose speeches influenced the politics of Athens.

   Nevertheless, by the fifth century B.C, written documents existed in considerable numbers in ancient
Greece. If we believe Plato, education has been on a downward spiral ever since. According to Plato,
Socrates caught one of his students (Phaedrus) pretending to recite a speech from memory that in fact he
had learned from a written version. Socrates then told Phaedrus the story of how the god Theuth offered
the King of Egypt the gift of writing, which would be a `recipe for both memory and wisdom'. The king
was not impressed. According to the king:

         it [writing] will implant forgetfulness in their souls; they will cease to exercise memory because
     they will rely on what is written, creating memory not from within themselves, but by means of
     external symbols. What you have discovered is a recipe not for memory, but for reminding. And it is
     no true wisdom that you offer your disciples, but only its semblance, for by telling them many things
     without teaching them anything, you will make them seem to know much, while for the most part
     they will know nothing. And as men filled not with wisdom but the conceit of wisdom, they will be a
     burden to their fellow men.

                                                   Phaedrus, 274c-275, translation adapted from Manguel, 1996

   I can just hear some of my former colleagues saying the same thing about social media.
   Slate boards were in use in India in the 12th century AD, and blackboards/chalkboards became used
in schools around the turn of the 18th century. At the end of World War Two the U.S. Army started using
overhead projectors for training, and their use became common for lecturing, until being largely replaced
by electronic projectors and presentational software such as Powerpoint around 1990. This may be the
place to point out that most technologies used in education were not developed specifically for education
but for other purposes (mainly for the military or business.)
   Although the telephone dates from the late 1870s, the standard telephone system never became a
major educational tool, not even in distance education, because of the high cost of analogue telephone
calls for multiple users, although audio-conferencing has been used to supplement other media since the
1970s. Video-conferencing using dedicated cable systems and dedicated conferencing rooms have been
in use since the 1980s. The development of video compression technology and relatively low cost video
servers in the early 2000s led to the introduction of lecture capture systems for recording and streaming
classroom lectures in 2008. Webinars now are used largely for delivering lectures over the Internet.
   None of these technologies though changes the oral basis of communication for teaching.

7.2.2 Written communication

The role of text or writing in education also has a long history. According to the Bible, Moses used
chiseled stone to convey the ten commandments in a form of writing, probably around the 7th century
BC. Even though Socrates is reported to have railed against the use of writing, written forms of
communication make analytic, lengthy chains of reasoning and argument much more accessible,
reproducible without distortion, and thus more open to analysis and critique than the transient nature of
speech.
                                                                                                  7.2 A short history of educational technology 323

   The invention of the printing press in Europe in the 15th century was a truly disruptive technology,
making written knowledge much more freely available, very much in the same way as the Internet
has done today. As a result of the explosion of written documents resulting from the mechanization
of printing, many more people in government and business were required to become literate and
analytical, which led to a rapid expansion of formal education in Europe. There were many reasons for
the development of the Renaissance and the Enlightenment, and the triumph of reason and science over
superstition and beliefs in Europe, but the technology of printing was a key agent of change.

   Improvements in transport infrastructure in the 19th century, and in particular the creation of a cheap
and reliable postal system in the 1840s, led to the development of the first formal correspondence
education, with the University of London offering an external degree program by correspondence from
1858. This first formal distance degree program still exists today in the form of the University of London
Worldwide. In the 1970s, the Open University transformed the use of print for teaching through specially
designed, highly illustrated printed course units that integrated learning activities with the print medium,
based on advanced instructional design.

   With the development of web-based learning management systems in the mid-1990s, textual
communication, although digitized, became, at least for a brief time, the main communication medium
for Internet-based learning, although lecture capture and video streaming is now changing that.

7.2.3 Broadcasting and video
324 Chapter 7: Understanding technology in education

Figure 7.2.3 BBC television studio and radio transmitter,
Alexandra Palace, London
Image: © Copyright Oxyman and licensed for reuse under
a Creative Commons Licence
                                                                                                  7.2 A short history of educational technology 325

   The British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) began broadcasting educational radio programs for
schools in the 1920s. The first adult education radio broadcast from the BBC in 1924 was a talk on
Insects in Relation to Man, and in the same year, J.C. Stobart, the new Director of Education at the BBC,
mused about `a broadcasting university' in the journal Radio Times (Robinson, 1982). Television was
first used in education in the 1960s, for schools and for general adult education (one of the six purposes
in the current BBC's Royal Charter is still `promoting education and learning').

   In 1969, the British government established the Open University (OU), which worked in partnership
with the BBC to develop university programs open to all, using a combination originally of printed
materials specially designed by OU staff, and television and radio programs made by the BBC but
integrated with the courses. Although the radio programs involved mainly oral communication, the
television programs did not use lectures as such, but focused more on the common formats of general
television, such as documentaries, demonstration of processes, and cases/case studies (see Bates, 1984).
In other words, the BBC focused on the unique `affordances' of television, a topic that will be discussed
in much more detail later. Over time, as new technologies such as audio- and video-cassettes were
introduced, live broadcasting, especially radio, was cut back for OU programs, although there are still
some general educational channels broadcasting around the world (e.g. TVOntario in Canada; PBS, the
History Channel, and the Discovery Channel in the USA).

   The use of television for education quickly spread around the world, being seen in the 1970s by some,
particularly in international agencies such as the World Bank and UNESCO, as a panacea for education
in developing countries, the hopes for which quickly faded when the realities of lack of electricity, cost,
security of publicly available equipment, climate, resistance from local teachers, and local language
and cultural issues became apparent (see, for instance, Jamison and Klees, 1973). Satellite broadcasting
started to become available in the 1980s, and similar hopes were expressed of delivering `university
lectures from the world's leading universities to the world's starving masses', but these hopes too quickly
faded for similar reasons. However, India, which had launched its own satellite, INSAT, in 1983, used
it initially for delivering locally produced educational television programs throughout the country, in
several indigenous languages, using Indian-designed receivers and television sets in local community
centres as well as schools (Bates, 1984).

   In the 1990s the cost of creating and distributing video dropped dramatically due to digital
compression and high-speed Internet access. This reduction in the costs of recording and distributing
video also led to the development of lecture capture systems. The technology allows students to view
or review lectures at any time and place with an Internet connection. The Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT) started making its recorded lectures available to the public, free of charge, via
its OpenCourseWare project, in 2002. YouTube started in 2005 and was bought by Google in 2006.
YouTube is increasingly being used for short educational clips that can be downloaded and integrated
into online courses. The Khan Academy started using YouTube in 2006 for recorded voice-over lectures
using a digital blackboard for equations and illustrations. Apple Inc. in 2007 created iTunesU to became
326 Chapter 7: Understanding technology in education

a portal or a site where videos and other digital materials on university teaching could be collected and
downloaded free of charge by end users.

   Until lecture capture arrived, learning management systems had integrated basic educational design
features, but this required instructors to redesign their classroom-based teaching to fit the LMS
environment. Lecture capture on the other hand required no changes to the standard lecture model, and
in a sense reverted back to primarily oral communication supported by Powerpoint or even writing
on a chalkboard. Thus oral communication remains as strong today in education as ever, but has been
incorporated into or accommodated by new technologies.

7.2.4 Computer technologies

7.2.4.1 Computer-based learning

In essence the development of programmed learning aims to computerize teaching, by structuring
information, testing learners' knowledge, and providing immediate feedback to learners, without human
intervention other than in the design of the hardware and software and the selection and loading of
content and assessment questions. B.F. Skinner started experimenting with teaching machines that made
use of programmed learning in 1954, based on the theory of behaviourism (see Chapter 2, Section 3).
Skinner's teaching machines were one of the first forms of computer-based learning. There has been a
recent revival of programmed learning approaches as a result of MOOCs, since machine based testing
scales much more easily than human-based assessment.

   PLATO was a generalized computer assisted instruction system originally developed at the University
of Illinois, and, by the late 1970s, comprised several thousand terminals worldwide on nearly a dozen
different networked mainframe computers. PLATO was a highly successful system, lasting almost 40
years, and incorporated key on-line concepts: forums, message boards, online testing, e-mail, chat
rooms, instant messaging, remote screen sharing, and multi-player games.

   Attempts to replicate the teaching process through artificial intelligence (AI) began in the mid-1980s,
with a focus initially on teaching arithmetic. Despite large investments of research in AI for teaching
over the last 30 years, the results generally have been disappointing. It has proved difficult for machines
to cope with the extraordinary variety of ways in which students learn (or fail to learn.) Recent
developments in cognitive science and neuroscience are being watched closely but at the time of writing
the gap is still great between the basic science, and analysing or predicting specific learning behaviours
from the science.

   More recently we have seen the development of adaptive learning, which analyses learners' responses
then re-directs them to the most appropriate content area, based on their performance. Learning
analytics, which also collects data about learner activities and relates them to other data, such as student
performance, is a related development. These developments will be discussed in further detail in Section
7.7.

7.2.4.2 Computer networking

Arpanet in the U.S.A was the first network to use the Internet protocol in 1982. In the late 1970s,
Murray Turoff and Roxanne Hiltz at the New Jersey Institute of Technology were experimenting
with blended learning, using NJIT's internal computer network. They combined classroom teaching
with online discussion forums, and termed this `computer-mediated communication' or CMC (Hiltz and
Turoff, 1978). At the University of Guelph in Canada, an off-the-shelf software system called CoSy
                                                                                                  7.2 A short history of educational technology 327

was developed in the 1980s that allowed for online threaded group discussion forums, a predecessor to
today's forums contained in learning management systems. In 1988, the Open University in the United
Kingdom offered a course, DT200, that as well as the OU's traditional media of printed texts, television
programs and audio-cassettes, also included an online discussion component using CoSy. Since this
course had 1,200 registered students, it was one of the earliest `mass' open online courses. We see then
the emerging division between the use of computers for automated or programmed learning, and the use
of computer networks to enable students and instructors to communicate with each other.

   The Word Wide Web was formally launched in 1991. The World Wide Web is basically an application
running on the Internet that enables `end-users' to create and link documents, videos or other digital
media, without the need for the end-user to transcribe everything into some form of computer code. The
first web browser, Mosaic, was made available in 1993. Before the Web, it required lengthy and time-
consuming methods to load text, and to find material on the Internet. Several Internet search engines
have been developed since 1993, with Google, created in 1999, emerging as one of the primary search
engines.

7.2.4.3 Online learning environments

In 1995, the Web enabled the development of the first learning management systems (LMSs), such as
WebCT (which later became Blackboard). LMSs provide an online teaching environment, where content
can be loaded and organized, as well as providing `spaces' for learning objectives, student activities,
assignment questions, and discussion forums. The first fully online courses (for credit) started to appear
in 1995, some using LMSs, others just loading text as PDFs or slides. The materials were mainly text
and graphics. LMSs became the main means by which online learning was offered until lecture capture
systems arrived around 2008.

   By 2008, George Siemens, Stephen Downes and Dave Cormier in Canada were using web technology
to create the first `connectivist' Massive Open Online Course (MOOC), a community of practice that
linked webinar presentations and/or blog posts by experts to participants' blogs and tweets, with just
over 2,000 enrollments. The courses were open to anyone and had no formal assessment. In 2012,
two Stanford University professors launched a lecture-capture based MOOC on artificial intelligence,
attracting more than 100,000 students, and since then MOOCs have expanded rapidly around the world.

7.2.5 Social media

Social media are really a sub-category of computer technology, but their development deserves a section
of its own in the history of educational technology. Social media cover a wide range of different
technologies, including blogs, wikis, You Tube videos, mobile devices such as phones and tablets,
Twitter, Skype and Facebook. Andreas Kaplan and Michael Haenlein (2010) define social media as

   a group of Internet-based applications that ...allow the creation and exchange of user-generated content, based
   on interactions among people in which they create, share or exchange information and ideas in virtual
   communities and networks.

Social media are strongly associated with young people and `millenials' - in other words, many of the
students in post-secondary education. At the time of writing social media are only just being integrated
into formal education, and to date their main educational value has been in non-formal education, such
as fostering online communities of practice, or around the edges of classroom teaching, such as `tweets'
328 Chapter 7: Understanding technology in education

during lectures or rating of instructors. It will be argued though in Chapters 8, 9 and 10 that they have
much greater potential for learning.

7.2.6 A paradigm shift

It can be seen that education has adopted and adapted technology over a long period of time. There
are some useful lessons to be learned from past developments in the use of technology for education,
in particular that many claims made for a newly emerging technology are likely to be neither true nor
new. Also new technology rarely completely replaces an older technology. Usually the old technology
remains, operating within a more specialised `niche', such as radio, or integrated as part of a richer
technology environment, such as video in the Internet.

   However, what distinguishes the digital age from all previous ages is the rapid pace of technology
development and our immersion in technology-based activities in our daily lives. Thus it is fair to
describe the impact of the Internet on education as a paradigm shift, at least in terms of educational
technology. We are still in the process of absorbing and applying the implications. The next section
attempts to pin down more closely the educational significance of different media and technologies.

                                                            Activity 7.2 What does history tell us?

      1. What constitutes an educational technology? How would you classify a recorded lecture from MIT that is
   accessed as an open educational resource? When is a technology educational and not just a technology?

      2. An early version of the Internet (Arpanet) existed long before 1990, but the combination of Internet
   protocols and the development of html and the World Wide Web were clearly a turning point in both
   telecommunications and education (at least for me). What then makes the Internet/the Web a paradigm shift?
   Or are they just an evolution, an orderly next step in the development of technology?

      3. Is writing a technology? Is a lecture a technology? Does it matter to decide this?
      4. The more sharp eyed or analytical of you may be asking questions about the categorization or definition
   of some of the technologies listed above (quite apart from the issue of how to deal with people as a means
   of communication). For instance computer-mediated communication (CMC) existed before the Internet (from
   1978 in fact), but isn't it an Internet technology? (It is now, but wasn't then.) How do social media differ from
   CMC? Does it make sense to distinguish television technologies such as broadcast, cable, satellite, DVDs or
   video-conferencing, and is this relevant any more? If so, what distinguishes them and what do they have in
   common from an educational perspective?
      These are some of the issues that will become clearer in the following sections.

References

Bates, A. (1984) Broadcasting in Education: An Evaluation London: Constables
   Hiltz, R. and Turoff, M. (1978) The Network Nation: Human Communication via Computer Reading

MA: Addison-Wesley
   Jamison, D. and Klees, S. (1973) The Cost of Instructional Radio and Television for Developing

Countries Stanford CA: Stanford University Institute for Communication Research
                                                                                                  7.2 A short history of educational technology 329

   Kaplan, A. and Haenlein, M. (2010), Users of the world, unite! The challenges and opportunities of
social media, Business Horizons, Vol. 53, No. 1, pp. 59-68

   Manguel, A. (1996) A History of Reading London: Harper Collins
   Robinson, J. (1982) Broadcasting Over the Air London: BBC (out of print)
   Saettler, P. (1990) The Evolution of American Educational Technology Englewood CO: Libraries
Unlimited
   Selwood, D. (2014) What does the Rosetta Stone tell us about the Bible? Did Moses read hieroglyphs?
The Telegraph, July 15
7.3 Media or technology?

Figure 7.3.1 A book: medium or technology?

7.3.1. Defining media and technology
Philosophers and scientists have argued about the nature of media and technologies over a very long
period. The distinction is challenging because in everyday language use, we tend to use these two terms
interchangeably. For instance, television is often referred to as both a medium and a technology. Is the
Internet a medium or a technology? And does it matter?

   I will argue that there are differences, and it does matter to distinguish between media and technology,
especially if we are looking for guidelines on when and how to use them. There is a danger, particularly
in education, in looking too much at the raw technology, and not enough at the personal, social and
cultural contexts in which we use technology. The terms `media' and `technology' represent different
ways altogether of thinking about the choice and use of technology in teaching and learning.

                                                                   331
332 Chapter 7: Understanding technology in education

7.3.2 Technology

There are many definitions of technology (see Wikipedia for a good discussion of this). Essentially
definitions of technology range from the basic notion of tools, to systems which employ or exploit
technologies. Thus

         · `technology refers to tools and machines that may be used to solve real-world problems` is a
            simple definition;

         · `the current state of humanity's knowledge of how to combine resources to produce desired
            products, to solve problems, fulfill needs, or satisfy wants` is a more complex and grandiose
            definition (and has a smugness about it that I think is undeserved - technology often does the
            opposite of satisfy wants, for instance.).

In terms of educational technology we have to consider a broad definition of technology. The technology
of the Internet involves more than just a collection of tools, but a system that combines computers,
telecommunications, software and rules and procedures or protocols. However, I baulk at the very broad
definition of the `current state of humanity's knowledge`. Once a definition begins to encompass many
different aspects of life it becomes unwieldy and ambiguous.

   I tend to think of technology in education as things or tools used to support teaching and learning.
Thus computers, software programs such as a learning management system, or a transmission or
communications network, are all technologies. A printed book is a technology. Technology often
includes a combination of tools with particular technical links that enable them to work as a technology
system, such as the telephone network or the Internet.

   However, for me, technologies or even technological systems do not of themselves communicate or
create meaning. They just sit there until commanded to do something or until they are activated or until
a person starts to interact with the technology. At this point, we start to move into media.
                                                                                                                              7.3 Media or technology? 333

                     Figure 7.3.2 Don't just sit there - DO something!
                     Image: © Alex Dawson, Flickr, 2006

7.3.3 Media
Media (plural of medium) is another word that has many definitions.

   The word `medium' comes from the Latin, meaning in the middle (a median) and also that which
intermediates or interprets. Media require an active act of creation of content and/or communication, and
someone who receives and understands the communication, as well as the technologies that carry the
medium.

   The term `media' has two distinct meanings relevant for teaching and learning, both of which are
different from definitions of technology

7.3.3.1 Media linked to senses and `meaning'.

We use our senses, such as sound and sight, to interpret media. In this sense, we can consider text,
graphics, audio and video as media `channels', in that they intermediate ideas and images that convey
meaning. Every interaction we have with media, in this sense, is an interpretation of reality, and again
usually involves some form of human intervention, such as writing (for text), drawing or design for
graphics, talking, scripting or recording for audio and video. Note that there are two types of intervention
in media: by the `creator' who constructs information, and by the `receiver', who must also interpret it.

   Media of course depend on technology, but technology is only one element of media. Thus we can
think of the Internet as merely a technological system, or as a medium that contains unique formats and
symbol systems that help convey meaning and knowledge. These formats, symbol systems and unique
characteristics of a particular medium (e.g. the 280 character limit in Twitter) are deliberately created
334 Chapter 7: Understanding technology in education

and need to be interpreted by both creators and end users. Furthermore, at least with the Internet, people
can be at the same time both creators and interpreters of knowledge.

   Computing can also be considered a medium in this context. I use the term computing, not computers,
since although computing uses computers, computing involves some kind of intervention, construction
and interpretation. Computing as a medium would include coding, animations, online social networking,
using a search engine, or designing and using simulations. Thus Google uses a search engine as its
primary technology, but I classify Google as a medium, since it needs content and content providers,
and an end user who defines the parameters of the search, in addition to the technology of computer
algorithms to assist the search. Thus the creation, communication and interpretation of meaning are
added features that turn a technology into a medium.

   In terms of representing knowledge it is useful to think of the following media for educational
purposes within which there are sub-systems (only some examples given):

         · Text: textbooks, novels, poems

         · Graphics: diagrams, photographs, drawings, posters, graffiti

         · Audio: sounds, speech, podcasts, radio programs

         · Video and film: television programs, movies, YouTube clips, `talking heads'

         · Computing: animation, simulations, online discussion forums, virtual worlds.

Furthermore, within these sub-systems there are ways of influencing communication through the use of
unique symbol systems, such as story lines and use of characters in novels, composition in photography,
voice modulation to create effects in audio, cutting and editing in film and television, and the design of
user interfaces or web pages in computing. The study of the relationship between these different symbol
systems and the interpretation of meaning is a whole field of study in itself, called semiotics.

   In education we could think of classroom teaching as a medium. Technology or tools are used (e.g.
chalk and blackboards, or Powerpoint and a projector) but the key component is the intervention of
the teacher and the interaction with the learners in real time and in a fixed time and place. We can
also then think of online teaching as a different medium, with computers, the Internet (in the sense
of the communication network) and a learning management system as core technologies, but it is the
interaction between teachers, learners and online resources within the unique context of the Internet that
are the essential component of online learning.

   From an educational perspective, it is important to understand that media are not neutral or `objective'
in how they convey knowledge. They can be designed or used in such a way as to influence (for good
or bad) the interpretation of meaning and hence our understanding. Some knowledge therefore of how
media work is essential for teaching in a digital age. In particular we need to know how best to design
and apply media (rather than technology) to facilitate learning.

   Over time, media have become more complex, with newer media (e.g. television) incorporating some
of the components of earlier media (e.g. audio) as well as adding another medium (video). Digital
media and the Internet increasingly are incorporating and integrating all previous media, such as text,
audio, and video, and adding new media components, such as animation, simulation, and interactivity.
When digital media incorporate many of these components they become `rich media'. Thus one major
advantage of the Internet is that it encompasses all the representational media of text, graphics, audio,
video and computing.
                                7.3 Media or technology? 335

7.3.3.2 Media as organisations

The second meaning of media is broader and refers to the industries or significant areas of human
activity that are organized around particular technologies, for instance film and movies, television,
publishing, and the Internet. Within these different media are particular ways of representing, organizing
and communicating knowledge.

   Thus for instance within television there are different formats, such as news, documentaries, game
shows, action programs, while in publishing there are novels, newspapers, comics, biographies, and
so on. Sometimes the formats overlap but even then there are symbol systems within a medium that
distinguish it from other media. For instance in movies there are cuts, fades, close-ups, and other
techniques that are markedly different from those in other media. All these features of media bring with
them their own conventions and assist or change the way meaning is extracted or interpreted.

   Lastly, there is a strong cultural context to media organisations. For instance, Schramm (1972) found
that broadcasters often have a different set of professional criteria and ways of assessing `quality' in an
educational broadcast from those of educators (which made my job of evaluating the programs the BBC
made for the Open University very interesting). Today, this professional `divide' can be seen between
the differences between computer scientists and educators in terms of values and beliefs with regard to
the use of technology for teaching. At its crudest, it comes down to issues of control: who is in charge of
using technology for teaching? Who makes the decisions about the design of a MOOC or the use of an
animation?

7.3.4 The affordances of media
336 Chapter 7: Understanding technology in education

                      Figure 7.3.3 Graphs can represent, in a different way, the same concepts as
                      written descriptions or formulae. Understanding the same thing in different ways
                      generally leads to deeper understanding.
                      Image: © Open University 2013

   Different media have different educational effects or affordances. If you just transfer the same
teaching to a different medium, you fail to exploit the unique characteristics of that medium. Put more
positively, you can do different and often better teaching by adapting it to the medium. That way
students will learn more deeply and effectively. To illustrate this, let's look at an example from early on
in my career as a researcher in educational media.

7.3.4.1 A personal story

In 1969, I was appointed as a research officer at the Open University in the United Kingdom. At this
point the university had just received its royal charter. I was the 20th member of staff appointed. My
job was to research into the pilot programs being offered by the National Extension College, which was
delivering low cost non-credit distance education programs in partnership with the BBC. The NEC was
`modelling' the kind of integrated multimedia courses, consisting of a mix of print and broadcast radio
and TV, that were to be offered by the Open University when it started.

   My colleague and I sent out questionnaires by mail on a weekly basis to students taking
the NEC courses. The questionnaire contained both pre-coded responses, and the opportunity for open-
ended comments, and asked students for their responses to the print and broadcast components of the
courses. We were looking for what worked and what didn't work in designing multimedia distance
education courses.
                                                                                                                              7.3 Media or technology? 337

   When I started analyzing the questionnaires, I was struck particularly by the `open-ended' comments
in response to the television and radio broadcasts. Responses to the printed components tended to be
`cool': rational, calm, critical, constructive. The responses to the broadcasts were the opposite: `hot',
emotional, strongly supportive or strongly critical or even hostile, and rarely critically constructive.
Something was going on here.

7.3.4.2 Findings from the research: how media differ

The initial discovery that different media affected students differently came very quickly, but it took
longer to discover in what ways media are different, and even longer why, but here are some of the
discoveries made by my colleagues and me in the Audio-Visual Media Research Group at the OU
(Bates, 1984):

         · the BBC producers (all of whom had a degree in the subject area in which they were making
            programs) thought about knowledge differently from the academics with whom they were
            working. In particular, they tended to think more visually and more concretely about the
            subject matter. Thus they tended to make programs that showed concrete examples of
            concepts or principles in the texts, applications of principles, or how academic concepts
            worked in real life. Academic learning is about abstraction and higher order levels of
            thinking. However, abstract concepts are better understood if they can be related to concrete
            or empirical experiences, from which, indeed, abstract concepts are often drawn. The
            television programs enabled learners to move backwards and forwards between the abstract
            and the concrete. Where this was well designed, it really helped a large number of students -
            but not all;

         · students responded very differently to the TV programs in particular. Some loved them, some
            hated them, and few were indifferent. The ones that hated them wanted the programs to be
            didactic and repeat or reinforce what was in the printed texts. Interestingly though the TV-
            haters tended to get lower grades or even fail in the final course exam. The ones that loved
            the TV programs tended to get higher grades. They were able to see how the programs
            illustrated the principles in the texts, and the programs `stretched' these students to think
            more widely or critically about the topics in the course. The exception was math, where
            borderline students found the TV programs most helpful;

         · the BBC producers rarely used talking heads or TV lectures. With radio and later audio-
            cassettes, some producers and academics integrated the audio with texts, for instance in
            mathematics, using a radio program and later audio-cassettes to talk the students through
            equations or formulae in the printed text (similar to Khan Academy lectures today on video);

         · using television and radio to develop higher level learning is a skill that can be taught. In the
            initial foundation (first year) social science course (D100), many of the programs were made
            in a typical BBC documentary style. Although the programs were accompanied by extensive
            broadcast notes that attempted to link the broadcasts to the academic texts, many students
            struggled with these programs. When the course was remade five years later a distinguished
            academic (Stuart Hall) was used as an `anchor' for all the programs. The first few programs
            were somewhat like lectures, but in each program Stuart Hall introduced more and more
            visual clips and helped students analyze each clip. By the end of the course the programs
338 Chapter 7: Understanding technology in education

            were almost entirely in the documentary format. Students rated the remade programs much
            higher and used examples from the TV programs much more in their assignments and exams
            for the remade course.

7.3.4.3 Why are these findings significant?

At the time (and for many years afterwards) researchers such as Richard Clark (1983) argued that
`proper', scientific research showed no significant difference between the use of different media. In
particular, there were no differences between classroom teaching and other media such as television or
radio or satellite. Even today, we are getting similar findings regarding online learning (e.g. Means et al.,
2010).

   However, this is because the research methodology that is used by researchers for such comparative
studies requires the two conditions being compared to be the same, except for the medium being used
(called matched comparisons, or sometimes quasi-experimental studies). Typically, for the comparison
to be scientifically rigorous, if you gave lectures in class, then you had to compare lectures on television.
If you used another television format, such as a documentary, you were not comparing like with
like. Since the classroom was used as the base, for comparison, you had to strip out all the affordances
of television - what it could do better than a lecture - in order to compare it. Indeed Clark argued that
when differences in learning were found between the two conditions, the differences were a result of
using a different pedagogy in the non-classroom medium.

   The critical point is that different media can be used to assist learners to learn in different ways and
achieve different outcomes. In one sense, researchers such as Clark were right: the teaching methods
matter, but different media can more easily support different ways of learning than others. In our
example, a documentary TV program aims at developing the skills of analysis and the application or
recognition of theoretical constructs, whereas a classroom lecture is more focused on getting students
to understand and correctly recall the theoretical constructs. Thus requiring the television program to
be judged by the same assessment methods as for the classroom lecture unfairly measures the potential
value of the TV program. In this example, it may be better to use both methods: didactic teaching to
teach understanding, then a documentary approach to apply that understanding. (Note that a television
program could do both, but the classroom lecture could not.)

   Perhaps even more important is the idea that many media are better than one. This allows learners
with different preferences for learning to be accommodated, and to allow subject matter to be taught in
different ways through different media, thus leading to deeper understanding or a wider range of skills
in using content. On the other hand, this increases costs.

7.3.5 How do these findings apply to digital learning?

Digital learning can incorporate a range of different media: text, graphics, audio, video, animation,
simulations. We need to understand better the affordances of each medium within the Internet, and
use them differently but in an integrated way so as to develop deeper knowledge, and a wider range
of learning outcomes and skills. The use of different media also allows for more individualization and
personalization of the learning, better suiting learners with different learning styles and needs. Most of
all, we should stop trying merely to move classroom teaching to other media such as MOOCs, and start
designing digital learning so its full potential can be exploited.
                                                                     7.3 Media or technology? 339

7.3.6 Implications for education

If we are interested in selecting appropriate technologies for teaching and learning, we should not just
look at the technical features of a technology, nor even the wider technology system in which it is
located, nor even the educational beliefs we bring as a classroom teacher. We also need to examine the
unique features of different media, in terms of their formats, symbols systems, and cultural values. These
unique features are increasingly referred to as the affordances of media or technology.

   The concept of media is much `softer' and `richer' than that of `technology', more open to
interpretation and harder to define, but `media' is a useful concept, in that it can also incorporate the
inclusion of face-to-face communication as a medium. Another reason to distinguish between media and
technology is to recognise that technology on its own does not of itself lead to the transfer of meaning .

   As new technologies are developed, and are incorporated into media systems, old formats and
approaches are carried over from older to newer media. Education is no exception. New technology is
`accommodated' to old formats, as with clickers and lecture capture, or we try to create the classroom
in virtual space, as with learning management systems. However, new formats, symbols systems and
organizational structures that exploit the unique characteristics of the Internet as a medium are gradually
being discovered. It is sometimes difficult to see these unique characteristics clearly at this point in time.
However, e-portfolios, mobile learning, open educational resources such as animations or simulations,
and self-managed learning in large, online social groups are all examples of ways in which we are
gradually developing the unique `affordances' of the Internet.

   More significantly, it is likely to be a major mistake to use computers to replace or substitute
for humans in the educational process, given the need to create and interpret meaning when using
media, at least until computers have much greater facility to recognize, understand and apply semantics,
value systems, and organizational features, which are all important components of `reading' different
media. But at the same time it is equally a mistake to rely only on the symbol systems, cultural
values and organizational structures of classroom teaching as the means of judging the effectiveness or
appropriateness of the Internet as an educational medium.

   Thus we need a much better understanding of the strengths and limitations of different media for
teaching purposes if we are successfully to select the right medium for the job. However, given the
widely different contextual factors influencing learning, the task of media and technology selection
becomes infinitely complex. This is why it has proved impossible to develop simple algorithms or
decision trees for effective decision making in this area. Nevertheless, there are some guidelines that can
be used for identifying the best use of different media within an Internet-dependent society. To develop
such guidelines we need to explore in particular the unique educational affordances of text, audio, video
and computing, which is the next task of this chapter.

                                  Activity 6.3 Media or technology?

   1. Do you find the distinction between media and technology helpful? If so, how would you classify the
following (medium or technology):

           · newspaper
           · printing press
           · television program
340 Chapter 7: Understanding technology in education

              · Netflix
              · classroom
              · MOOC
              · discussion forum

      2. Do you think that knowledge becomes something different when represented by different media? For
   instance, does an animation of a mathematical function represent something different from a written or printed
   equation of the same function? Which is the most `mathematical': the formula or the animation?

      3. What in your view makes the Internet unique from a teaching perspective, or is it just old wine in new
   bottles?

      4. Text has publishers and newspaper corporations, audio has radio stations, and video has both television
   companies and YouTube. Is there a comparable organization for the Internet or is it not really a medium in the
   sense of publishing, radio or television?

      For feedback on this activity, click on the podcast below:

                           An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                        https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=178

More reading

Bates, A. (1984) Broadcasting in Education: An Evaluation London: Constables
   Bates, A. (2012) Pedagogical roles for video in online learning, Online Learning and Distance

Education Resources
   Clark, R. (1983) `Reconsidering research on learning from media' Review of Educational Research,

Vol. 53, pp. 445-459
   Kozma, R. (1994) `Will Media Influence Learning? Reframing the Debate', Educational Technology

Research and Development, Vol. 42, No. 2, pp. 7-19
   Means, B. et al. (2009) Evaluation of Evidence-Based Practices in Online Learning: A Meta-Analysis

and Review of Online Learning Studies Washington, DC: US Department of Education
(http://www.ed.gov/rschstat/eval/tech/evidence-based-practices/finalreport.pdf)

   Russell, T. L. (1999) The No Significant Difference Phenomenon Raleigh, NC: North Carolina State
University, Office of Instructional Telecommunication

   Schramm, W. (1972) Quality in Instructional Television Honolulu HA: University Press of Hawaii
   If you want to go deeper into the definitions of and differences between media and technology, you
might want to read any of the following:
   Bates, A. (2011) Marshall McLuhan and his relevance to teaching with technology, Online learning
and distance education resources, July 20 (for a list of McLuhan references as well as a discussion of
his relevance)
   Guhlin, M. (2011) Education Experiment Ends,Around the Corner - MGuhlin.org, September 22
                                                                                                                          7.3 Media or technology? 341

LinkedIn: Media and Learning Discussion Group
Salomon, G. (1979) Interaction of Media, Cognition and Learning San Francisco: Jossey Bass
7.4 Assessing media affordances: the SAMR model

Figure 7.4 The SAMR model Image: Ruben Puentedura

7.4.1 Exploiting the affordances of a medium
It was noted in the previous section that video technology can be used as a straight replacement for a
face-to-face lecture by merely substituting the face-to-face delivery with online delivery. The mode of
delivery has changed but not the pedagogy. The full affordances of the medium of video have not been
exploited.

   On the other hand, using video to show a documentary can bring powerful examples of situations

                                                                   343
344 Chapter 7: Understanding technology in education

to which can be applied the ideas and concepts covered in an academic course. A documentary thus
has the potential to make better use of the affordances of video than recording a lecture because the
learning experience from watching a documentary is different from watching a lecture; at the same time,
using a documentary video will require a different approach to teaching than using a lecture and will
probably have different outcomes. With the video lecture students will focus on comprehension and
understanding; with the documentary the students' focus will be on analysing and critiquing the material.

7.4.2 The SAMR model

A good way to assess whether a particular application of media or technology is making full use of the
affordances of a medium is to apply the SAMR model developed by Dr. Ruben Puentedura, a technology
consultant based in the USA.

   Puentedura suggests four `levels' of technology application in education:

         · substitution: a direct tool substitute, with no functional change, for example, a video
            recording of a classroom lecture on water quality, made available for downloading by
            students; students are assessed on the content of the lecture by written exams at the end of the
            course.

         · augmentation: a direct tool substitute, with functional improvement, for example, the video
            lecture is embedded in an LMS, and edited into four sections, with online multiple-choice
            questions at the end of each section for students to answer.

         · modification: significant task redesign, for example, the instructor provides video recordings
            of water being tested, and asks students to analyse each of the recordings in terms of the
            principles taught in the course in the form of essay-type questions that are assessed.

         · redefinition: creation of new tasks, inconceivable without the use of technology, for example,
            the instructor provides readings and online guidance through the LMS, and students are asked
            to record with their mobile phones how they selected samples of water for testing quality, and
            integrate their findings and analysis in the form of an e-portfolio of their work.

In the first two levels, substitution and augmentation, video is used to enhance the method of teaching
but it is only where video is used in the final two stages, modification and redefinition, that teaching is
actually transformed. Significantly, Puentedura links the modification and transformation levels to the
development of Bloom's higher order '21st century' skills such as analysis, evaluation and creativity
(Puentedura, 2014). For a more detailed description of the model and how it works, see the video:
Introduction to the SAMR model.

7.4.3 Strengths and limitations of the model

First, I was unable to find any research that validated this model. It has a powerful feel of common sense
behind it, but it would be good to see it more empirically validated, although there are many examples of
its actual use, particularly in teacher education in the k-12 sector (you can find some examples collected
by Kelly Walsh here. For a more critical response to the SAMR model, see Linderoth, 2013).

   Second, while the model is a useful means of evaluating whether a use of technology merely enhances
or radically changes teaching, it doesn't help much with the hard part, and that is imagining the
                                                                                           7.4 Assessing media affordances: the SAMR model 345

transformative ways in which a technology could be used in the first place. Nevertheless it is a good
heuristic device to get you to think about the best way to use technology in teaching.

   Third, there will be situations where substitution and augmentation will still be a perfectly justifiable
use of technology, for instance for students with disabilities, or to increase accessibility to learning
materials.

   On balance, it is a very useful model by which an instructor can evaluate a potential or actual use of
technology. In particular it focuses on the way students will need to interact with the technology and the
ways technology can be used to assist the development of 21st century skills. At the same time, we still
need to understand how and why media and technology could be used to transform teaching in the first
place. The first step then is to understand better the unique properties of different technologies, which is
the subject of the next section.

References

Linderoth, J. (2013) Open letter to Dr. Ruben Puentedura Spelvetenskapliga betraktelser, 17 October
   Puentedura, R. (2014) SAMR and Bloom's Taxonomy: Assembling the Puzzle common sense

education, September 24

                                                    Activity 7.4: Assessing the SAMR model

             1. If you are using any technology in your teaching, where does it fit in the SAMR framework in
                 comparison with in-person teacher-student interaction? What could you change to make the
                 technology `move up the ladder'?

             2. Do you have to exploit fully the affordances of a medium? If so, why?
      For feedback on this activity, click on the podcast below

                           An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                        https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=1237
7.5 Broadcast vs communicative media

Figure 7.5 The teacher is the lighter-coloured symbol

7.5.1 Key media characteristics
It will help clarify the possible benefits or weaknesses for education of each medium if we understand
the characteristics or affordances of each medium. To do this we need to identify where media have
common or different features.

   There is a wide range of media characteristics or affordances that we could look at, but I will focus on
three that are particularly important for education:

                                                                   347
348 Chapter 7: Understanding technology in education

         · whether media are broadcast (one-way) or communicative (two way);

         · whether media are synchronous or asynchronous, including live (transient) or recorded
            (permanent);

         · whether media are single or rich.

We shall see that these characteristics are more dimensional than discrete states, and different media will
fit at different points on these dimensions, but the exact point on the continuum will depend to some
extent on the way they are designed or used. In this section I will focus on the broadcast/communicative
dimension. The other two characteristics will be discussed in subsequent sections

7.5.2 Broadcast or communicative media

A major structural distinction is between `broadcast' media that are primarily one-to-many and one-
way, and those media that are primarily many-to-many or `communicative', allowing for two-way or
multiple communication connections. Communicative media include those that give equal `power' of
communication between multiple end users.

7.5.2.1 Broadcast media

Television, radio and print for example are primarily broadcast or one-way media, as end users or
`recipients' cannot change the `message' (although they may interpret it differently or choose to ignore
it). Note that it does not matter really what delivery technology (terrestrial broadcast, satellite, cable,
DVD, Internet) is used for television, it remains a `broadcast' or one-way medium. Some Internet
technologies are also primarily one way. For instance, an institutional web site is primarily a one-way
technology.

   One advantage of broadcast media and technologies is that they ensure a common standard of learning
materials for all students. This is particularly important in countries where teachers are poorly qualified
or of variable quality. Also one-way broadcast media enable the organization to control and manage
the information that is being transmitted, ensuring quality control over content. Broadcasting media and
technologies are more likely to be favoured by those with an `objectivist' approach to teaching and
learning, since the `correct' knowledge can be transmitted to everyone receiving the instruction. One
disadvantage is that additional resources are needed to provide interaction with teachers or between
learners.

7.5.2.2 Communicative media

The telephone, video-conferencing, e-mail, online discussion forums, most social media and the Internet
are examples of communicative media or technologies, in that all users can communicate and interact
with each other, and in theory at least have equal power in technology terms. The educational
significance of communicative media is that they allow for interaction between learners and teachers,
and perhaps even more significantly, between a learner and other learners, without the participants
needing to be present in the same place.

7.5.2.3 Which is which?

This dimension is not a rigid one, with necessarily clear or unambiguous classifications. Increasingly,
                                                                                                           7.5 Broadcast vs communicative media 349

technologies are becoming more complex, and able to serve a wide range of functions. In particular
the Internet is not so much a single medium as an integrating framework for many different media
and technologies with different and often opposite characteristics. Furthermore, most technologies are
somewhat flexible in that they can be used in different ways. However, if we stretch a technology too
far, for instance trying to make a broadcast medium such as an xMOOC also more communicative,
stresses are likely to occur. So I find the dimension still useful, so long as we are not dogmatic about the
characteristics of individual media or technologies. This means though looking at each case separately.

   Thus I see a learning management system as primarily a broadcast or one-way technology, although
it has features such as discussion forums that allow for some forms of multi-way communication.
However, it could be argued that the communication functions in an LMS require additional
technologies, such as a discussion forum, that just happen to be plugged in to or embedded within the
LMS, which is primarily a database with a cool interface. We shall see that in practice we often have to
combine technologies if we want the full range of functions required in education, and this adds cost and
complexity.

   Web sites can vary on where they are placed on this dimension, depending on their design. For
instance, an airline web site, while under the full control of the company, has interactive features
that allow you to find flights, book flights, reserve seats, and hence, while you may not be able to
`communicate' or change the site, you can at least interact with it and to some extent personalize it.
However, you cannot change the page showing the choice of flights. This is why I prefer to talk about
dimensions. An airline web site that allows end user interaction is less of a broadcast medium. However
it is not a `pure' communicative medium either. The power is not equal between the airline and the
customer, because the airline controls the site.

   It should be noted too that some social media (e.g. YouTube and blogs) are also more of a broadcast
than a communicative medium, whereas other social media use mainly communicative technologies
with some broadcast features (for example, personal information on a Facebook page). A wiki is
clearly more of a `communicative' medium. Again though it needs to be emphasized that intentional
intervention by teachers, designers or users of a technology can influence where on the dimension some
technologies will be, although there comes a point where the characteristic is so strong that it is difficult
to change significantly without introducing other technologies.

   The role of the teacher or instructor also tends to be very different when using broadcast or
communicative media. In broadcast media, the role of the teacher is central, in that content is chosen
and often delivered by the instructor. xMOOCs are an excellent example. However, in communicative
media, while the instructor's role may still be central, as in online collaborative learning or seminars,
there are learning contexts where there may be no identified `central' teacher, with contributions coming
from all or many members of the community, as in communities of practice or cMOOCs.

   Thus it can be seen that `power' is an important aspect of this dimension. What `power' does
the end-user or student have in controlling a particular medium or technology? If we look at this
from an historical perspective, we have seen a great expansion of technologies in recent years that
give increasing power to the end user. The move towards more communicative media and away from
broadcast media then has profound implications for education (as for society at large).

7.5.3 Applying the dimension to educational media

We can also apply this analysis to non-technological means of communication, or `media', such
as classroom teaching. Lectures have broadcast characteristics, whereas a small seminar group has
350 Chapter 7: Understanding technology in education

communicative characteristics. In Figure 7.5.3, I have placed some common technologies, classroom
media and online media along the broadcast/communicative continuum.

Figure 7.5.3 The continuum of knowledge dissemination

   When doing this exercise, it is important to note that:
         · there is no general normative or evaluative judgement about the continuum. Broadcasting is
            an excellent way of getting information in a consistent form to a large number of people;
            interactive communication works well when all members of a group have something equal to
            contribute to the process of knowledge development and dissemination. The judgement of the
            appropriateness of the medium or technology will very much depend on the context, and in
            particular the resources available and the general philosophy of teaching to be applied;
         · where a particular medium or technology is placed on the continuum will depend to some
            extent on the actual design, use or application. For instance, if the lecturer talks for 45
            minutes and allows 10 minutes for discussion, an interactive lecture might be further towards
            broadcasting than if the lecture session is more of a question and answer session;
         · I have placed `computers' in the middle of the continuum. They can be used as a broadcast
                                                                                                           7.5 Broadcast vs communicative media 351

            medium, such as for programmed learning, or they can be used to support communicative
            uses, such as online discussion. Their actual placement on the continuum therefore will
            depend on how we choose to use computers in education;

         · the important decision from a teaching perspective is deciding on the desired balance
            between `broadcasting' and `discussion' or communication. That should then be one factor in
            driving decisions about the choice of appropriate technologies;

         · the continuum is a heuristic device to enable a teacher to think about what medium or
            technology will be most appropriate within any given context, and not a firm analysis of
            where different types of educational media or technology belong on the continuum.

Thus where a medium or technology `fits' best on a continuum of broadcast vs communicative is one
factor to be considered when making decisions about media or technology for teaching and learning.

                                                          Activity 7.5 Broadcast or communicative?

      From the list below:

              · a blog
              · online collaborative learning
              · Twitter
              · virtual worlds
              · a podcast
              · an open textbook
      1. Determine which is a medium and which a technology, or which could be both, and under what
   conditions.
      2. Decide where, from your experience, each medium or technology should be placed on Figure 7.5.3. Write
   down why.
      3. Which were easy to categorize and which difficult?
      4. How useful is this continuum in making decisions about which medium or technology to use in your
   teaching? What would help you to decide?

      My analysis can be accessed by clicking here.
7.6 The time and space dimensions of media

                      Figure 7.6.1 Audio cassettes are a recorded, asynchronous technology

   Different media and technologies operate differently over space and time. These dimensions are
important for both facilitating or inhibiting learning, and for limiting or enabling more flexibility for
learners. There are actually two closely related dimensions here:

         · `live' or recorded
         · synchronous or asynchronous
7.6.1 Live or recorded
These are fairly obvious in their meaning. Live media by definition are face-to-face events, such as
lectures, seminars, and one-on-one face-to-face tutorials. A `live' event requires everyone to be present
at the same place and time as everyone else. This could be a rock concert, a sports event or a lecture.
Live events, such as for instance a seminar, work well when personal relations are important, such as
building trust, or for challenging attitudes or positions that are emotionally or strongly held (either by
students or instructors.) The main educational advantage of a live lecture is that it may have a strong
emotive quality that inspires or encourages learners beyond the actual transmission of knowledge, or
may provide an emotional `charge' that may help students shift from previously held positions. Live
events, by definition, are transient. They may be well remembered, but they cannot be repeated, or if

                                                                   353
354 Chapter 7: Understanding technology in education

they are, it will be a different experience or a different audience. Thus there is a strong qualitative or
affective element about live events.

   Recorded media on the other hand are permanently available to those possessing the recording,
such as a video-cassette or an audio-cassette. Books and other print formats are also recorded media. The
key educational significance of recorded media is that students can access the same learning material an
unlimited number of times, and at times that are convenient for the learner.

   Live events of course can also be recorded, but as anyone who has watched a live sports
event compared to a recording of the same event knows, the experience is different, with usually a lesser
emotional charge when watching a recording (especially if you already know the result). Thus one
might think of `live' events as `hot' and recorded events as `cool.' Recorded media can of course be
emotionally moving, such as a good novel, but the experience is different from actually taking part in
the events described.

7.6.2 Synchronous or asynchronous

Synchronous technologies require all those participating in the communication to participate together, at
the same time, but not necessarily in the same place.

   Thus live events are one example of synchronous media, but unlike live events, technology enables
synchronous learning without everyone having to be in the same place, although everyone does have to
participate in the event at the same time. A video-conference or a webinar are examples of synchronous
technologies which may be broadcast `live', but not with everyone in the same place. Other synchronous
technologies are television or radio broadcasts. You have to be `there' at the time of transmission, or you
miss them. However, the `there' may be somewhere different from where the teacher is.

   Asynchronous technologies enable participants to access information or communicate at different
points of time, usually at the time and place of choice of the participant. All recorded media are
asynchronous. Books, DVDs, on-demand You Tube videos, lectures recorded through lecture capture
and available for streaming on demand, and online discussion forums are all asynchronous media or
technologies. Learners can log on or access these technologies at times and the place of their own
choosing.

   Figure 7.6.2 illustrates the main differences between media in terms of different combinations of time
and place.
                                                                                                   7.6 The time and space dimensions of media 355

Figure 7.6.2 The separation of teachers/instructors from learners by time and space

7.6.3 Why does this matter?
Overall there are huge educational benefits associated with asynchronous or recorded media, because the
ability to access information or communicate at any time offers the learner more control and flexibility.
The educational benefits have been confirmed in a number of studies. For instance, Means et al. (2010)
found that students did better on blended learning because they spent more time on task, because the
online materials were always available to the students.

   Research at the Open University found that students much preferred to listen to radio broadcasts
recorded on cassette than to the actual broadcast, even though the content and format was identical
(Grundin, 1981; Bates at al., 1981). However, even greater benefits were found when the format of the
audio was changed to take advantage of the control characteristics of cassettes (stop, replay). It was
found that students learned more from `designed' cassettes than from cassette recordings of broadcasts,
especially when the cassettes were co-ordinated or integrated with visual material, such as text or
graphics. This was particularly valuable, for instance, in talking students through mathematical formulae
(Durbridge, 1983).

   This research underlines the importance of changing design as one moves from synchronous to
asynchronous technologies. Thus we can predict that although there are benefits in recording live
lectures through lecture capture in terms of flexibility and access, or having readings available at any
356 Chapter 7: Understanding technology in education

time or place, the learning benefits would be even greater if the lecture or text was redesigned for
asynchronous use, with built-in activities such as tests and feedback, and points for students to stop the
lecture and do some research or extra reading, then returning to the teaching.

   The ability to access learning materials on demand (recorded lectures or webinars, learning
management systems, web sites, social media) is particularly important for increasing access and
flexibility for learners, especially those working as well as studying, for those with young families, or
for students with long commutes. Thus there should be clearly justified pedagogical benefits that could
not be provided by the use of technology if students must be present either in the same place or at the
same time as an instructor. In particular, what are the social or pedagogical reasons why students should
come to the school or campus or be present at a set time when so much teaching and learning can now
be done asynchronously?

   The ability to access media asynchronously through recorded and streamed materials is one of the
biggest changes in the history of teaching, but the dominant paradigm in higher education is still the live
lecture or seminar. There are, as we have seen, some advantages in live media, and direct inter-personal
contact, but they need to be used more selectively to exploit their unique advantages or affordances.

7.6.4 The significance of the Internet

Broadcast/communicative and synchronous/asynchronous are two separate dimensions. By placing them
in a matrix design, we can then assign different technologies to different quadrants, as in Figure
7.6.4 below. (I have included only a few - you may want to place other technologies on this diagram):
                                                                                                   7.6 The time and space dimensions of media 357

Figure 7.6.4 The significance of the Internet in terms of media characteristics

   Why the Internet is so important is that it is an encompassing medium that embraces all these other
media and technologies, thus offering immense possibilities for teaching and learning. This enables
us, if we wish, to be very specific about how we design our teaching, so that we can exploit all the
characteristics or dimensions of technology to fit almost any learning context through this one medium.
7.6.5 Conclusion
It should be noted at this stage that although I have identified some strengths and weaknesses of the
four characteristics of broadcast/communicative, and synchronous/asynchronous media, we still need
an evaluative framework for deciding when to use or combine different technologies. This means
developing criteria that will enable us to decide within specific contexts the optimum choice of
technologies.
References
Bates, A. (1981) `Some unique educational characteristics of television and some implications for
teaching or learning` Journal of Educational Television Vol. 7, No.3
358 Chapter 7: Understanding technology in education

   Durbridge, N. (1983) Design implications of audio and video cassettes Milton Keynes: Open
University Institute of Educational Technology (out of print)

   Grundin, H. (1981) Open University Broadcasting Times and their Impact on Students' Viewing/
Listening Milton Keynes: The Open University Institute of Educational Technology (out of print)

   Means, B. et al. (2009) Evaluation of Evidence-Based Practices in Online Learning: A Meta-Analysis
and Review of Online Learning Studies Washington, DC: US Department of Education

                                                  Activity 7.6 Time and space dimensions of technology

      1. Does this categorization of technologies make sense to you?
      2. Can you easily place other media or technologies into Figures 7.6.2 and 7.6.4? What media or
   technologies don't fit? Why not?
      3. Can you imagine a situation where a podcast might be a better choice for teaching and learning than
   virtual reality (assuming students have access to both technologies)? And can you imagine the opposite (of
   where virtual reality would be better than an audio-cassette)? What are the defining criteria or conditions?
      For my comments on the last question, click on the podcast below:

                           An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                        https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=187
7.7 Media richness

Figure 7.7.1 Making sense of biology: MrExham

7.7.1 The historical development of media richness
In Section 7.2, `A short history of educational technology', the development of different media in
education was outlined, beginning with oral teaching and learning, moving on to written or textual
communication, then to video, and finally computing. Each of these means of communication has
usually been accompanied by an increase in the richness of the medium, in terms of how many senses
and interpretative abilities are needed to process information.

   Another way of defining the richness of media is by the symbol systems employed to communicate
through the medium. Thus textual material from an early stage incorporated graphics and drawings as
well as words. Television or video incorporates audio as well as still and moving images. Computing
now can incorporate text, audio, video, animations, simulations, computing, and networking, all through
the Internet.

                                                                   359
360 Chapter 7: Understanding technology in education

7.7.2 The continuum of media richness

Figure 7.7.2 The continuum of media richness

   Once again then there is a continuum in terms of media richness, as illustrated in Figure 7.7.2 above.
Also once again, design of a particular medium can influence where on the continuum it would be
placed. For instance in Figure 7.7.2, different forms of teaching using video are represented in blue. Ted
Talks, a televised lecture, and often xMOOCs are usually mainly talking heads. The Khan Academy uses
dynamic graphics as well as voice over commentary, and MrExham's YouTube video on prokaryotic
cells uses colour graphics and animation as well as a `talking head' commentary. Educational television
broadcasts are likely to use an even wider range of video techniques.

   However, although the richness of video can be increased or decreased by the way it is used, video is
always going to be richer in media terms than radio or textbooks. Radio is never going to be a rich
medium in terms of its symbols systems because it depends on a single medium, audio, and even talking
head video is richer symbolically than radio.

   There is no normative or evaluative judgment here. Radio can be `rich' in the sense of fully exploiting
the characteristics or symbol systems of the medium. A well produced radio program is more likely to
be educationally effective than a badly produced video. But in terms of representation of knowledge, the
possibilities of radio in terms of media richness will always be less than the possibilities of video.
                                               7.7 Media richness 361

7.7.3 The educational value of media richness

But how rich should media be for teaching and learning? From a teaching perspective, rich media have
advantages over a single medium of communication, because rich media enable the teacher to do more.
For example, many activities that previously required learners to be present at a particular time and place
to observe processes or procedures such as demonstrating mathematical reasoning, experiments, medical
procedures, or stripping a carburetor, can now be recorded and made available to learners to view at any
time. Sometimes, phenomena that are too expensive or too difficult to show in a classroom can be shown
through animation, simulations, video recordings or virtual reality.

   Furthermore, each learner can get the same view as all the other learners, and can view the process
many times until they have mastery. Good preparation before recording can ensure that the processes
are demonstrated correctly and clearly. The combination of voice over video enables learning through
multiple senses. Even simple combinations, such as the use of audio over a sequence of still frames in
a text, have been found more effective than learning through a single medium of communication (see
for instance, Durbridge, 1984). The Khan Academy videos have exploited very effectively the power of
audio combined with dynamic graphics. Computing adds another element of richness, in the ability to
network learners or to respond to learner input.

   From a learner's perspective, though, some caution is needed with rich media. Two particularly
important concepts are cognitive overload and Vygotsky's Zone of Proximal Development. Cognitive
overload results when students are presented with too much information at too complex a level or too
quickly for them to properly absorb it (Sweller, 1988). Vygotsky's Zone of Proximal Development or
ZPD (Vygotsky, 1934) is the difference between what a learner can do without help and what can be
done with help. Rich media may contain a great deal of information compressed into a very short time
period and its value will depend to a large extent on the learner's level of preparation for interpreting it.

   For instance, a documentary video may be valuable for demonstrating the complexity of human
behaviour or complex industrial systems, but learners may need either preparation in terms of what to
look for, or to identify concepts or principles that may be illustrated within the documentary. On the
other hand, interpretation of rich media is a skill that can be explicitly taught through demonstration and
examples (Bates and Gallagher, 1977). Although YouTube videos are limited in length to around eight
minutes mainly for technical reasons, they are also more easily absorbed than a continuous video of 50
minutes. Thus again design is important for helping learners to make full educational use of rich media.

7.7.4 Simple or rich media?

It is a natural tendency when choosing media for teaching to opt for the `richest' or most powerful
medium. Why would I use a podcast rather than a video? There are in fact several reasons:

         · cost and ease of use: it may just be quicker and simpler to use a podcast, especially if it can
            achieve the same learning objective;

         · there may be too many distractions in a rich medium for students to grasp the essential point
            of the teaching. For instance, video recording a busy intersection to look at traffic flow may
            include all kinds of distractions for the viewer from the actual observation of traffic patterns.
            A simple diagram or an animation that focuses only on the phenomenon to be observed might
            be better;

         · the rich medium may be inappropriate for the learning task. For instance, if students are to
362 Chapter 7: Understanding technology in education

            follow and critique a particular argument or chain of reasoning, text may work better than a
            video of a lecturer with annoying mannerisms talking about the chain of reasoning.

In general, it is tempting always to look for the simplest medium first then only opt for a more
complex or richer medium if the simple medium can't deliver the learning goals as adequately. However,
consideration needs to be given to media richness as a criterion when making choices about media or
technology, because rich media may enable learning goals to be achieved that would be difficult with a
simple medium.

   This is the last of the characteristics of media and technology that can influence decisions about
teaching and learning. The next section will provide an overview and summary.

References

Bates, A. and Gallagher, M. (1977) Improving the Effectiveness of Open University Television Case-
Studies and Documentaries Milton Keynes: The Open University I.E.T. Papers on Broadcasting, No. 77
(out of print - copies available from tony.bates@ubc.ca).

   Durbridge, N. (1984) Audio cassettes, in Bates, A. (ed.) The Role of Technology in Distance
Education London: Routledge (re-published in 2014)

   Sweller, J. (1988) Cognitive load during problem solving: effects on learning, Cognitive Science, Vol.
12

   Vygotsky, L.S. (1987). Thinking and speech, in R.W. Rieber & A.S. Carton (eds.), The collected works
of L.S. Vygotsky, Volume 1: Problems of general psychology (pp. 39-285). New York: Plenum Press.
(Original work published 1934.)

                                                            Activity 7.7 How rich is your medium?

             1. What media are you using at the moment for teaching? Where would you place these on the
                 `richness' continuum? What benefits might there be to your teaching in changing your media to
                 either increase or decrease the richness of media you are using?

             2. Do you agree that: `it is a useful guideline always to look for the simplest medium first`.
             3. How important do you think the richness of medium is when making decisions about the use of

                 media and technology?
             4. Do you agree with the placement of different media on this continuum in Figure 7.7.2. If not, why

                 not?

      I provide no feedback for this activity.
7.8 Understanding the foundations of educational media

Figure 7.8 Video explanation of a (plastinated) dog's heart: note the QR code which enables students to access the
video from their own phones or tablets. Image: Dr. Sue Dawson, University of Prince Edward Island

   I am aware that this chapter may appear somewhat abstract and theoretical, but in any subject domain,
it is important to understand the foundations that underpin practice. This applies with even more force
to understanding media and technology in education, because it is such a dynamic field that changes
all the time. What seem to be the major media developments this year are likely to be eclipsed by new
developments in technology next year. In such a shifting sea, it is therefore necessary to look at some
guiding concepts or principles that are likely to remain constant, whatever changes take place over the
years.

                                                                   363
364 Chapter 7: Understanding technology in education

   So in summary here are the main points that I have been emphasising throughout this chapter.

                                                                            Key Takeaways

             1. Technologies are merely tools that can be used in a variety of ways. What matters more is how
                 technologies are applied. The same technology can be applied in different ways, even or
                 especially in education. So in judging the value of a technology, we need to look more closely at
                 the ways in which it is being or could be used. In essence this means focusing more on media -
                 which represent the more holistic use of technologies - than on individual tools or technologies
                 themselves, while still recognising that technology is an essential component of almost all media.

             2. By focusing on media rather than technologies, we can then include face-to-face teaching as a
                 medium, enabling comparisons with more technology-based media to be made along a number of
                 dimensions or characteristics.

             3. Recognising that in education media are usually used in combination, the six key building blocks
                 of media are:

                           1. face-to-face teaching

                           2. text

                           3. (still) graphics

                           4. audio (including speech)

                           5. video

                           6. computing (including animation, simulations and virtual reality)

             4. Media differ in terms of their formats, symbols systems, and cultural values. These unique
                 features are increasingly referred to as the affordances of media or technology. Thus different
                 media can be used to assist learners to learn in different ways and achieve different outcomes,
                 thus also individualising learning more.

             5. There are many dimensions along which some technologies are similar and others are different.
                 By focusing on these dimensions, we have a basis for analysing new media and technologies, to
                 see where they `fit' within the existing landscape, and to evaluate their potential benefits or
                 limitations for teaching and learning.

             6. There are probably other characteristics or dimensions of educational media that might also be
                 identified, but I believe these three key characteristics or dimensions to be the most important:

                           1. broadcast vs communicative

                           2. synchronous (live) vs asynchronous (recorded)

                           3. single vs rich media

             7. However, the identification of where a particular medium fits along any specific characteristic or
                 dimension will depend in most cases on how that medium is designed. At the same time, there is
                 usually a limit to how far a technology can be forced along one of these dimensions; there is
                 likely to be a single, `natural' position on each dimension, subject to good design, in terms of
                 exploiting the educational affordances of the medium.

             8. These characteristics or dimensions of media then need to be evaluated against the learning goals
                 and outcomes desired, while recognising that a new educational medium or application
                                                                               7.8 Understanding the foundations of educational media 365

              might enable goals to be achieved that had not been previously considered possible.
         9. Over time, media have tended to become more communicative, asynchronous, and `rich', thus

              offering teachers and learners more powerful tools for teaching and learning.
        10. The Internet is an extremely powerful medium because through a combination of tools and media

              it can encompass all the characteristics and dimensions of educational media.

                                              Activity 7.8 Analysing your current use of technology

   1. Take one of the courses you are teaching at the moment. How could you make your teaching more
communicative, asynchronous, and rich in media? What media or technologies would help you do this?

   2. Write down what you would see as (a) the advantages (b) the disadvantages of changing your teaching in
this way.

   3. Do you think applying the three dimensions described here will be useful when deciding whether or not
to use a new technology? If not, why not?

   The next chapter should provide more feedback on your answers.
Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

                                                                      Purpose of the chapter

      1. To identify the main pedagogical characteristics of the following media:
              · text;
              · audio;
              · video;
              · computing;
              · social media
              · emerging technologies (virtual/augmented reality; serious games; artificial intelligence).

      2. To provide a framework of analysis for determining appropriate pedagogical roles for different media.

      3. To enable you to apply that analysis to any particular module of teaching

What is covered in this chapter
         · 8.1 Thinking about the pedagogical differences of media
         · 8.2 Text
         · 8.3 Audio
         · 8.4 Video
         · 8.5 Computing
         · 8.6 Social media
         · 8.7a Emerging technologies: serious games and gamification
         · 8.7b Emerging technologies: virtual and augmented reality
         · 8.7c Emerging technologies: Artificial intelligence
         · 8.7d Emerging technologies: conclusion and summary
         · 8.8 A framework for analysing the pedagogical characteristics of educational media

Also in this chapter you will find the following activities:
         · Activity 8.1 Thinking about the pedagogical differences between media

                                                                   367
368 A.W. (Tony) Bates

         · Activity 8.2 Identifying the unique pedagogical characteristics of text
         · Activity 8.3 Identifying the unique pedagogical characteristics of audio
         · Activity 8.4 Identifying the unique pedagogical characteristics of video
         · Activity 8.5 Identifying the unique pedagogical characteristics of computing
         · Activity 8.6 Identifying the unique pedagogical characteristics of social media
         · Activity 8.7a Using and designing serious games
         · Activity 8.7b Using and designing VR and AR
         · Activity 8.7c Assessing artificial intelligence
         · Activity 8.7d Assessing and developing applications of emerging technologies
         · Activity 8.8 Choosing media for a teaching module

                                                                            Key Takeaways

      There is a very wide range of media available for teaching and learning. In particular:

              · text, audio, video, computing and social media all have unique characteristics that make them
                 useful for teaching and learning;

              · the choice or combination of media will need to be determined by:

                             the overall teaching philosophy behind the teaching;
                             the presentational and structural requirements of the subject matter or content;
                             the skills that need to be developed in learners;
                             and not least by the imagination of the teacher or instructor (and increasingly learners

                               themselves) in identifying possible roles for different media;

              · learners now have powerful tools through social media for creating their own learning materials
                 or for demonstrating their knowledge;

              · courses can be structured around individual students' interests, allowing them to seek appropriate
                 content and resources to support the development of negotiated competencies or learning
                 outcomes;.

              · content is now increasingly open and freely available over the Internet; as a result learners can
                 seek, use and apply information beyond the bounds of what a professor or teacher may dictate;

              · students can create their own online personal learning environments;
              · many students will still need a structured approach that guides their learning;
              · teacher presence and guidance is likely to be necessary to ensure high quality learning via social

                 media;
              · teachers need to find the middle ground between complete learner freedom and over-direction

                 to enable learners to develop the key skills needed in a digital age.
8.1 Thinking about the pedagogical differences of media

Figure 8.1.1 Is slow motion a unique characteristic of video?
Image: Pouring mercury into liquid nitrogen: University of Nottingham
Click on image to see video

8.1.1 Identifying the pedagogical differences between media
In the last chapter, I identified three core dimensions of media and technology along which any
technology can be placed. In the next two chapters, I will discuss a method for deciding which media to
use when teaching. In this chapter I will focus primarily on the pedagogical differences between media.
In the following chapter I will provide a model or set of criteria to use when making decisions about
media and technology for teaching.
8.1.2 First steps
Embedded within any decision about the use of technology in education and training will be assumptions

                                                                   369
370 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

about the learning process. We have already seen earlier in this book how different epistemological
positions and theories of learning affect the design of teaching, and these influences will also determine
a teacher's or an instructor's choice of appropriate media. Thus, the first step is to decide what and how
you want to teach.

   This has been covered in depth through Chapters 2-5, but in summary, there are five critical questions
that need to be asked about teaching and learning in order to select and use appropriate media/
technologies:

         · what is my underlying epistemological position about knowledge and teaching?

         · what are the desired learning outcomes from the teaching?

         · what teaching methods will be employed to facilitate the learning outcomes?

         · what are the unique educational characteristics of each medium/technology, and how well do
            these match the learning and teaching requirements?

         · what resources are available?

This chapter focuses on the fourth of these questions, but they are best not asked sequentially, but in
a cyclical or iterative manner, as media affordances may suggest alternative teaching methods or even
the possibility of learning outcomes that had not been initially considered. When the unique pedagogical
characteristics of different media are considered, this may lead to some changes in what content will be
covered and what skills will be developed. Therefore, at this stage, decisions on content and learning
outcomes should still be tentative.

8.1.3 Identifying the unique educational characteristics of a medium

Different media have different potential or `affordances' for different types of learning. One of the arts of
teaching is often finding the best match between media and desired learning outcomes. Before exploring
this relationship, first, a summary of the substantial amount of excellent past research on this topic (see,
for instance, Trenaman, 1967; Olson and Bruner, 1974; Schramm, 1977; Salomon, 1979, 1981; Clark,
1983; Bates, 1984; Koumi, 2006; Berk, 2009; Mayer, 2009).

   This research has indicated that there are three core elements that need to be considered when deciding
what media to use:

         · content;

         · content structure;

         · skills.

Olson and Bruner (1974) claim that learning involves two distinct aspects: acquiring knowledge of facts,
principles, ideas, concepts, events, relationships, rules and laws; and using or working on that knowledge
to develop skills. Again, this is not necessarily a sequential process. Identifying skills then working
back to identify the concepts and principles needed to underpin the skills may be another valid way
of working. In reality, learning content and skills development will often be integrated in any learning
process. Nevertheless, when deciding on media use, it is useful to make a distinction between content
and skills.
                                        8.1 Thinking about the pedagogical differences of media 371

8.1.3.1. The representation of content

Media differ in the extent to which they can represent different kinds of content, because they vary in
the symbol systems (text, sound, still pictures, moving images, etc.) that they use to encode information
(Salomon, 1979). We saw in the previous chapter that different media are capable of combining different
symbol systems. Differences between media in the way they combine symbol systems influence the way
in which different media represent content. Thus there is a difference between a direct experience, a
written description, a televised recording, and a computer simulation of the same scientific experiment.
Different symbol systems are being used, conveying different kinds of information about the same
experiment. For instance, our concept of heat can be derived from touch, mathematical symbols
(800 celsius), words (random movement of particles), animation, or observance of experiments. Our
`knowledge' of heat is as a result not static, but developmental. A large part of learning requires the
mental integration of content acquired through different media and symbol systems. For this reason,
deeper understanding of a concept or an idea is often the result of the integration of content derived from
a variety of media sources (Mayer, 2009).

   Media also differ in their ability to handle concrete or abstract knowledge. Abstract knowledge is
handled primarily through language. While all media can handle language, either in written or spoken
form, media vary in their ability to represent concrete knowledge. For instance, television can show
concrete examples of abstract concepts, the video showing the concrete `event', and the sound track
analyzing the event in abstract terms. Well-designed media can help learners move from the concrete to
the abstract and back again, once more leading to deeper understanding.

8.1.3.2 Content structure

Media also differ in the way they structure content. Books, the telephone, radio, podcasts and face-to-
face teaching all tend to present content linearly or sequentially. While these media can represent parallel
activities (for example, in print, different chapters may deal with events that occur simultaneously
but from different perspectives) such activities still have to be presented sequentially. Computers and
television are more able to present or simulate the inter-relationship of multiple variables simultaneously
occurring. Virtual reality is an exceptionally powerful example of this. Computers can also handle
branching or alternative routes through information, but usually within closely defined limits.

   Subject matter varies a great deal in the way in which information needs to be structured. Subject areas
(for example, natural sciences, history) structure content in particular ways determined by the internal
logic of the subject discipline. This structure may be very tight or logical, requiring particular sequences
or relationships between different concepts, or very open or loose, requiring learners to deal with highly
complex material in an open-ended or intuitive way.

   If media then vary both in the way they present information symbolically and in the way they handle
the structures required within different subject areas, media which best match the required mode of
presentation and the dominant structure of the subject matter need to be selected. Consequently, different
subject areas will require a different balance of media. This means that subject experts should be deeply
involved in decisions about the choice and use of media, to ensure that the chosen media appropriately
match the presentational and structural requirements of the subject matter.

8.1.3.3 The development of skills

Media also differ in the extent to which they can help develop different skills. Skills can range from
intellectual to psychomotor to affective (emotions, feelings). Koumi (2015) has used Krathwohl's (2002)
372 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

revision of Bloom's Taxonomy of Learning Objectives (1956) to assign affordances of text and video to
learning objectives using Krathwold's classification of learning objectives.

   Comprehension is likely to be the minimal level of intellectual learning outcome for most education
courses. Some researchers (for example, Marton and Säljö, 1976) make a distinction between surface
and deep comprehension. At the highest level of skills comes the application of what one has
comprehended to new situations. Here it becomes necessary to develop skills of analysis, evaluation,
and problem solving.

   Thus a first step is to identify learning objectives or outcomes, in terms of both content and skills,
while being aware that the use of some media may result in new possibilities in terms of learning
outcomes.

8.1.4 Pedagogical affordances - or unique media characteristics?

`Affordances' is a term originally developed by the psychologist James Gibson (1977) to describe the
perceived possibilities of an object in relation to its environment (for example, a door knob suggests to
a user that it should be turned or pulled, while a flat plate on a door suggests that it should be pushed.).
The term has been appropriated by a number of fields, including instructional design and human-
machine interaction.

   Thus the pedagogical affordances of a medium relate to the possibilities of using that medium for
specific teaching purposes. It should be noted that an affordance depends on the subjective
interpretation of the user (in this case a teacher or instructor), and it is often possible to use a medium
in ways that are not unique to that medium. For instance video can be used for recording and delivering
a lecture. In that sense there is a similarity in at least one affordance for a lecture and a video. Also
students may choose not to use a medium in the way intended by the instructor. For instance, Bates and
Gallagher (1977) found that some social science students objected to documentary-style television
programs requiring application of knowledge or analysis rather than presentation of concepts.

   Others (such as myself) have used the term `unique characteristics' of a medium rather than
affordances, since `unique characteristics' suggest that there are particular uses of a medium that are
less easily replicated by other media, and hence act as a better discriminator in selecting and using
media. For instance, using video to demonstrate in slow motion a mechanical process is much more
difficult (but not impossible) to replicate in other media. In what follows, my focus is more on unique
or particular rather than general affordances of each medium, although the subjective and flexible
nature of media interpretation makes it difficult to come to any hard and fast conclusions.

   I will now attempt in the next sections to identify some of the unique pedagogical characteristics of
the following media:

         · text;

         · audio;

         · video;

         · computing;

         · social media

         · emerging technologies, in particular, virtual/augmented reality, serious games and artificial
            intelligence.
                                                                                   8.1 Thinking about the pedagogical differences of media 373

Technically, face-to-face teaching should also be considered a medium, but I will look specifically at
the unique characteristics of face-to-face teaching in Chapter 10, where I discuss different modes of
delivery.

8.1.5 Purpose of the exercise

Before starting on the analysis of different media, it is important to understand my goals in this chapter.
I am NOT trying to provide a definitive list of the unique pedagogical characteristics of each medium.
Because context is so important and because the science is not strong enough to identify unequivocally
such characteristics, I am suggesting in the following sections a way of thinking about the pedagogical
affordances of different media. To do this, I will identify what I think are the most important pedagogical
characteristics of each medium.

   However, individual readers may well come to different conclusions, depending particularly on the
subject area in which they are working. The important point is for teachers and instructors to think about
what each medium could contribute educationally within their subject area, and that requires a strong
understanding of both the needs of their students and the nature of their subject area, as well as the key
pedagogical features of each medium.

   Listen to the podcast below for an illustration of the differences between media.
             Podcast 8.1 Tony's shaggy dog story: click play on the above podcast (41 seconds).

                       An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                    https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=197

References

Bates, A. (1984) Broadcasting in Education: An Evaluation London: Constables
   Bates, A. and Gallagher, M. (1977) Improving the Effectiveness of Open University Television Case-

Studies and Documentaries Milton Keynes: The Open University, I.E.T. Papers on Broadcasting, No.
77 (out of print - copies available from tony.bates@ubc.ca)

   Berk, R.A. (2009) Multimedia teaching with video clips: TV, movies, YouTube and mtvU in the
college classroom, International Journal of Technology in Teaching and Learning, Vol. 91, No. 5

   Bloom, B. S.; Engelhart, M. D.; Furst, E. J.; Hill, W. H.; Krathwohl, D. R. (1956). Taxonomy of
educational objectives: The classification of educational goals. Handbook I: Cognitive domain. New
York: David McKay Company

   Clark, R. (1983) Reconsidering research on learning from media Review of Educational Research,
Vol. 53. No. 4

   Gibson, J.J. (1979) The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception Boston: Houghton Mifflin
   Koumi, J. (2006) Designing video and multimedia for open and flexible learning.
London: Routledge.
   Koumi, J. (2015) Learning outcomes afforded by self-assessed, segmented video-print combinations
Cogent Education, Vol. 2, No.1
374 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

  Krathwohl, D.R. (2002) A Revision of Bloom's Taxonomy: An Overview in Theory into Practice,
Vol. 41, No. 4, College of Education, The Ohio State University.

   Marton, F. and Säljö, R. (1997) Approaches to learning, in Marton, F., Hounsell, D. and Entwistle, N.
(eds.) The experience of learning: Edinburgh: Scottish Academic Press

   Mayer, R. E. (2009) Multimedia learning (2nd ed). New York: Cambridge University Press
   Olson, D. and Bruner, J. (1974) `Learning through experience and learning through media', in Olson,
D. (ed.) Media and Symbols: the Forms of Expression Chicago: University of Chicago Press (out of
print)
   Salomon, G. (1979) Interaction of Media, Cognition and Learning San Francisco: Jossey-Bass
   Salomon, G. (1981) Communication and Education Beverly Hills CA/London: Sage (out of print)
   Schramm, W. (1977) Big Media, Little Media Beverly Hills CA/London: Sage
   Trenaman, J. (1967) Communication and Comprehension London: Longmans

                                 Activity 8.1: Thinking about the pedagogical differences between media

                1. Examine one of your lessons or courses.

                                Can you think of content that would best be presented through video or audio
                                   rather than through talking or text? What content is still better offered through
                                   talking or a textbook? What are your reasons? Are they pedagogical or for other
                                   reasons?

                                can you think of a skill that you are teaching that could be better done through
                                   the use of media that you are not currently using?

                                can you think of new learning outcomes that you could achieve through the use
                                   of media?

         There is no feedback from me on this activity, but the rest of this and the following chapter may help.
8.2 Text

Figure 8.2.1 There's nothing like a good book - or is there?.

8.2.1 The unique pedagogical features of text
Ever since the invention of the Gutenberg press, print has been a dominant teaching technology, arguably
at least as influential as the spoken word of the teacher. Even today, textbooks, mainly in printed
format, but increasingly also in digital format, still play a major role in formal education, training
and distance education. Many fully online courses still make extensive use of text-based learning
management systems and online asynchronous discussion forums.

                                                                   375
376 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

   Why is this? What makes text such a powerful teaching medium, and will it remain so, given the latest
developments in information technology?

8.2.1.2 Presentational features

Text can come in many formats, including printed textbooks, text messages, novels, magazines,
newspapers, scribbled notes, journal articles, essays, novels, online asynchronous discussions and so on.

   The key symbol systems in text are written language (including mathematical symbols) and still
graphics, which would include diagrams, tables, and copies of images such as photographs or paintings.
Colour is an important attribute for some subject areas, such as chemistry, geography and geology, and
art history.

   Some of the unique presentational characteristics of text are as follows:

         · text is particularly good at handling abstraction and generalisation, mainly through written
            language;

         · text enables the linear sequencing of information in a structured format;

         · text can present and separate empirical evidence or data from the abstractions, conclusions or
            generalisations derived from the empirical evidence;

         · text's linear structure enables the development of coherent, sequential argument or
            discussion;

         · at the same time text can relate evidence to argument and vice versa;

         · text's recorded and permanent nature enables independent analysis and critique of its content;

         · still graphics such as graphs or diagrams enable knowledge to be presented differently from
            written language, either providing concrete examples of abstractions or offering a different
            way of representing the same knowledge.

There is some overlap of each of these features with other media, but no other medium combines all
these characteristics, or is as powerful as text with respect to these characteristics.

   Earlier (Chapter 2, Section 2.7.3) I argued that academic knowledge is a specific form of knowledge
that has characteristics that differentiate it from other kinds of knowledge, and particularly from
knowledge or beliefs based solely on direct personal experience. Academic knowledge is a second-order
form of knowledge that seeks abstractions and generalizations based on reasoning and evidence.

   Fundamental components of or criteria for academic knowledge are:

         · codification: knowledge can be consistently represented in some form (words, symbols,
            video);

         · transparency: the source of the knowledge can be traced and verified;

         · reproduction: knowledge can be reproduced or have multiple copies;

         · communicability: knowledge must be in a form such that it can be communicated and
            challenged by others.

Text meets all four criteria above, so it is an essential medium for academic learning.
                                                            8.2 Text 377

7.2.1.2 Skills development

Because of text's ability to handle abstractions, and evidence-based argument, and its suitability for
independent analysis and critique, text is particularly useful for developing the higher learning outcomes
required at an academic level, such as analysis, critical thinking, and evaluation.

   It is less useful for showing processes or developing manual skills, for instance.

8.2.2 The book and knowledge

Figure 8.2.2 What is a book? From scrolls to paperbacks
to e-books, this one minute video portrays the history and
future of books. Click to see the video from the UK Open
University (© Open University, 2014)

   Although text can come in many formats, I want to focus particularly on the role of the book, because
of its centrality in academic learning. The book has proved to be a remarkably powerful medium for
the development and transmission of academic knowledge, since it meets all four of the components
378 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

required for presenting academic knowledge, but to what extent can new media such as blogs, wikis,
multimedia, and social media replace the book in academic knowledge?

   New media can in fact handle just as well some of these criteria, and provide indeed added value, such
as speed of reproduction and ubiquity, but the book still has some unique qualities. A key advantage of
a book is that it allows for the development of a sustained, coherent, and comprehensive argument with
evidence to support the argument. Blogs can do this only to a limited extent (otherwise they cease to be
blogs and become articles or a digital book).

   Quantity is important sometimes and books allow for the collection of a great deal of evidence
and supporting argument, and allow for a wider exploration of an issue or theme, within a relatively
condensed and portable format. A consistent and well supported argument, with evidence, alternative
explanations or even counter positions, requires the extra `space' of a book. Above all, books can
provide coherence or a sustained, particular position or approach to a problem or issue, a necessary
balance to the chaos and confusion of the many new forms of digital media that constantly compete for
our attention, but in much smaller `chunks' that are overall more difficult to integrate and digest.

   Another important academic feature of text is that it can be carefully scrutinised, analysed and
constantly checked, partly because it is largely linear, and also permanent once published, enabling more
rigorous challenge or testing in terms of evidence, rationality, and consistency. Multimedia in recorded
format can come close to meeting these criteria, but text can also provide more convenience and in
media terms, more simplicity. For instance I repeatedly find analysing video, which incorporates many
variables and symbol systems, more complex than analysing a linear text, even if both contain equally
rigorous (or equally sloppy) arguments.

8.2.2.1 The form and function of a book

Does the form or technological representation of a book matter any more? Is a book still a book if
downloaded and read on an iPad or Kindle, rather than as printed text?

   For the purposes of knowledge acquisition, it probably isn't any different. Indeed, for study purposes,
a digital version is probably more convenient because carrying an iPad around with maybe hundreds of
books downloaded on it is certainly preferable to carrying around the printed versions of the same books.
There are still complaints by students about the difficulties of annotating e-books, but this will almost
certainly become a standard feature available in the future.

   If the whole book is downloaded, then the function of a book doesn't change much just because it
is available digitally. However, there are some subtle changes. Some would argue that scanning is still
easier with a printed version. Have you ever had the difficulty of finding a particular quotation in a
digital book compared with the printed version? Sure, you can use the search facility, but that means
knowing exactly the correct words or the name of the person being quoted. With a printed book, I can
often find a quotation just by flicking the pages, because I am using context and rapid eye scanning to
locate the source, even when I don't know exactly what I am looking for. On the other hand, searching
when you do know what you are looking for (e.g. a reference by a particular author) is much easier
digitally.

   When books are digitally available, users can download only the selected chapters that are of interest
to them. This is valuable if you know just what you want, but there are also dangers. For instance in my
book on the strategic management of technology (Bates and Sangrà, 2011), the last chapter summarizes
the rest of the book. If the book had been digital, the temptation then would be to just download the
final chapter. You'd have all the important messages in the book, right? Well, no. What you would be
missing is the evidence for the conclusions. Now the book on strategic management is based on case
studies, so it would be really important to check back with how the case studies were interpreted to get
                                                                                                                                                     8.2 Text 379

to the conclusions, as this will affect the confidence you would have as a reader in the conclusions that
were drawn. If just the digital version of only the last chapter is downloaded, you also lose the context
of the whole book. Having the whole book gives readers more freedom to interpret and add their own
conclusions than just having a summary chapter.

   In conclusion, then, there are advantages and disadvantages of digitizing a book, but the essence of
a book is not greatly changed when it becomes digital rather than printed. I have also written about the
advantages of publishing an online academic textbook, based on my own experience of writing the first
edition of this book, which is now available in 10 languages and has been downloaded over 500,000
times since 2015. For another perspective on this, see Clive Shepherd's blog: Weighing up the benefits
of traditional book publishing.

8.2.2.2 A new niche for books in academia

We have seen historically that new media often do not entirely replace an older medium, but the old
medium finds a new `niche'. Thus television did not lead to the complete demise of radio. Similarly,
I suspect that there will be a continued role for the book in academic knowledge, enabling the book
(whether digital or printed) to thrive alongside new media and formats in academia.

   However, books that retain their value academically will likely need to be much more specific in their
format and their purpose than has been the case to date. For instance, I see no future for books consisting
mainly of a collection of loosely connected but semi-independent chapters from different authors, unless
there is a strong cohesion and edited presence that provides an integrated argument or consistent set
of data across all the chapters. Most of all, books may need to change some of their features, to allow
for more interaction and input from readers, and more links to the outside world. It is much more
unlikely though that books will survive in a printed format, because digital publication allows for many
more features to be added, reduces the environmental footprint, and makes text much more portable and
transferable.

   Lastly, this is not an argument for ignoring the academic benefits of new media. The value of
graphics, video and animation for representing knowledge, the ability to interact asynchronously with
other learners, and the value of social networks, are all under-exploited in academia. But text and books
are still important.

8.2.3 Text and other forms of knowledge

I have focused particularly on text and academic knowledge, because of the traditional importance of
text and printed knowledge in academia. The unique pedagogical characteristics of text though may be
less for other forms of knowledge. Indeed, multimedia may have many more advantages in vocational
and technical education.

   In the k-12 or school sector, text and print are likely to remain important, because reading and writing
are likely to remain essential in a digital age, so the study of text (digital and printed) will remain
important if only for developing literacy skills.

   Indeed, one of the limitations of text is that it requires a high level of prior literacy skills for it to be
used effectively for teaching and learning, and indeed much of teaching and learning is focused on the
development of skills that enable rigorous analysis of textual materials. Indeed reading ability is one of
the core skills identified for the 21st century. Reading and writing literacy is somewhat under attack with
the use of truncated language in text messages, automated spelling correction, and emotive symbols in
380 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

social media. However, we should be giving as much attention to developing literacy skills in using and
interpreting multimedia in a digital age.

8.2.4 Assessment

If text is critical for the presentation of knowledge and development of skills in your subject area,
what are the implications for assessment? If students are expected to develop the skills that text
appears to develop, then presumably text will be an important medium for assessment. Students will
need to demonstrate their own ability to use text to present abstractions, argument and evidence-based
reasoning.

   In such contexts, composed textual responses, such as essays or written reports, are likely to be
necessary, rather than multiple-choice questions or multimedia reports.

8.2.5 More evidence, please

Although there has been extensive research on the pedagogical features of other media such as audio,
video and computing, text has generally been treated as the default mode, the base against which other
media are compared. As a result print in particular is largely taken for granted in academia. We are now
though at the stage where we need to pay much more attention to the unique characteristics of text in its
various formats, in relation to other media. Until though we have more empirical studies on the unique
characteristics of text and print, text will remain central to at least academic teaching and learning.

References

Koumi, J. (1994) Media comparisons and deployment: a practitioner's view British Journal of
Educational Technology, Vol. 25, No. 1.

   Koumi, J. (2006) Designing video and multimedia for open and flexible learning. London: Routledge.
   Koumi, J. (2015) Learning outcomes afforded by self-assessed, segmented video-print
combinations Cogent Education, Vol. 2, No.1
   Manguel, A. (1996) A History of Reading London: Harper Collins

   Although there are many publications on text, in terms of typography, structure, and its historical
influence on education and culture, I could find no publications where text is compared with other
modern media such as audio or video in terms of its pedagogical characteristics, although Koumi (2015)
has written about text in combination with audio, and Albert Manguel's book is also fascinating reading
from an historical perspective.

   However, I am sure that my lack of references is due to my lack of scholarship in the area. If
you have suggestions for readings, please send me an email. Also, a study of the unique pedagogical
characteristics of text in a digital age might make for a very interesting and valuable Ph.D. thesis.

                                       Activity 8.2 Identifying the unique pedagogical characteristics of text

      1. Take one of the courses you are teaching. What key presentational aspects of text are important for this
                                                                                                                                                  8.2 Text 381

course? Is text the best medium for representing knowledge in your subject area; if not, what concepts or topics
would be best represented through other media?

   2. Look at the skills listed in Section 1.2 of this book. Which of these skills would best be developed through
the use of text rather than other media? How would you do this using text-based teaching?

   3. What do you think about books for learning? Do you think the book is dead or about to become
obsolete? If you think books are still valuable for learning, what changes, if any, do you think should be made
to academic books? What would be lost if books were entirely replaced by new media? What would be gained?

   4. Under what conditions would it be more appropriate for students to be assessed through written essays
and under what conditions would multimedia portfolios be more appropriate for assessment?

   5. Can you think of any other unique pedagogical characteristics of text?
   For feedback on this activity, click on the podcast below:

                       An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                    https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=201
8.3 Audio

       Figure 8.3.1 Image: © InnerFidelity, 2012

                  Sounds, such as the noise of certain machinery, or the background hum of daily life, have an
               associative as well as a pure meaning, which can be used to evoke images or ideas relevant to the
               main substance of what is being taught. There are, in other words, instances where audio is
               essential for efficiently mediating certain kinds of information.

                                                                                                         Durbridge, 1984
8.3.1 Audio: the unappreciated medium
We have seen that oral communication has a long history, and continues today in classroom teaching and
in general radio programming. In this section though I am focusing primarily on recorded audio, which
I will argue is a very powerful educational medium when used well.

   There has been a good deal of research on the unique pedagogical characteristics of audio. At the UK
Open University course teams had to bid for media resources to supplement specially designed printed
materials. Because media resources were developed initially by the BBC, and hence were limited and
expensive to produce, course teams (in conjunction with their allocated BBC producer) had to specify
how radio or television would be used to support learning. In particular, the course teams were asked to

                                                                   383
384 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

identify what teaching functions television and radio would uniquely contribute to the teaching. After
allocation and development of a course, samples of the programs were evaluated in terms of how well
they met these functions, as well as how the students responded to the programming. In later years, the
same approach was used when production moved to audio and video cassettes.

   This process of identifying unique roles then evaluating the programs allowed the OU, over a period
of several years, to identify which roles or functions were particularly appropriate to different media
(Bates, 1984). Koumi (2006), himself a former BBC/OU producer, followed up on this research and
identified several more key functions for audio and video. Over a somewhat similar period, Richard
Mayer, at the University of California at Santa Barbara, was conducting his own research into the use of
multimedia in education (Mayer, 2009).

   Although there have been continuous developments of audio technology, from audio-cassettes to Sony
Walkman's to podcasts, the pedagogical characteristics of audio have remained remarkably constant
over a fairly long period.

8.3.2 Presentational features

Although audio can be used on its own, it is often used in combination with other media, particularly
text. On its own, it can present:

         · spoken language (including foreign languages) for analysis or practice;

         · music, either as a performance or for analysis;

         · students with a condensed argument that may:

                      reinforce points made elsewhere in the course;

                      introduce new points not made elsewhere in the course;

                      provide an alternative viewpoint to the perspectives in the rest of the course;

                      analyse or critique materials elsewhere in the course;

                      summarize or condense the main ideas or major points covered in the course;

                      provide new evidence in support of or against the arguments or perspectives
                        covered elsewhere in the course;

         · interviews with leading researchers or experts;

         · discussion between two or more people to provide various views on a topic;

         · primary audio sources, such as bird song, children talking, eye witness accounts, or recorded
            performances (drama, concerts);

         · analysis of primary audio sources, by playing the source followed by analysis;

         · `breaking news' that emphasizes the relevance or application of concepts within the course;

         · the instructor's personal spin on a topic related to the course.

Audio however has been found to be particularly `potent' when combined with text, because it enables
students to use both eyes and ears in conjunction. Audio has been found to be especially useful for:

         · explaining or `talking through' materials presented through text, such as mathematical
                                                                                                                                                   8.3 Audio 385

            equations, reproductions of paintings, graphs, statistical tables, and even physical rock
            samples.

This technique was later further developed by Salman Khan, but using video to combine voice-over
(audio) explanation with visual presentation of mathematical symbols, formulae, and solutions.

8.3.3 Skills development

Because of the ability of the learner to stop and start recorded audio, it has been found to be particularly
useful for:

         · enabling students through repetition and practice to master certain auditory skills or
            techniques (e.g. language pronunciation, analysis of musical structure, mathematical
            computation);

         · getting students to analyse primary audio sources, such as children's use of language, or
            attitudes to immigration from recordings of interviewed people;

         · changing student attitudes by:
                      presenting material in a novel or unfamiliar perspective;
                      by presenting material in a dramatized form, enabling students to identify with
                        someone with a different perspective.

8.3.4 Strengths and weaknesses of audio as a teaching medium

First, some advantages:

         · it is much easier to make an audio clip or podcast than a video clip or a simulation;
         · audio requires far less bandwidth than video or simulations, hence downloads quicker and

            can be used over relatively low bandwidths;
         · it is easily combined with other media such as text, mathematical symbols, and graphics,

            allowing more than one sense to be used and allowing for `integration';
         · some students prefer to learn by listening compared with reading;
         · audio combined with text can help develop literacy skills or support students with low levels

            of literacy;
         · audio provides variety and another perspective from text, a `break' in learning that refreshes

            the learner and maintains interest;
         · Nicola Durbridge, in her research at the Open University, found that audio increased distance

            students' feelings of personal `closeness' with the instructor compared with video or text, i.e.
            it is a more intimate medium.

In particular, added flexibility and learner control means that students will often learn better from pre-
prepared audio recordings combined with accompanying textual material (such as a web site with slides)
than they will from a live classroom lecture.
386 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

   There are also of course disadvantages of audio:

         · audio-based learning is difficult for people with a hearing disability;

         · creating audio is extra work for an instructor;

         · audio is often best used in conjunction with other media such as text or graphics thus adding
            complexity to the design of teaching;

         · recording audio requires at least a minimal level of technical proficiency;

         · spoken language tends to be less precise than text.

Increasingly video is now being used to combine audio over images, such as in the Khan Academy, but
there are many instances, such as where students are studying from prescribed texts, where recorded
audio works better than a video recording.

   So let's hear it for audio!

References

Bates, A. (1984) Broadcasting in Education: An Evaluation London: Constables
   Bates, A. (2005) Technology, e-Learning and Distance Education London/New York: Routledge
   Durbridge, N. (1984) Audio-cassettes, in Bates, A. (ed.) The Role of Technology in Distance

Education London/New York: Croom Hill/St Martin's Press
   EDUCAUSE Learning Initiative (2005) Seven things you should know about... podcasting Boulder

CO: EDUCAUSE, June
   Koumi, J. (2006). Designing video and multimedia for open and flexible learning. London: Routledge.
   Mayer, R. E. (2009). Multimedia learning (2nd ed). New York: Cambridge University Press.
   Postlethwaite, S. N. (1969) The Audio-Tutorial Approach to Learning Minneapolis: Burgess

Publishing Company
   Salmon, G. and Edirisingha, P. (2008) Podcasting for Learning in Universities Milton Keynes: Open

University Press

                                      Activity 8.3 Identifying the unique pedagogical characteristics of audio

      1. Take one of the courses you are teaching. What key presentational aspects of audio could be important for
   this course?

      2. Look at the skills listed in Section 1.2 of this book. Which of these skills would best be developed through
   the use of audio rather than other media? How would you do this using audio-based teaching?

      3. Under what conditions would it be more appropriate for students to be assessed by asking them to make
   an audio recording? How could this be done under assessment conditions?

      4. To what extent do you think redundancy or duplication between different media is a good thing? What are
   the disadvantages of covering the same topic through different media?

      5. Can you think of any other unique pedagogical characteristics of audio?
      Click on the podcast below for feedback on this activity:
                                                                                                                            8.3 Audio 387

   An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=203
8.4 Video

Figure 8.4.1 An OpenLearn video from the Open University on communications technologies in developing countries.
Click on the image to play the video

8.4.1 More power, more complexity
Although there have been massive changes in video technology over the last 25 years, resulting
in dramatic reductions in the costs of both creating and distributing video, the unique educational
characteristics are largely unaffected. (More recent computer-generated media such as simulations, will
be analysed under `Computing', in Section 8.5).

   Video is a much richer medium than either text or audio, as in addition to its ability to offer text and
sound, it can also offer dynamic or moving pictures. Thus while it can offer all the affordances of audio,
and some of text, it also has unique pedagogical characteristics of its own. Once again, there has been
considerable research on the use of video in education, and again I will be drawing on research from the
Open University (Bates, 1984; 2005; Koumi, 2006) as well as from Mayer (2009).

   Click on the links to see examples for many of the characteristics listed below.

                                                                   389
390 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

8.4.2 Presentational features

Video can be used to:

         · demonstrate experiments or phenomena, particularly:

                      where equipment or phenomena to be observed are large, microscopic, expensive,
                        inaccessible, dangerous, or difficult to observe without special equipment (see an
                        example from the University of Nottingham);

                      where resources are scarce, or unsuitable for student experimentation (e.g. live
                        animals, human body parts) (see an example of the anatomy of the brain, from the
                        University of British Columbia);

                      where the experimental design is complex (for example, testing whether wild
                        sharks are more attracted to blood than fish oil)

                      where there is an element of risk or danger in conducting the experiment (see an
                        example demonstrating the conservation of momentum)

                      where the experimental behaviour may be influenced by uncontrollable but
                        observable variables;

         · illustrate principles involving dynamic change or movement (see an example explaining
            exponential growth from a course at UBC);

         · illustrate abstract principles through the use of specially constructed physical models, for
            instance an animation of a normal curve of distribution;

         · illustrate principles involving three-dimensional space, for example, see this video from
            Nova Scotia Community College

         · demonstrate changes over time through the use of animation, slow-motion, or speeded-up
            video (see an example of how haemophilus influenzae cells take up DNA, from UBC);

         · demonstrate correct procedures in health, safety, repairs and maintenance (for an example,
            see Brady's EMR Skills Video)

         · substitute for a field visit, by:

                      providing students with an accurate, comprehensive visual picture of a site, in order
                        to place the topic under study in context; for instance see the Bodo aboriginal
                        archeological site in Alberta

                      demonstrating the relationship between different elements of a system under
                        study (e.g. production processes, ecological balanc brady's EMRe); for example,
                        see the paper-making process

                      by identifying and distinguishing between different classes or categories of
                        phenomena at the site (e.g. in forest ecology);

                      to observe differences in scale and process between laboratory and mass-
                        production techniques;

                      through the use of models, animations or simulations, to teach certain advanced
                        scientific or technological concepts (such as theories of relativity or quantum
                                                                                                                                       8.4 Video 391

               physics) without students having to master highly advanced mathematical
               techniques; see for instance `Einstein's Theory of Relativity Made Easy.'

· bring students primary resource or case-study material, i.e. recording of naturally occurring
   events which, through editing and selection, demonstrate or illustrate principles covered
   elsewhere in a course;

· demonstrate ways in which abstract principles or concepts developed elsewhere in the course
   have been applied to real-world problems, for example, innovative stormwater management
   in the University of British Columbia's Master of Land and Water Management;

· synthesise a wide range of variables into a single recorded event, e.g. to suggest how real
   world problems can be resolved;

· demonstrate decision-making processes or decisions `in action' (e.g. triage in an emergency
   situation) by:

             recording the decision-making process as it occurs in real contexts;

             recording `staged' simulations, dramatisation or role-playing, as in the scenarios in
               Ryerson University's Therapeutic Communication and Mental Health Assessment
               Program

· demonstrate correct procedures in using tools or equipment (including safety procedures);

· demonstrate methods or techniques of performance (e.g. mechanical skills such as stripping
   and re-assembling a carburetor, sketching, drawing or painting techniques, or dance);

· record and archive events that are crucial to topics in a course, but which may disappear or be
   destroyed in the near future, such as, for instance, street graffiti or condemned buildings (see
   an example about neon lights in Vancouver);

· demonstrate practical activities to be carried out by students, on their own (for example, see
   32 cool experiments to do at home).
392 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

Figure 8.4.2 Don't do this yourself at home! Video on the conservation of momentum

8.4.3 Skills development
This usually requires the video to be integrated with student activities. The ability to stop, rewind and
replay video becomes crucial for skills development, as student activity usually takes place separately
from the actual viewing of the video. This may mean thinking through carefully activities for students
related to the use of video.

   If video is not used directly for lecturing, research clearly indicates that students generally need to be
guided as to what to look for in video, at least initially in their use of video for learning. There are various
techniques for relating concrete events with abstract principles, such as through audio narration over the
video, using a still frame to highlight the observation, or repeating a small section of the program. Bates
and Gallagher (1977) found that using video for developing higher order analysis or evaluation was a
teachable skill that needs to be built into the development of a course or program, to get the best results.

   Typical uses of video for skills development include:
         · enabling students to recognize naturally occurring phenomena or classifications (e.g.
            classroom teaching strategies, symptoms of mental illness, classroom behaviour) in context;
         · enabling students to analyse a situation, using principles either introduced in the video
            recording or covered elsewhere in the course, such as a textbook or lecture; for example,
            possible raw material on managing domestic violence,
         · interpreting artistic performance (e.g. drama, spoken poetry, movies, paintings, sculpture, or
            other works of art);
                                                                                                                                                   8.4 Video 393

         · analysis of music composition, through the use of musical performance, narration and
            graphics;

         · testing the applicability or relevance of abstract concepts or generalisations in real world
            contexts (see for example the European Space Agency's video on climate change)

         · looking for alternative explanations for real world phenomena.
There are many ways in which video can be used for skills development. Nevertheless, however video
is used for skill development, as well as the demonstration of the skill, attention must be paid to
ensuring opportunities for student practice and feedback, probably using other media, although it is now
increasingly easy for students to make their own videos to demonstrate their skill.

Figure 8.4.3 Demonstrating teaching strategies: kinesthetic learning

8.4.4 Strengths and weaknesses of video as a teaching medium
One factor that makes video powerful for learning is its ability to show the relationship between
concrete examples and abstract principles, with usually the sound track relating the abstract principles
to concrete events shown in the video (see, for example: Probability for quantum chemistry, UBC).
Video is particularly useful for recording events or situations where it would be too difficult, dangerous,
expensive or impractical to bring students to such events.

   Thus its main strengths are as follows:
394 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

         · linking concrete events and phenomena to abstract principles and vice versa;

         · the ability of students to stop and start, so they can integrate activities with video;

         · providing an alternative approach to the presentation of content that can help students
            having difficulties in learning abstract concepts;

         · adding substantial interest to a course by linking it to real world issues;

         · a growing amount of freely available, high quality academic videos;

         · good for developing some of the higher level intellectual skills and some of the more
            practical skills needed in a digital age;

         · the use of low cost cameras and free editing software enables some forms of video to be
            cheaply produced.

It should also be remembered that in addition to the features listed above, video can incorporate many of
the features of audio as well.

   The main weaknesses of video are:

         · many faculty have no knowledge or experience in using video other than for recording
            lecturing;

         · there is currently a limited amount of high quality educational video free for downloading,
            because the cost of developing high quality educational video that exploits the unique
            characteristics of the medium is still relatively high. Links also often go dead after a while,
            affecting the reliability of outsourced video. The availability of free material for educational
            use is improving all the time, but currently finding appropriate and free videos that meet the
            specific needs of a teacher or instructor can be time-consuming or such material may just not
            be available or reliable;

         · creating original material that exploits the unique characteristics of video is time-consuming,
            and still relatively expensive, because it usually needs professional video production;

         · to get the most out of educational video, students need specially designed activities that often
            will have to sit outside the video itself;

         · students often reject videos that require them to do analysis or interpretation; they often
            prefer direct instruction that focuses primarily on comprehension. Such students need to be
            trained to use video differently, which requires time to be devoted to developing such skills.

For these reasons, video is not being used enough in education. When used it is often an afterthought or
an `extra', rather than an integral part of the design, or is used merely to replicate a classroom lecture,
rather than exploiting the unique characteristics of video.

8.4.5 Assessment

If video is being used to develop the skills outlined in Section 8.4.3, then it is essential that these skills
are assessed and count for grading. Indeed, one possible means of assessment might be to ask students
                                                                                                                                                   8.4 Video 395

to analyse or interpret a selected video, or even to develop their own media project, using video they
themselves have collected or produced, using their own devices.

References

Bates, A. (1984) Broadcasting in Education: An Evaluation London: Constables
   Bates, A. (2005) Technology, e-Learning and Distance Education London/New York: Routledge
   Bates, A. and Gallagher, M. (1977) Improving the Effectiveness of Open University Television Case-

Studies and Documentaries Milton Keynes: The Open University, I.E.T. Papers on Broadcasting, No. 77
(out of print - copies available from tony.bates@ubc.ca)

   Koumi, J. (2006). Designing video and multimedia for open and flexible learning. London: Routledge
   Mayer, R. E. (2009). Multimedia learning (2nd ed). New York: Cambridge University Press
   The University of British Columbia also provides two annotated bibliographies of digital multimedia
research. one collated at UBC and one by the University of Central Florida.

                                      Activity 8.4 Identifying the unique pedagogical characteristics of video

      1. Take one of the courses you are teaching. What key presentational aspects of video could be important for
   this course?

      2. Look at the skills listed in Section 1.2 of this book. Which of these skills would best be developed through
   the use of video rather than other media? How would you do this using video-based teaching?

      3. Under what conditions would it be more appropriate for students to be assessed by asking them to analyse
   or make their own video recording? How could this be done under assessment conditions?

      4. Type in the name of your topic + video into Google.

              · How many videos come up?
              · What's their quality like?
              · Could you use any of them in your teaching?
              · If so, how would you integrate them into your course?
              · Could you make a better video on the topic?
              · What would enable you to do this?

      Here are some criteria I would apply to what you find:

              · it is relevant to what you want to teach;
              · it demonstrates clearly a particular topic or subject and links it to what the student is intended to

                 learn;
              · it is short and to the point;
              · the example is well produced (clear camera work, good presenter, clear audio);
              · it provides something that you could not do easily yourself;
              · it is freely available for non-commercial use.

      For feedback on this activity, and some further comments on the value of video, click on the podcast below:
396 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

                           An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                        https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=206
8.5 Computing

                                                                   397
398 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media
                                                                                  8.5 Computing 399

Figure 8.5.1 A computer-marked assignment form (University of Western Australia)

8.5.1 A volatile and comprehensive medium

It is debatable whether computing should be considered a medium, but I am using the term broadly,
and not in the technical sense of writing code. I prefer `computing' to `ICTs' (information and
communications technologies). Computing is a medium while ICT refers more to the technologies
used. The Internet in particular is an all-embracing medium that accommodates text, audio, video
and computing, as well as providing other elements such as distributed communication and access to
educational opportunities. Computing is also still an area that is fast developing, with new products
and services emerging all the time. Indeed, I will treat recent developments in social media and some
emerging technologies separately from computing, although technically they are sub-categories of
computing. Once again, though, social media and some emerging technologies contain affordances that
are not so prevalent in more conventional computing-based learning environments.

   In such a volatile medium, it would be foolish to be dogmatic about unique media characteristics,
but once again, the purpose of this chapter is not to provide a definitive analysis, but a way of thinking
about technology that will facilitate an instructor's choice and use of technology. The focus is: what are
the pedagogical affordances of computing that are different from those of other media (other than the
important fact that it can embrace all the other media characteristics)?

   Although there has been a great deal of research into computers in education, there has been less focus
on the specifics of its pedagogical media characteristics, although a great deal of interesting research
and development has taken place and continues in human-machine interaction and to a lesser extent in
artificial intelligence. Thus I am relying more on analysis and experience than research on the unique
affordances or characteristics of computing as an educational medium in this section.

8.5.2 Presentational features
400 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

                                         Presentation is not really where the educational strength of

                                         computing lies. It can represent text and audio reasonably well,

Figure 8.5.2 Screen size can be a real   and video less well, because of the limited size of the screen (and
presentational limitation with smaller,  video often has to share screen space with text), and the
mobile devices                           bandwidth/pixels/download time required. Screen size can be a

                                         real presentational limitation with smaller, mobile devices,

although tablets such as the iPad are a major advance in screen quality.

However, unlike the other media, computing enables the end user to interact directly with the medium,

to the extent that the end user (in education, the student) can add to, change or interact with the

content, at least to a certain extent. Also, more controversially, computing can automatically collect end-

user responses for analytics. In this sense, computing comes closer to a complete, if virtual, learning

environment.

Thus in presentational terms computing can be used to:

· create and present original teaching content in a rich and varied way (using a combination of
   text, audio, video and webinars);

· enable access to other sources of secondary `rich' content through the Internet;

· enable students to communicate both synchronously and asynchronously with the instructor
   and other students;

· structure and manage content through the use of web sites, learning management systems,
   video servers, and other similar technologies;

· create virtual worlds or virtual environments/contexts through technology such as
   animations, simulations, augmented or virtual reality, and serious games;

· set multiple-choice tests, automatically mark such tests, and provide immediate feedback to
                                                                                                                                            8.5 Computing 401

            learners;

         · enable learners digitally to submit written (essay-type), or multimedia (project-based)
            assignments through the use of e-portfolios.

8.5.3 Skills development

Skills development in a computing environment will once again depend very much on the
epistemological approach to teaching. Computing can be used to focus on comprehension and
understanding, through a behaviourist approach to computer-based learning (present/test/feedback).
However, the communications element of computing also enables more constructivist approaches,
through online student discussion and student-created multimedia work.

   Thus computing can be used (uniquely) to:

         · develop and test student comprehension of content through computer-based learning/testing;

         · develop computer coding and other computer-based skills;

         · develop decision-making skills through the use of digitally-based simulations and/or virtual
            worlds;

         · develop skills of reasoning, evidence-based argument, and collaboration through instructor-
            moderated online discussion forums;

         · enable students to create their own artefacts/online multimedia work through the use of e-
            portfolios, thus improving their digital communication skills as well as assessing better what
            they have learned;

         · develop skills of experimental design, through the use of simulations, virtual laboratory
            equipment and remote labs;

         · develop skills of knowledge management and problem-solving, by requiring students to find,
            analyse, evaluate and apply content, accessed through the Internet, to real world problems;

         · develop spoken and written language skills through both presentation of language and
            through communication with other students and/or native language speakers via the Internet

         · collect data on end-user/student interactions with computer and associated equipment such as
            mobile phones and tablets for:

                      learning analytics, which can be used to identify weaknesses in the design of the
                        teaching, and student success and failure regarding learning outcomes, including
                        skills development, as well as identifying at-risk students,

                      adaptive learning, offering learners alternative routes through learning materials,
                        providing an element of personalisation,

                      assessment (including monitoring),

                      automated or human feedback.

These affordances are in addition to the affordances that other media can support within a broader
computing environment.
402 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

8.5.4 Strengths and weaknesses of computing as a teaching medium

Many teachers and instructors avoid the use of computing because they fear it may be used to replace
them, or because they believe it results in a very mechanical approach to teaching and learning.
This is not helped by misinformed computer scientists, politicians and industry leaders who argue
that computers can replace or reduce the need for humans in teaching. Both viewpoints show a
misunderstanding of both the sophistication and complexity of teaching and learning, and the flexibility
and advantages that computing can bring to teaching.

   So here are some of the advantages of computing as a teaching medium:

         · it is a very powerful teaching medium in terms of its unique pedagogical characteristics, in
            that it can combine the pedagogical characteristics of text, audio, video and computing in an
            integrated manner;

         · its unique pedagogical characteristics are useful for teaching many of the skills learners need
            in a digital age;

         · computing can enable learners to have more power and choice in accessing and creating their
            own learning and learning contexts;

         · computing can enable learners to interact directly with learning materials and receive
            immediate feedback, thus, when well designed, increasing the speed and depth of their
            learning;

         · computing can enable anyone with Internet access and a computing device to study or learn
            at any time or place;

         · computing can enable regular and frequent communication between student, instructors and
            other students;

         · computing is flexible enough to be used to support a wide range of teaching philosophies and
            approaches;

         · computing can help with some of the `grunt' work in assessment and tracking of student
            performance, freeing up an instructor to focus on the more complex forms of assessment and
            interaction with students.

On the other hand, the disadvantages of computing are:

         · many teachers and instructors often have no training in or awareness of the strengths and
            weaknesses of computing as a teaching medium;

         · computing is too often oversold as a panacea for education; it is a powerful teaching medium,
            but it needs to be managed and controlled by educators;

         · the traditional user interface for computing, such as pull-down menus, cursor screen
            navigation, touch control, and an algorithmic-based filing or storage system, while all very
            functional, are not intuitive and can be quite restricting from an educational point of view.
            Voice recognition and search interfaces such as Siri and Alexa are an advance, and have
            potential for education, but at present they have not been used extensively as educational
            tools (at least by instructors);

         · there is a tendency for computer scientists and engineers to adopt behaviourist approaches to
                                                                                                                                            8.5 Computing 403

            the use of computing for education, which not only alienates constructivist-oriented teachers
            and learners, but also underestimates or underuses the true power of computing for teaching
            and learning;

         · despite computing's power as a teaching medium, there are many aspects of teaching and
            learning that require direct interaction between a student and teacher - and between students
            - even or especially in a fully online environment (see Chapter 4, Section 4) . The importance
            of face-to-face, human-to-human contact is probably greater the younger or the less mature
            the learner, but there will still be many learning contexts where face-to-face contact is
            necessary or highly desirable even for older or mature learners (this is discussed more in
            Chapter 10, Section 4). The importance of frequent face-to-face teacher-student interaction is
            also probably less than many instructors believe, but more than many advocates of computer
            learning understand. It is not either/or, but finding the right balance in the right context.

         · computing needs the input and management of teachers and educators, and to some extent
            learners, to determine the conditions under which computing can best operate as a teaching
            medium; and teachers need to be in control of the decisions on when and how to use
            computing for teaching and learning;

         · to use computing well, teachers need to work closely with other specialists, such as
            instructional designers and computer scientists.

The issue around the value of computing as a medium for teaching is less about its pedagogical value
and more about control. Because of the complexity of teaching and learning, it is essential that the use
of computing for teaching and learning is controlled and managed by educators. As long as teachers
and instructors have control, and have the necessary knowledge and training about the pedagogical
advantages and limitations of computing, then computing is an essential medium for teaching in a digital
age.

8.5.5 Assessment

There is a tendency to focus assessment in computing on multiple choice questions and `correct'
answers. Although this form of assessment has its value in assessing comprehension and for testing
a limited range of mechanical procedures, computing also supports a wider range of assessment
techniques, from learner-created blogs and wikis to e-portfolios. These more flexible forms of computer-
based assessment are more in alignment with measuring the knowledge and skills that many learners
will need in a digital age.

                                   Activity 8.5 Identifying the unique pedagogical characteristics of computing

      1. Take one of the courses you are teaching. What key presentational aspects of computing could be
   important for this course?

      2. Look at the skills listed in Section 1.2 of this book. Which of these skills would best be developed through
   the use of computing rather than other media? How would you do this using computer-based teaching?

      3. Under what conditions would it be more appropriate in any of your courses for students to be assessed
   by asking them to create their own multimedia project portfolios rather than through a written exam?
404 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

   What assessment conditions would be necessary to ensure the authenticity of a student's work? Would this
   form of assessment be extra work for you?

      4. What are the main barriers to your using computing more in your teaching? Philosophical? Practical?
   Lack of training or confidence in technology use? Or lack of institutional support? What could be done to
   remove some of these barriers?

      For feedback on some of these questions, click on the podcast below:

                           An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                        https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=210
8.6 Social media

Figure 8.6.1 The range of social media in 2010
Image: © Abhijit Kadle, Upside Learning, 2010

   Although social media are mainly Internet-based and hence a sub-category of computing, there are
enough significant differences between educational social media use and computer-based learning or
online collaborative learning to justify treating social media as a separate medium, although of course

                                                                   405
406 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

they are dependent and often fully integrated with other forms of computing. The main difference is in
the extent of control over learning that social media offer to learners.

8.6.1 What are social media?

Around 2005, a new range of web tools began to find their way into general use, and increasingly into
educational use. These can be loosely described as social media, as they reflect a different culture of web
use from the former `centre-to-periphery' push of institutional web sites.

   Here are some of the tools and their uses (there are many more possible examples: click on each
example for an educational application):
                                                                    8.6 Social media 407

Type of tool        Example                            Application
Blogs
                    Stephen's Web                      Allows an individual to make regular postings to the web, e.g. a
                    Online Learning and Distance       personal diary or an analysis of current events
                    Education Resources

Wikis               Wikipedia                          An "open" collective publication, allowing people to contribute or
                    UBC's Math Exam Resources          create a body of information
                                                       A social utility that connects people with friends and others who
Social networking   FaceBook                           work, study and interact with them
                    LinkedIn                           Allows end users to access, store, download and share audio
                                                       recordings, photographs, and videos
Multi-media         Podcasts
archives
                    You-Tube
                    Flikr
                    e-portfolios
                    MIT Open Course-Ware

Multi-player games  RainbowSix Siege                   Enables players to compete or collaborate against each other or a
                    Dragonfly                          third party/parties represented by the computer, usually in real
                    Propulsive Problematics            time

Mobile learning     Mobile phones and apps, e.g. Soil  Enables users to access multiple information formats (voice, text,
                    TopARgraphy                        video, etc.) at any time, any place

                 Figure 8.6.2 Examples of social media (adapted from Bates, 2011, p.25)

   The main feature of social media is that they empower the end user to access, create, disseminate
and share information easily in a user-friendly, open environment. Usually the only direct cost is the
time of the end-user. There are often few controls over content, other than those normally imposed
408 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

by a state or government (such as libel or pornography). One feature of such tools is to empower the
end-user - the learner or customer - to self-access and manage data (such as online banking) and to
form personal networks (for example through FaceBook). For these reasons, some have called social
media the `democratization' of the web, although at the same time one could argue that social media are
now heavily commercialised through advertising.

   In general, social media tools are based on very simple software, in that they have relatively few lines
of code. As a result, new tools and applications (`apps') are constantly emerging, and their use is either
free or very low cost. For a good broad overview of the use of social media in education, see Lee and
McCoughlin (2011).

8.6.2 General affordances of social media

The concept of `affordances' is frequently used in discussions of social media. McLoughlin & Lee
(2011) identify the following `affordances' associated with social media (although they use the term web
2.0) in general:

         · connectivity and social rapport;
         · collaborative information discovery and sharing;
         · content creation;
         · knowledge and information aggregation and content modification.

However, we need to specify more directly the unique pedagogical characteristics of social media.

8.6.3 Presentational characteristics

Social media enable:

         · networked multimedia communication between self-organising groups of learners;
         · access to rich, multimedia content available over the Internet at any time or place, as long as

            there is a suitable Internet connection;
         · learner-generated multimedia materials;
         · opportunities to expand learning beyond `closed' courses and institutional boundaries.

8.6.4 Skills development

Social media,when well designed within an educational framework, can help with the development of
the following skills (click on each to see examples):

         · digital literacy: this web site was designed by the Library at the University of British
            Columbia to enable students to manage their digital identity;

         · independent and self-directed learning: this is a Wiki built by UBC math graduate students to
            provide assistance to undergraduate students in their exams;
                                                                                                                                          8.6 Social media 409

         · collaboration/collaborative learning/teamwork; this was a class project to build Wikipedia
            entries on Latin American literature by a third year undergraduate class at UBC;

         · internationalisation/development of global citizens;

         · networking and other inter-personal skills;

         · knowledge management; students at UBC use social media to research emerging
            technologies and build a possible educational business around the technology

         · decision-making in specific contexts (for example, emergency management, law
            enforcement).

8.6.5 Strengths and weaknesses of social media

Some of the advantages of social media are as follows:

         · they can be extremely useful for developing some of the key skills needed in a digital age,
            such as digital communication akills;

         · they can enable teachers to set online group work, based on cases or projects, and students
            can collect data in the field using social media such as mobile phones or iPads;

         · learners can post media-rich assignments either individually or as a group;

         · these assignments when assessed can be loaded by the learner into their own personal
            learning environment or e-portfolios for later use when seeking employment or transfer to
            graduate school;

         · learners can take more control over their own learning, as we have seen in connectivist
            MOOCs in Chapter 5 Section 3.2

         · through the use of blogs and wikis, courses and learning can be thrown open to the world,
            adding richness and wider perspectives to learning.

However, many students are not, at least initially, independent learners (see Candy, 1991). Many
students come to a learning task without the necessary skills or confidence to study independently from
scratch (Moore and Thompson, 1990). They need structured support, structured and selected content,
and recognized accreditation. The advent of new tools that give students more control over their learning
will not necessarily change their need for a structured educational experience. However, learners can be
taught the skills needed to become independent learners (Moore, 1973; Marshall and Rowland, 1993).
Social media can make the learning of how to learn much more effective but still only in most cases
within an initially structured environment.

   The use of social media raises the inevitable issue of quality. How can learners differentiate between
reliable, accurate, authoritative information, and inaccurate, biased or unsubstantiated information, if
they are encouraged to roam free? What are the implications for expertise and specialist knowledge,
when everyone has a view on everything? As Andrew Keen (2007) has commented, `we are replacing
the tyranny of experts with the tyranny of idiots.' Not all information is equal, nor are all opinions.

   These are key challenges for the digital age, but as well as being part of the problem, social media can
also be part of the solution. Teachers can consciously use social media for the development of knowledge
management and the responsible use of social media, but the development of such knowledge and
skills through the use of social media will need a teacher-supported environment. Many students look for
410 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

structure and guidance in their learning, and it is the responsibility of teachers to provide it. We therefore
need a middle ground between the total authority and control of the teacher, and the complete anarchy
of the children roaming free on a desert island in the novel "Lord of the Flies" (Golding, 1954). Social
media allow for such a middle ground, but only if as teachers we have a clear pedagogy or educational
philosophy to guide our choices and use of the technology.

   For more on social media, see Chapter 9, Section 8.

References

Bates, T. (2011) `Understanding Web 2.0 and Its Implications for e-Learning' in Lee, M. and
   McCoughlin, C. (eds.) Web 2.0-Based E-Learning Hershey NY: Information Science Reference

Candy, P. (1991) Self-direction for lifelong learning San Francisco: Jossey-Bass
Golding, W. (1954) The Lord of the Flies London: Faber and Faber
Keen, A. (2007) The Cult of the Amateur: How Today's Internet is Killing our Culture New York/

   London: Doubleday
Lee, M. and McCoughlin, C. (eds.) Web 2.0-Based E-Learning Hershey NY: Information Science

   Reference
Marshall, L. and Rowland, F. (1993) A Guide to learning independently Buckingham UK: Open

   University Press
McCoughlin, C. and Lee, M. (2011) `Pedagogy 2.0: Critical Challenges and Responses to Web 2.0

   and Social Software in Tertiary Teaching', in Lee, M. and McCoughlin, C. (eds.) Web 2.0-Based
   E-Learning Hershey NY: Information Science Reference
   Moore,M. (1973) Toward a Theory of Independent Learning and Teaching, Journal of Higher
Education, Volume 44, No. 9
Moore, M. and Thompson, M. (1990) The Effects of Distance Education: A Summary of the
   Literature University Park, PA: American Center for Distance Education, Pennsylvania State
   University

                                  Activity 8.6 Identifying the unique pedagogical characteristics of social media

      1. Take one of your courses, and analyse how social media could be used in your course. In particular:

              · what new learning outcomes could the use of social media help develop?

              · would it be better just to add social media to the course or to re-design it around social media?

      2. I have offered only a cursory list of the unique pedagogical characteristics of social media. Can you think
   of others that have not already been covered in this section?

      3. How does this chapter influence your views on students bringing their own devices to class?

      4. Are you (still) skeptical about the value of social media in education? What do you see as its downsides?

      For feedback on some of these questions and some more general points about social media in education,
   click on the podcast below.
                                                                                                                   8.6 Social media 411

   An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=213
8.7.a Emerging technologies: serious games and gamification

Figure 8.7a.1 The Gartner Hype Cycle for Emerging Technologies. Image: Wikimedia Commons, 2019

8.7a.1 The challenge of emerging technologies
It is not uncommon for a school principal, a college VP Education, or a university president to go to a
conference and come back thrilled about the potential of the latest technology for teaching and learning.
They are victims of what the consulting firm Gartner calls the hype cycle.

   A new technology triggers excitement, the media picks up on it, the technology reaches a peak of
inflated expectations, it starts to get more widely applied, disillusionment sinks in when faced with
the realities of implementation, then the technology starts to find its niche as better understanding of

                                                                   413
414 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

its strengths and weaknesses emerge, eventually reaching a plateau of productivity, where it works
well within its limits. MOOCs are an excellent example of this, with most knowledgeable observers in
2019 placing them towards the top of the slope of enlightenment or just emerging on to the plateau of
productivity (see, for instance, Web Courseworks, 2018).

   New technologies that have educational applications are constantly emerging. For instance in the first
edition of this book (written in 2015) there was no extensive discussion of artificial intelligence, virtual
reality or serious games, yet four years later they are now at the forefront of many discussions about the
future of digital learning, which is why this section has been added. There are several other technologies
that could be included, but many of these will be subsumed under artificial intelligence.

   I will not be able to go into depth about any of these three technologies (each deserves its own
book), but they are significant enough to bring them to your attention. Once again, I will focus on their
potential affordances, although it must be recognised that with all emerging technology, it may take time
to identify all their advantages and disadvantages.

8.7a.2 Serious games

Gartner's hype cycle is best considered as a way of thinking about emerging technologies, rather than
as a factual representation of their development. For instance, serious games are more of a slow burner.
There have never been vastly inflated expectations about their likely impact on education; indeed for a
long time they have been written off as too expensive or not appropriate for serious education. However,
that view has been changing in recent years.

8.7a.2.1 What are serious games?

There are several different definitions of serious games. I have included two definitions that cover both
educational and corporate settings.

   The Financial Times Lexicon offers the following definition:

     Serious games are games designed for a purpose beyond pure entertainment. They use the
     motivation levers of game design - such as competition, curiosity, collaboration, individual
     challenge - and game media, including board games through physical representation or video
     games, through avatars and 3D immersion, to enhance the motivation of participants to engage in
     complex or boring tasks. Serious games are therefore used in a variety of professional situations
     such as education, training, assessment, recruitment, knowledge management, innovation and
     scientific research.

   Zhonggen (2019) provides this definition in his comprehensive review of the research on serious
games:

     Serious games are referred to as entertaining tools with a purpose of education, where players
     cultivate their knowledge and practice their skills through overcoming numerous hindrances during
     gaming.

   It is important to distinguish between serious games, game-based learning and gamification because
of the differences in their purpose, approach and impact on learning.

         · Game-based learning refers to "the pedagogical approach of utilizing games in education"
                                                                              8.7.a Emerging technologies: serious games and gamification 415

            (Anastasiadis, Lampropoulos and Siakas, 2018)

         · Gamification is defined as the "use of game design elements in non-game contexts"
            (Deterding et al., 2011)

Note that serious games are not necessarily digital. However, whether digital or not, they are governed
by similar principles of of design, such as mechanics, dynamics and aesthetics (Hunicke et al., 2004).

8.7a.2.2 Why use serious games?

The main reasons offered for using games in education are to:

         · improve students' motivation to learn,

         · engage learners more deeply in the learning process,

         · improve learning outcomes,

         · improve attendance and participation.

However, an extensive review of the literature conducted by Dichev and Dicheva in 2017 found that
research remains inconclusive on these assumptions. They also found that:

         · the practice of gamifying learning has outpaced researchers' understanding of its mechanisms
            and methods;

         · insufficient high quality evidence exists to support the long-term benefits of serious games in
            an educational context;

         · a limited understanding that how to gamify an activity depends on the specifics of the
            educational context.

Dichev and Dicheva do conclude though that their study does not mean that gamification cannot be used
successfully in a learning context; rather better designs and more research are needed.

   Other research tends to be more positive. Hamari et al. (2016) and Clark et al. (2016) found sufficient
evidence that, when well designed, and under the right conditions, serious games significantly enhanced
student learning relative to nongame conditions.

   Zhonggen (2019) found among the ` huge number of findings in serious game assisted learning, most
...are supportive, coupled with a few negative results.' However, the main benefits tended to be in the
affective domain (student `happiness' and improved social learning and communication) rather than in
immediately improved cognitive learning outcomes, except in science (improved retention and holistic
understanding), architecture and medicine/health. In the latter, games helped children with autism to
learn. Zhonggen reports:

   `Generally, ... medical science has recently witnessed clearly more studies on serious game assisted
learning compared with other fields and most of studies in medical science supported use of serious
games.'

8.7a.2.3 Examples of serious games

The Digital Education Strategies team (DES) at Ryerson University has participated in the development
of several virtual games simulations including:
416 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

   Games-based learning: Ryerson University's Academic Integrity office, in collaboration with DES,
developed a digital learning game called Academic Integrity in Space to motivate students to complete
self-study training and to learn about the academic integrity, values and behaviours expected of students.
The game development team's objectives were to create a well-designed digital game to meet the
learning objectives of making choices, learning by doing, and experiencing situations first-hand, through
role-playing.

Figure 8.7a.2 Academic Integrity game, Ryerson University. Click on image to play game

   Video Game Simulation: A Home Visit game promotes the application of knowledge and skills
related to establishing a therapeutic nurse-client relationship and completing a mental health assessment.
Students assume the role of a community health nurse assigned to complete a home visit. Video
is used to create an authentic experience, and students have to respond to particularly challenging
situations, based on procedures taught elsewhere in the course. Depending on the student response,
further video segments are used to provide feedback and to continue to scenarios to test the next
appropriate procedure. Professors from Centennial College, Ryerson University and George Brown
College are developing a series of open access video game simulations through a virtual healthcare
experience portal.
                                                                              8.7.a Emerging technologies: serious games and gamification 417

Figure 8.7a.3 Home visit video game, Ryerson University. Click on image to see video.

   Gamification: Kyle Geske, an instructor at Red River College, Winnipeg, has developed a games-
based approach to teaching web design. In his elective course on Full Stack Development of web sites,
students have to design a project according to principles provided by the instructor. At each stage of the
design process within the project students gain marks, and compete throughout the course with other
students, who can see the marks at each stage for all the other students. A student can `level up' their
mark by going back and improving on each of the steps of the design. This approach has resulted in an
increase in the average end of course grade compared to the more traditional classroom methods. Note
this course involves elements of gaming, such as competition, and `levelling up', without using games
themselves.

8.7a.2.4 Designing serious games

Zhonggen's review of the literature (2018) highlighted the importance of the following in effective
games design:

            ·backstory and production,
            ·realism,
            ·artificial intelligence and adaptivity,
            ·interaction,
            ·feedback and debriefing,
418 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

            ·ease of use,

            ·surprises.

As a result of this prior research, and under the leadership of Naza Djafarova, the Digital Education
Strategies team (DES) at the G. Raymond Chang School for Continuing Education at Ryerson University
in Toronto developed a practical design guide (2018) for serious game-based learning, based on a games
research process. This guide is an open educational resource and is designed to serve three purposes:

         · provide a conceptual framework to guide game design within multidisciplinary teams in
            higher education;

         · offer a methodological guide to running a participatory workshop focused on the pre-
            production phase of the game development process;

         · share resources by making the guide and the design of the workshop available as open
            educational resources.

The games design methodology is an adaptation of the Design, Play, and Experience (DPE) Framework,
developed by Winn (2009). The game development process consists of three phases:

         · the pre-production phase, during which brainstorming among team members takes place,
            leading to the design of a paper prototype of the game;

         · the production phase, when the game is developed; and
         · the post-production phase, during which the game is tested and refined before being offered

            to learners.

The Digital Education Strategies team utilized the Design, Play and Experience model to identify four
essential educational game elements:

         · Learning refers to the content to be learned by players through the game with specific and
            measurable learning outcomes;

         · Storytelling refers to the background story of the game and includes a description of the
            character(s), the setting, and the ultimate goal of the game;

         · Gameplay refers to the way in which the player interacts with the game, or with other
            players (if a multiplayer game). It encapsulates the type of activity (e.g., puzzle, trivia, etc.)
            found in the game;

       · User Experience refers to the player's emotions and attitudes while playing the
          game, as well as how the player interacts with the game.

Figure 8.7a.4 provides a more detailed representation of the various components of the Ryerson serious
game design methodology.
                                                                              8.7.a Emerging technologies: serious games and gamification 419

Figure 8.7a.4 Serious game design methodology, from Djafarova er al., 2018

   The Digital Education Strategies' report suggests a workshop approach to serious games design, in
which all the key stakeholders (content experts, instructional designers, media producers, and so forth)
are involved. Brainstorming in the early stages of design is considered essential. Also built into the
design is testing and user feedback before releasing the game.

   There are probably other effective design approaches, but the above approach highlights the essential
multi-disciplinary approach of serious games design.

8.7a.2.5 Unique educational characteristics of serious games

These still need to be clearly identified and validated, but two rather different claims are made for serious
games:

         · the first is that they can increase student motivation and engagement;
420 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

         · the second is that games can be particularly useful for developing the following skills:

                      problem solving

                      communication skills

                      decision-making

     within specific contexts that approximate to the real world.

8.7a.2.6 Strengths and weaknesses

In terms of the hype cycle, serious games are somewhere along the slope of enlightenment. There is not
the research yet to move them into the plateau of productivity, but there is enough evidence from practice
that they are gaining traction in education.

   However, there are a number of reasons why serious games have not become more prevalent in
education. The first is philosophical. There is resistance to the idea of games because some see serious
games as an oxymoron. How can a game be serious? Many instructors fear that learning could easily
be trivialised through games or that games can cover only a very limited part of what learning should
be about - it can't all be fun; that is not the purpose of education. Similarly, many professional game
designers are not interested in developing serious games because they fear that if the primary goal is
learning and not enjoyment, a focus on education risks killing the main element of a game: being fun to
play.

   A more pragmatic reason is cost and quality. The assumed high cost of video games has so far acted
as a deterrent in education. There is no obvious business plan to justify the investment. The best selling
video games for entertainment for instance cost millions of dollars to produce, on a scale similar to
mainstream movies. If games are produced cheaply, won't the quality - in terms of production standards,
narrative/plot, visuals, and learner engagement - suffer, thus making them unattractive for learners?

   However, probably the main reason serious games are not more prevalent in education is that most
educators simply do not know enough about serious games: what exists, how they can be used, nor how
to design them. Experience suggests that there are many possible and realistic applications for serious
games in education. There is some evidence (see for instance, Arnab, 2014) that effective serious games
can be developed at very little cost.

   Nevertheless, there is always a high degree of risk in serious games design. There is no sure way
of predicting in advance that a new game will be successful. Some low-cost simple games can work
well; some expensively produced games can easily flop. This means careful testing and feedback during
development. So serious games should be more seriously considered for teaching in a digital age - but
their application needs to be done carefully and professionally.

   Thus serious games are a relatively high risk, high return activity for teaching in a digital age. Success
in serious games means building on best practices in games design, both within and outside education,
sharing costs and experience, and collaboration between institutions and games development teams.
However, as teaching in a digital age moves more and more towards high-level skills development,
experiential learning, and problem-solving in real world contexts, serious games are bound to play an
increasingly important role.
            8.7.a Emerging technologies: serious games and gamification 421

References

Anastasiadis, T. et al. (2018) Digital Game-based Learning and Serious Games in Education
International Journal of Advances in Scientific Research and Engineering, Vol. 4, No. 12

   Arnab, S. et al. (2014) Mapping learning and game mechanics for serious games analysis. British
Journal of Educational Technology, Vol. 46, No. 2, pp 391-411

   Deterding, S. et al. (2011) Gamification: Using Game Design Elements in Non-Gaming Contexts
in PART 2-Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference extended abstracts on Human Factors in
Computing Systems Vancouver BC: CHI

   Dichev, C. and Dicheva, D. (2017) Gamifying education: what is known, what is believed and
what remains uncertain: a critical review International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher
Education, Vol. 14, No. 9

   Djafarov, N. et el. (2018) The Art of Serious Game Design Toronto ON: Chang School of Continuing
Studies, Ryerson University

   Hunicke, R., LeBlanc, M., & Zubek, R. (2004). MDA: A formal approach to game design and game
research, in Proceedings of the Challenges in Game AI Workshop, San Jose CA: Nineteenth National
Conference on Artificial Intelligence

   Winn, B. (2009) `The design, play and experience framework', in R. Ferdig (Ed.), Handbook of
research on effective electronic gaming in education. Hershey, PA: IGI Global (pp. 388-401).

   Zhonggen, Y. (2019) A Meta-Analysis of Use of Serious Games in Education over a Decade,
International Journal of Computer Games Technology, vol. 2019, Article ID 4797032

            Activity 8.7a Using and designing seriou games

      1. What are your views on serious games and gamification? Do you think they are useful approaches
           to teaching in a digital age, or are they just a gimmick that avoids the real challenges of learning,
           especially at a higher education level?

      2. Take a look at the Ryerson University's `Art of Serious Games Design'. Is this a model that could
           be used at your institution? Who would lead this effort? With what learning goals or outcomes
           could this process help in your program? What would be the main barrier to doing this?

      3. What other approaches could be taken to getting serious games used in your teaching?

Click on the podcast below for feedback on this activity.

                   An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=1313
8.7.b. Emerging technologies: virtual and augmented reality

                                                                       Figure 8.7.b.1 Video by Atelier 101. Click on image to see
                                                                       video

   As with serious games, virtual and augmented reality are technologies that have been around for
some time while making a relatively small impact on education in their earlier development. However
more recent technological developments that have moved virtual worlds from two-dimensions (such as
Second Life) into three-dimensional, deeply immersive environments have brought more attention to
their potential in education (for a good overview of the history and potential of augmented and virtual
reality in education, see Elmqadden, 2019).
8.7b.1 What are virtual/augmented/mixed reality?
A simple definition of these technologies is `human immersion in a synthetic world` (Seidel and
Chatelier, 1997). The Franklin Institute provides the following more detailed definitions that attempt to
distinguish between the different types of `synthetic' worlds:

     Augmented reality (AR) adds digital elements to a live view often by using the camera on a
     smartphone. Examples of augmented reality experiences include Snapchat lenses and the game
     Pokémon Go.
     Virtual reality (VR) implies a complete immersion experience that shuts out the physical world.
     Using VR devices such as HTC Vive, Oculus Rift or Google Cardboard, users can be transported
     into a number of real-world and imagined environments such as the middle of a squawking penguin
     colony or even the back of a dragon.
     In a mixed reality (MR) experience, which combines elements of both AR and VR, real-world and

                                                                   423
424 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

     digital objects interact. Mixed reality technology is just now starting to take off, with Microsoft's
     HoloLens one of the most notable early mixed reality apparatuses.

   I will use the term `immersive technologies' for all these technologies. However, verbal descriptions
will always be somewhat inadequate in describing what are essentially multi-sensory experiences,
combining vision, hearing and movement. These technologies are something that need to be experienced
rather than explained if they are to be better understood.

8.7b.2 Why use immersive technologies?

There are several reasons why these technologies are beginning to be used more in education:

         · the recent development of relatively low cost and easily wearable end-user technology
            (headsets in particular);

         · deep immersion into three-dimensional, highly realistic learning environments that are
            strongly compelling/motivating for the end user;

         · the ability for end users to manipulate objects within the three dimensional environment;
         · more powerful cloud computing technology that allows for the development of more

            complex and more realistic learning environments, combined with more advanced
            developments in mobile technologies and high-speed wireless networks;
         · the potential for developing a range of skills and knowledge that would be difficult,
            impossible or dangerous in real-world environments.

8.7b.3 Examples of immersive environments in education

Looking at the challenges above, it may be wondered why anyone would bother with immersive
technologies in education. However, the potential benefits have barely been explored. I provide
examples here that demonstrate both the potential benefits and how some immersive environments can
be developed relatively easily.

8.7b.3.1 Virtual reality

In the Department of Chemistry at the University of Bristol in England, Dr. David Glowacki and his
team in their VR laboratory created an interactive molecular dynamics modelling tool in the form
of Nano Simbox VR, which allowed anyone to visit and play within the invisible molecular world
(O'Connor et al., 2018). The main aim of this particular project was to provide an intuitive feeling of
the way molecules operate in multiple dimensions to enable researchers and students to have a better
understanding of how nano worlds operate, leading to better hypotheses for testing within this
particular domain.

   As the authors state in the article:

         From a modeling perspective, the nanoscale represents an interesting domain, because the objects of
         study (for example, molecules) are invisible to the naked eye, and their behavior is governed by physical
         forces and interactions significantly different from those forces and interactions that we encounter during
         our day-to-day phenomenological experience. In domains like this, which are imperceptible to the naked
                                                                               8.7.b. Emerging technologies: virtual and augmented reality 425

         eye, effective models are vital to provide the insight required to make research progress....molecular
         systems typically have thousands of degrees of freedom. As a result, their motion is characterized by a
         complicated, highly correlated, and elegant many-body dynamical choreography, which is nonintuitive
         compared to the more familiar mechanics of objects that we encounter in the everyday physical world.
         Their combined complexity, unfamiliarity, and importance make molecules particularly interesting
         candidates for investigating the potential of new digital modeling paradigms.

Glowacki and his team in Science Advances (O'Connor et al., 2018) describe how the VR app enabled
researchers to:

         · easily "grab" individual C60 atoms and manipulate their real-time dynamics to pass the
            C60 back and forth between each other.

         · take hold of a fully solvated benzylpenicillin ligand and interactively guide it to dock it
            within the active site of the TEM-1 -lactamase enzyme (with both molecules fully flexible
            and dynamic) and generate the correct binding mode (33), a process that is important to
            understanding antimicrobial resistance

         · guide a methane molecule (CH4) through a carbon nanotube, changing the screw sense of an
            organic helicene molecule,

         · tie a knot in a small polypeptide [17-alanine (17-ALA)

Figure 8.7b.2 The use of virtual reality to foster chemical intuition Dr. David Glowacki, University of Bristol. Click on
the image to see the video.
426 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

   Building dynamic models that operate not only in real time but also in three dimensions can require
not only specialized virtual reality equipment, but more importantly massive amounts of computing
power to handle the visual representation and modelling of highly complex, interactive dynamic
molecular processes. However, through the use of cloud computing and faster networks, building such
models has now become a reality, enabling not only such models to be represented but allowing some
degree of real-time manipulation by researchers in different locations but within the same time-frame.
The main advantage of the use of a cloud platform is to allow the scaling up of modelling from simple
to much more complex dynamic nano interactions and the synchronous sharing of the virtual reality
experience with multiple users.

   Not all applications of VR though need massive computing power. Other exploratory uses of virtual
reality are

         · for students to find their way round a complex campus

         · in architecture/space planning, allowing clients to understand in three dimensions the final
            `look' of a building design by virtually walking through it (Brandaõ et al., 2018), Google
            Blocks, a free software program for developing 3D models, is one tool that can support this
            kind of application.

         · in music: at the University of British Columbia, Dr. Jonathon Girard is exploring the use of
            VR for learning how to conduct an orchestra (the virtual orchestra `responds' to the hand
            gestures of the conductor)

         · in medicine and health: researchers at UBC are exploring the use of VR for pain management

8.7b.3.2 Augmented reality

Augmented reality is a simpler immersive technology than virtual reality, often based on apps for mobile
phones. For instance, students in the University of British Columbia's APBI 200 Introduction to Soil
Science learn about the effects of topography on the formation of different soil types. The department
has developed the Soil TopARgraphy app, which allows viewing and manipulating a terrain model in
the Kamloops region of British Columbia. Students learn how topography impacts the distribution of
soil orders through its effects on microclimate (i.e. temperature and water). Students are able to view the
terrain model with a color-coded elevation map or a satellite image on their mobile phones. Furthermore,
students can tap on flags to read about different soil orders, view images, and take a self-study quiz to
reinforce their understanding.

   For this project, UBC's Emerging Media Lab built two mobile apps, an AR viewer for students
(Android and iOS) and an editor for the instructor (Android). The AR viewer is the app described above
to view a predefined terrain. The instructor can customize contents with the supplementary editor app.
They can update soil location on terrain, description, image, and quizzes
                                                                               8.7.b. Emerging technologies: virtual and augmented reality 427

                               Figure 8.7.c.3 Screen images from Soil TopARgraphy

   Other examples of AR applications from UBC:
         · Dr. Patrick Walls is developing a mobile phone-based app that helps students visualise
            multivariable functions, in order to learn the underlying concepts at a deeper level much
            more quickly.
         · in GEOG 498: Geographies in the Middle East, students learn about the history of the Syrian
            Civil War and its ongoing developments. The instructor, Dr. Siobhán McPhee, has developed
            a mobile app that follows the stories of five Syrian refugees who eventually reached
            Vancouver. Students are forced to make choices (or given a lack of choice), wait, and run/
            walk with the app to be able to progress the narrative of the experience. The purpose of this
            project is to evoke empathy and help students understand the emotional consequences of the
            Syrian Civil War. This app also applies some gamification principles as well.

8.7b.4 Designing immersive educational environments
This technology is so recent that there are few or no accepted best practices developed yet for
educational use. Most educational applications to date have been deliberately exploratory in nature.
However, there are several stages of development required that will apply to all educational applications
of these technologies:

         · identify start-up costs and possible sources of funding: this is not likely to be a cheap
428 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

            exercise, at least initially; for this reason, several universities, such as the University of
            British Columbia, and Drexel University, have set up their own emerging technologies
            research labs to experiment with educational applications;

         · define learning outcomes/objectives: what is the learner expected to learn? In the early stages
            of development this may be both a brainstorming exercise (preferably including students/end-
            users) and an iterative process, because the full potential of the technology is not always clear
            in first applications. In particular, the instructor needs to have a clear vision of what might be
            possible using an immersive technology. Thus some familiarity with the technology is
            essential before starting design;

         · determine where the use of this technology fits within the overall design of a course/program:
            in other words, what knowledge and skills will be developed within the immersive
            environment, and how does this integrate with what is being taught in the rest of the course/
            program?

         · decide between using an existing immersive design/learning environment that can be applied
            or adapted relatively easily for `local' use; or designing a new immersive environment from
            scratch. The latter is obviously more expensive and time-consuming and will require a high
            level of expertise; as a result the pay-off from design from scratch (improved learning
            outcomes/return on investment) needs to be worth the effort;

         · choice of appropriate/affordable technology. Headsets or mobile apps are the least expensive
            part of the use of immersive technologies. The main cost will be in developing or adapting
            the `augmented' or `virtual' world. However, as with serious games, there can be an
            intermediary step, where an existing `world' can be licensed and adapted for local use (see
            for instance, Lightwave). In some cases, open access immersive worlds are available for use
            or adaptation, although they are not common (see OpenSimulator, Art of
            Illusion, or MayaVerse, for examples.). Often students can be used to help with programming
            and design of the environment, as part of their studies, but they will need direction as well as
            the opportunity to offer creative ideas. Truly interactive virtual worlds where learners/users
            make decisions and the consequences are `programmed' into the learning environment may
            require large amounts of computing capacity, such as cloud computing;

         · to be effective, the VR environment has to be as authentic or realistic as possible. This means
            paying as much attention to creating the specific learning context. It will be necessary to
            decide what parts of the learning will best be done outside the VR/AR experience, and which
            inside. For instance, the procedures for monitoring the state of a nuclear reactor, for
            identifying critical incidents, for deciding whether or not or when to shut down the reactor,
            and for actually shutting down the reactor must also be built in to the learning process. Most
            of this may be taught outside the VR context, but VR can be used to test or develop the skills
            of applying this knowledge in a realistic, challenging context. In other words, the VR
            experience needs to be embedded within a broader learning context or environment;

         · testing and adaptation: design, at least initially, needs to be an iterative process, where ideas
            are developed and tried, and feedback received and incorporated into the design;

         · assessment: this can be a particular challenge, particularly if new learning outcomes result
            from the experience. How can assessment best capture what students have learned? Will
            assessment take place within the `virtual' world, in the real world, or in some other way (and
            if so, how authentic will such an assessment be)?
                                                                               8.7.b. Emerging technologies: virtual and augmented reality 429

         · in what ways could the new immersive environment be scaled up to enable costs to be
            recovered?

         · evaluation: what is the best way to evaluate the success or limitations of the design and
            application of the immersive world? How best to disseminate the knowledge and experience
            gained?

These may appear formidable challenges, but the potential benefits could be considerable.

8.7b.5 The unique characteristics of immersive technologies

The development of fully immersive technologies is so recent that it is premature to try to identify
all the educational affordances that are unique to this medium. New applications are being explored
all the time. Most of the evidence is qualitative, based on people's personal experience of using the
technology. Empirical evidence that validates specific educational affordances of VR/AR in terms of
improved learning outcomes is currently lacking. However, the potential of VR/AR in terms of assisting
learning can be identified.

   First of all, many of the affordances or educational characteristics of other media, and in particular
video, will apply to VR and AR, but often more intensely, because of the immersive experience.

   Virtual and augmented reality applications can provide students with a deep, intuitive understanding
of phenomena that are otherwise difficult if not impossible to achieve in other ways. This enables
students who often struggle with the abstract nature of an academic subject to understand in more
concrete terms what the abstractions mean or represent. This intuitive understanding is critical not only
for deeper understanding but also for breakthroughs in research and applications of science.

   Educational applications where the cost of alternative or traditional ways of learning are too expensive
or too dangerous, will be particularly suitable for virtual reality applications. Examples might be
emergency management, such as shutting down an out-of-control nuclear reactor, or defusing a bomb,
or managing a fire on an oil tanker, or exploring inside the physical structure of a human brain. In
particular, VR would be appropriate for learning in contexts where real environments are not easily
accessible, or where learners need to cope with strong emotions when making decisions or operating
under pressure in real time.

   AR, which is often easier to design and implement, enables learners to practice applications of
knowledge in semi-realistic contexts.

   However, at the time of writing we are just beginning to understand the potential of this medium. Over
time, the educational affordances of this medium will become much clearer.

8.7b.6 Strengths and weaknesses

VR is not just a fad that will disappear. There are already a large number of commercial applications,
mainly in entertainment and public relations, but also increasingly for specific areas of education and
training. There is already a lot of excellent, off-the-shelf software for creating VR environments, and
the cost of hardware is dropping rapidly (although good quality headsets and other equipment are still
probably too expensive for required use by large numbers of students).

   The fields of application of this technology are unlimited: training in the use of complex equipment,
simulation of surgical procedures, architectural design testing, the reconstruction of sites in archeology,
virtual museum visits, treatment of pain and phobias, and many other possibilities.
430 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

   To enable the more emotional aspects of decision making to be handled, the immersive experience
needs to be realistic. This will probably require high quality media production. Thus VR may often
need to be combined with simulation design, quality media production and powerful computing to be
educationally effective, again pushing up the cost. For these reasons, medicine is a particularly likely
area for development, where traditional training costs are really high or where training is difficult to
provide with real patients.

   Once again, though, applications will tend to be very specific to the needs of a particular subject area.
This means designers must include subject specialists with a deep understanding of the field who can
combine the power of the technology with the needs of learners in a particular learning context. VR in
particular requires instructors with imagination and creativity, working with other professionals such as
media producers, learners themselves, as well as specialists in VR design.

   What has inhibited widespread educational use of earlier two-dimensional VR developments such as
Second Life has been the high cost and difficulty of creating the graphics and contexts for learning.
Thus even if the hardware and software costs for VR are low enough for individual student use, the high
production costs of creating realistic educational contexts and scenarios are likely to inhibit its general
use.

   Some caution is also needed in assuming that people will behave the same in real life as they do in
VR environments. Gallup et al. (2019) found a major difference in the influence of social factors within
real-world and virtual environments: social cues in actual reality appear to dominate and supersede those
in VR. One of the authors, Alan Kingstone, concluded:

              "Using VR to examine how people think and behave in real life may very well lead to
           conclusions that are fundamentally wrong. This has profound implications for people who hope
           to use VR to make accurate projections regarding future behaviours. For example, predicting
           how pedestrians will behave when walking amongst driverless cars, or the decisions that pilots
           will make in an emergency situation. Experiences in VR may be a poor proxy for real life."

                                                                                                            Rolfsen, 2019
   This means we need more experimentation. This is still a relatively new technology, and there may
be very simple ways to use it in education that are not costly and meet needs that cannot be easily met
in traditional teaching or with other existing technology. For this to happen, though, educators, software
developers, and media producers need to come together to play, experiment, test and evaluate.
   Nevertheless, VR and AR are exciting technologies with the potential to change radically
conventional learning processes.

References

Brandaõ, G. et al. (2018) Virtual Reality as a Tool for Teaching Architecture in Design, User Experience,
and Usability: Designing Interactions Las Vegas NV: Proceedings of 7th International Conference,
DUXU 2018, held as Part of HCI International 2018,

   Connolly, B. (2018) How virtual reality is transforming learning at the University of Newcastle, CIO,
8 March

   Elmqadden, N. (2019) Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality in Education: Myth or Reality?
International Journal of Emerging Technologies in Learning, Vol. 14, No. 3

   Gallup, A. et al. (2019) Contagious yawning in virtual reality is affected by actual, but not simulated,
social presence Nature: Scientific Reports, 22 January

   O'Connor, M. et al. (2018) Sampling molecular conformations and dynamics in a multiuser virtual
reality framework, Science Advances, Vol. 4, No.6, 29 June
                                                                               8.7.b. Emerging technologies: virtual and augmented reality 431

   Rolfson, E. (2019) People think and behave differently in virtual reality than they do in real life UBC
News, 24 January

   Seidel, R. and Chatelier, P. (1997) Virtual Reality, Training's Future?: Perspectives on Virtual Reality
and Related Emerging Technologies Berlin: Springer Science & Business Media

                                                Activity 8.7.b Using and designing VR and AR

              · Go to YouTube and type in Virtual Reality in the search box (I found about 20 examples). Do any
                 of these videos suggest a way in which VR could be used in the area in which you are teaching
                 (assuming that the resources were available)?

              · What are the advantages of VR over video? What can it do educationally that would be more
                 difficult to do using video?

              · Your head of department has just come back from a conference and has seen a demonstration of
                 VR. He is very excited and wants the department to `become the leader in the state in the use of
                 VR for teaching.' What questions would you ask of him? (Assume you will still keep your job
                 afterwards!)

      Click on the podcast below for my feedback and my personal views on VR for teaching and learning.

                           An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                        https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=1544
8.7c Emerging technologies: artificial intelligence

Figure 8.7c.1 Image: Applift

8.7c.1 Focusing on AI's affordances for teaching and learning
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a daunting topic as there are so many issues with respect to its use in
education. AI is also currently going through yet another period of extreme hype as a panacea for
education, currently being at the top of the peak of inflated expectations, but this hype is driven mainly
by successful applications outside the field of education, such as in finance and marketing. Furthermore
the term `AI' is increasingly being used (incorrectly) as a general term for any computational activity.

  Even in education, there are very different possible areas of application of AI. Zeide (2019)

                                                                   433
434 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

makes a very useful distinction between institutional, student support and instructional
applications (Figure 8.7.c.2 below).

Figure 8.7c.2 AI applications in education Image: © Zeide, 2019

   Although AI applications for institutional or student support purposes are very important, this chapter
is focused on the pedagogical affordances of different media and technologies (what Zeide calls
`instructional' applications). In particular, the focus in this section will be on the role of AI as a form
of media or technology for teaching and learning, its pedagogical affordances, and its strengths and
weaknesses in this area.

   Moreover, AI is really a sub-set of computing. Thus all the general affordances of computing in
education set out in Section 5 of this chapter will apply to AI. This section aims to tease out the extra
potential that AI can offer in teaching and learning. This will mean particularly focusing on its role as a
medium rather than a general technology in teaching, which means looking at a wider context than just
the computational aspects of AI, in particular its pedagogical role.
                                         8.7c Emerging technologies: artificial intelligence 435

8.7c.2 What is artificial intelligence?

   The original definition of artificial intelligence by McCarthy (1956, cited in Russell & Norvig, 2010)
is:

     every aspect of learning or any other feature of intelligence can in principle be so precisely
     described that a machine can be made to simulate it. An attempt will be made to find how to make
     machines use language, form abstractions and concepts, solve kinds of problems now reserved for
     humans, and improve themselves.

   Zawacki-Richter et al. (2019), in a review of the literature on AI in higher education, report that those
authors that defined artificial intelligence tended to describe it as:

     intelligent computer systems or intelligent agents with human features, such as the ability to
     memorise knowledge, to perceive and manipulate their environment in a similar way as humans,
     and to understand human natural language.

   Klutka et al. (2018) also define AI in terms of what it can do in higher education (Figure 8.7.c.3
below):

Figure 8.7.c. 3 What AI can do in education Image: Klutka et al. (2018)
436 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

   There are three basic computing requirements that set `modern' AI apart from other computing
applications:

         · access to massive amounts of data;
         · computational power on a large scale to manage and analyze the data;
         · powerful and relevant algorithms for the data analysis.

8.7c.3 Why use artificial intelligence for teaching and learning?

There are two somewhat different goals for the general use of artificial intelligence. The first is to
increase the efficiency of a system or organization, primarily by reducing the high costs of labour,
namely by replacing relatively expensive human workers with relatively less costly machines
(automation). In education in particular, the main cost is that of teachers and instructors. Politicians,
entrepreneurs and policy makers increasingly see a move to automation as a way of reducing the costs
of education.

   The second is to increase the effectiveness of teaching and learning, in economic terms to increase
outputs: better learning outcomes and greater benefits for the same or more cost. With this goal, AI
would be used alongside or supporting teachers and instructors.

   Klutka et al. (2018) provide a general statement of the potential of AI in higher education `instruction'
through Figure 8.7c.4:
                                                                                              8.7c Emerging technologies: artificial intelligence 437

 Figure 8.7c.4 Goals for AI in higher education instruction Image: Klutka et al. (2018)

These are understandable goals, but we shall see later in this section that such goals to date are mainly
aspirational rather than real.

   In terms of this book, a key focus is on developing the knowledge and skills required by learners in a
digital age. The key test then for artificial intelligence is to what extent it can assist in the development
of these higher level skills.
438 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

8.7c.4 Affordances and examples of AI use in teaching and learning

Zawacki-Richter et al. (2019) in a review of the literature on AI in education initially identified 2,656
research papers in English or Spanish, then narrowed the list down by eliminating duplicates, limiting
publication to articles in peer-reviewed journals published between 2007 and 2018, and eliminating
articles that turned out in the end not to be about the use of AI in education. This resulted in a final 145
articles which were then analysed. Zawacki-Richter et al. then classified these 145 papers into different
uses of AI in education. This section draws heavily on this classification. (It should be noted that within
the 145 articles, only 92 were focused on instruction/student support. The rest were on institutional uses
such as identifying at risk students before admission).

   The Zawacki-Richter study offers one insight into the main ways that AI has been used in education
for teaching and learning over the ten years between 2007 and 2018, the closest we can come to
`affordances'. First, three main general `instructional' categories (with considerable overlap) from the
study are provided below, followed by some specific examples. (I have omitted Zawacki-Richter et al.'s
category of profiling and prediction concerned with administrative issues such as admissions, course
scheduling, and early warning systems for students at risk.)

8.7c.4.1 Intelligent tutoring systems (29 out of 92 articles reviewed by Zawacki-Richter et al.)

Intelligent tutoring systems:

         · provideteaching content tostudents and,atthesame time, supportthem bygiving adaptive feedback
            andhintstosolvequestions related tothecontent, aswell asdetecting students' difficulties/errorswhen
            workingwiththecontent ortheexercises;

         · curate learning materials based on student needs, such as by providing specific
            recommendations regarding the type of reading material and exercises done, as well as
            personalised courses of action;

         · facilitate collaboration between learners, for instance, by providing automated feedback,
            generating automatic questions for discussion, and the analysis of the process.

8.7c.4.2 Assessment and evaluation (36 out of 92)

AI supports assessment and evaluation through:

         · automated grading;

         · feedback, including a range of student-facing tools, such as intelligent agents that provide
            students with prompts or guidance when they are confused or stalled in their work;

         · evaluation of student understanding, engagement and academic integrity.

8.7c.4.3 Adaptive systems and personalization (27 out of 92)

AI enables adaptive systems and the personalization of learning by:

         · teaching course content then diagnosing strengths or gaps in student knowledge, and
                                                                                              8.7c Emerging technologies: artificial intelligence 439

            providing automated feedback;

         · recommending personalized content;

         · supporting teachers in learning design by recommending appropriate teaching strategies
            based on student performance;

         · supporting representation of knowledge in concept maps.

Klutka et al. (2018) identified several uses of AI for teaching and learning in universities in the
USA. ECoach, developed at the University of Michigan, provides formative feedback for a variety of
mainly large classes in the STEM field. It tracks students progress through a course and directs them
to appropriate actions and activities on a personalized basis. Other applications listed in the report
include sentiment analysis (using students' facial expressions to measure their level of engagement
in studying), an application to monitor student engagement in discussion forums, and organizing
commonly shared mistakes in exams into groups for the instructor to respond once to the group rather
than individually.

8.7c.4.4 Chatbots

A chatbot is programming that simulates the conversation or `chatter' of a human being through text
or voice interactions (Rouse, 2018). Chatbots in particular are a tool used to automate communications
with students. Bayne (2014) describes one such application in a MOOC with 90,000 subscribers. Much
of the student activity took place outside the Coursera platform within social media. The five academics
teaching the MOOC were all active on Twitter, each with large networks, and Twitter activity around the
MOOC hashtag (#edcmooc) was high across all instances of the course (for example, a total of around
180,000 tweets were exchanged on the first offering of the MOOC). A `Teacherbot' was designed to
roam the tweets using the course Twitter hashtag, using keywords to identify `issues' then choosing pre-
designed responses to these issues, which often entailed directing students to more specific research on
a topic. For a review of research on chatbots in education, see Winkler and Söllner (2018).

8.7c.4.5 Automated essay grading

Natural language processing (NLP) artificial intelligence systems - often called automated essay scoring
engines - are now either the primary or secondary grader on standardized tests in at least 21 states in the
USA (Feathers, 2019). According to Feathers:

     Essay-scoring engines don't actually analyze the quality of writing. They're trained on sets of
     hundreds of example essays to recognize patterns that correlate with higher or lower human-
     assigned grades. They then predict what score a human would assign an essay, based on those
     patterns.

   Feathers though claims that research from psychometricians and AI experts show that these tools are
susceptible to a common flaw in AI: bias against certain demographic groups (see Ongweso, 2019).

   Lazendic et al. (2018) offer a detailed account of the plan for machine grading in Australian high
schools. They state:

     It is ...crucially important to acknowledge that the human scoring models, which are developed for
     each NAPLAN writing prompt, and their consistent application, ensure and maintain the validity of
440 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

     NAPLAN writing assessments. Consequently, the statistical reliability of human scoring outcomes
     is fundamentally related to and is the key evidence for the validity of NAPLAN writing marking.

   In other words, the marking must be based on consistent human criteria. However, it was announced
later (Hendry, 2018) that Australian education ministers agreed not to introduce automated essay
marking for NAPLAN writing tests, heeding calls from teachers' groups to reject the proposal.

   Perelman (2013) developed a computer program called the BABEL generator that patched together
strings of sophisticated words and sentences into meaningless gibberish essays. The nonsense essays
consistently received high, sometimes perfect, scores when run through several different scoring
engines. See also Mayfield, 2013, and Parachuri, 2013, for thoughtful analyses of the issues in the
automated marking of writing.

   At the time of writing, despite considerable pressure to use automated essay grading for standardized
exams, the technology still has many questions lingering over it.

8.7c.5 Strengths and weaknesses

There are several ways to assess the value of the teaching and learning affordances of particular
applications of AI in teaching and learning:

         · is the application based on the three core features of `modern' AI: massive data sets, massive
            computing power; powerful and relevant algorithms?

         · does the application have clear benefits in terms of affordances over other media, and
            particularly general computing applications?

         · does the application facilitate the development of the skills and knowledge needed in a digital
            age?

         · is there unintended bias built into the algorithms? Does it appear to discriminate against
            certain categories of people?

         · is the application ethical in terms of student and teacher/instructor privacy and their rights in
            an open and democratic society?

         · are the results of the application `explainable'? For example, can a teacher or instructor or
            those responsible for the application understand and explain to students how the results or
            decisions made by the AI application were reached?

These issues are addressed below.

8.7c.5.1 Is it really a `modern' AI application in teaching and learning?

Looking at the Zawacki-Richter et al. study and many other research papers published in peer-reviewed
journals, very few so-called AI applications in teaching and learning meet the criteria of massive data,
massive computing power and powerful and relevant algorithms. Much of the intelligent tutoring within
conventional education is what might be termed `old' AI: there is not a lot of processing going on,
and the data points are relatively small. Many so-called AI papers focused on intelligent tutoring and
adaptive learning are really just general computing applications.

   Indeed, so-called intelligent tutoring systems, automated multiple-choice test marking, and automated
                                                                                              8.7c Emerging technologies: artificial intelligence 441

feedback on such tests have been around since the early 1980s. The closest to modern AI applications
appear to be automated essay grading of standardised tests administered across an entire education
system. However there are major problems with the latter. More development is clearly needed to make
automated essay grading a valid exercise.

   The main advantage that Klutka et al. (2018) identify for AI is that it opens up the possibility for
higher education services to become scalable at an unprecedented rate, both inside and outside the
classroom. However, it is difficult to see how `modern' AI could be used within the current education
system, where class sizes or even whole academic departments, and hence data points, are relatively
small, in terms of the numbers needed for `modern' AI. It cannot be said to date that modern AI has been
tried, and failed, in teaching and learning; it's not really even been tried.

   Applications outside the current formal system are more realistic, for MOOCs, for instance, or for
corporate training on an international scale, or for distance teaching universities with very large numbers
of students. The requirement for massive data does suggest that the whole education system could be
massively disrupted if the necessary scale could be reached by offering modern AI-based education
outside the existing education systems, for instance by large Internet corporations that could tap their
massive markets of consumers.

   However, there is still a long way to go before AI makes that feasible. This is not to say that there
could not be such applications of modern AI in the future, but at the moment, in the words of the old
English bobby, `Move along, now, there's nothing to see here.'

   However, for the sake of argument, let's assume that the definition of AI offered here is too strict and
that most of the applications discussed in this section are examples of AI. How do these applications of
AI meet the other criteria above?

8.7c.5.2 Do the applications facilitate the development of the skills and knowledge needed in a digital age?

This does not seem to be the case in most so-called AI applications for teaching and learning today.
They are heavily focused on content presentation and testing for understanding and comprehension. In
particular, Zawacki-Richter et al. make the point that most AI developments for teaching and learning -
or at least the research papers - are by computer scientists, not educators. Since AI tends to be developed
by computer scientists, they tend to use models of learning based on how computers or computer
networks work (since of course it will be a computer that has to operate the AI). As a result, such AI
applications tend to adopt a very behaviourist model of learning: present/test/feedback. Lynch (2017)
argues that:

     If AI is going to benefit education, it will require strengthening the connection between AI
     developers and experts in the learning sciences. Otherwise, AI will simply `discover' new ways to
     teach poorly and perpetuate erroneous ideas about teaching and learning.

   Comprehension and understanding are indeed important foundational skills, but AI so far is not
helping with the development of higher order skills in learners of critical thinking, problem-solving,
creativity and knowledge-management. Indeed, Klutka et al. (2018) claim that that AI can handle many
of the routine functions currently done by instructors and administrators, freeing them up to solve more
complex problems and connect with students on deeper levels. This reinforces the view that the role
of the instructor or teacher needs to move away from content presentation, content management and
testing of content comprehension - all of which can be done by computing - towards skills development.
The good news is that AI used in this way supports teachers and instructors, but does not replace them.
442 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

The bad news is that many teachers and instructors will need to change the way they teach or they will
become redundant.

8.7c.5.3 Is there unintended bias in the algorithms?

It could be argued that all AI does is to encapsulate the existing biases in the system. The problem
though is that this bias is often hard to detect in any specific algorithm, and that AI tends to scale up or
magnify such biases. These are issues more for institutional uses of AI, but machine-based bias can
discriminate against students also in a teaching and learning context as well, and especially in
automated assessment.

8.7c.5.4 Is the application ethical?

There are many potential ethical issues arising from the use of AI in teaching and learning, mainly
due to the lack of transparency in the AI software, and particularly the assumptions embedded in the
algorithms. The literature review by Zawacki-Richter et al. (2019) concluded:

     ...a stunning result of this review is the dramatic lack of critical reflection of the pedagogical and
     ethical implications as well as risks of implementing AI applications in higher education.

   What data are being collected, who owns or controls it, how is it being interpreted, how will it be
used? Policies will need to be put in place to protect students and teachers/instructors (see for instance
the U.S. Department of Education's student data policies for schools), and students and teachers/
instructors need to be involved in such policy development.

8.7c.5.5 Are the results explainable?

The biggest problem with AI generally, and in teaching and learning in particular, is the lack of
transparency. How did it give me this grade? Why I am directed to this reading rather than that one?
Why isn't my answer acceptable? Lynch (2017) argues that most data collected about student learning is
indirect, inauthentic, lacking demonstrable reliability or validity, and reflecting unrealistic time horizons
to demonstrate learning.

     `current examples of AIEd often rely on .... poor proxies for learning, using data that is easily
     collectable rather than educationally meaningful.'

8.7c.6 Conclusions

8.7c.6.1. Dream on, AI enthusiasts

In terms of what AI is actually doing now for teaching and learning, the dream is way beyond the reality.
What works well in finance or marketing or astronomy does not necessarily translate to teaching and
learning contexts. In doing the research for this section, it proved very difficult to find any compelling
examples of AI for teaching and learning, compared with serious games or virtual reality. It is always
hard to prove a negative, but the results to date of applying AI to teaching and learning are extremely
limited and disappointing.

   This is mainly due to the difficulty of applying `modern' AI at scale in a very fragmented system
                                                                                              8.7c Emerging technologies: artificial intelligence 443

that relies heavily on relatively small class sizes, programs, and institutions. Probably for modern AI to
`work', a totally different organizational structure for teaching and learning would be needed. But be
careful what you wish for.

   There is a strong affective or emotional influence in learning. Students often learn better when they
feel that the instructor or teacher cares. In particular, students want to be treated as individuals, with
their own interests, ways of learning, and some sense of control over their learning. Although at a mass
level human behaviour is predictable and to some extent controllable, each student is an individual and
will respond slightly differently from other students in the same context. Because of these emotional and
personal aspects of learning, students need to relate in some way to their teacher or instructor. Learning
is a complex activity where only a relatively minor part of the process can be effectively automated.
Learning is an intensely human activity, that benefits enormously from personal relationships and social
interaction. This relational aspect of learning can be handled equally well online as face-to-face, but it
means using computing to support communication as well as delivering and testing content acquisition.

8.7c.6.2 Not fit for purpose

Above all, AI has not progressed to the point yet where it can support the higher levels of learning
required in a digital age or the teaching methods needed to do this, although other forms of computing
or technology, such as simulations, games and virtual reality, can.

   In particular AI developers have been largely unaware that learning is developmental and constructed,
and instead have imposed an old and less appropriate method of teaching based on behaviourism and an
objectivist epistemology. However, to develop the skills and knowledge needed in a digital age, a more
constructivist approach to learning is needed. There has been no evidence to date that AI can support
such an approach to teaching, although it may be possible.

8.7c.6.3 AI's real agenda

AI advocates often argue that they are not trying to replace teachers but to make their life easier or more
efficient. This should be taken with a pinch of salt. The key driver of AI applications is cost-reduction,
which means reducing the number of teachers, as this is the main cost in education. In contrast, the
key lesson from all AI developments is that we will need to pay increased attention to the affective and
emotional aspects of life in a robotic-heavy society, so teachers will become even more important.

   Another problem with artificial intelligence is that the same old hype keeps going round and round.
The same arguments for using artificial intelligence in education go back to the 1980s. Millions of
dollars went into AI research at the time, including into educational applications, with absolutely no
payoff.

   There have been some significant developments in AI since then, in particular pattern recognition,
access to and analysis of big data sets, powerful algorithms, leading to formalized decision-making
within limited boundaries. The trick though is to recognise exactly what kind of applications these new
AI developments are good for, and what they cannot do well. In other words, the context in which
AI is used matters, and needs to be taken account of. Teaching and learning is a particularly difficult
environment then for AI applications.

8.7c.6.4 Defining AI's role in teaching and learning

Nevertheless, there is plenty of scope for useful applications of AI in education, but only if there is
continuing dialogue between AI developers and educators as new developments in AI become available.
444 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

But that will require being very clear about the purpose of AI applications in education and being wide
awake to the unintended consequences.

   In education, AI is still a sleeping giant. `Breakthrough' applications of AI for teaching and learning
are probably not going to come from the mainstream universities and colleges, but from outside
the formal post-secondary system, through organizations such as LinkedIn, lynda.com, Amazon or
Coursera, that have access to large data sets that make the applications of AI scalable and worthwhile
(to them). However, this would pose an existential threat to public schools, colleges and universities.
The issue then becomes: what system is best to protect and sustain the individual in a digital age:
multinational corporations using AI for teaching and learning; or a public education system with human
teachers using AI as a support for learners?

   The key question then is whether technology should aim to replace teachers and instructors through
automation, or whether technology should be used to empower not only teachers but also learners.
Above all, who should control AI in education: educators, students, computer scientists, or large
corporations? These are indeed existential questions if AI does become immensely successful in
reducing the costs of teaching and learning: but at what cost to us as humans? Fortunately AI is not yet
in a position to provide such a threat; but it may well do so soon.

References

Bayne, S. (2014) Teacherbot: interventions in automated teaching Teaching in Higher Education, Vol.
20. No.4

   Feathers, T. (2019) Flawed Algorithms Are Grading Millions of Students' Essays, Motherboard: Tech
by Vice, 20 August

   Hendry, J. (2018) Govts dump NAPLAN robo marking plans itnews, 30 January
   Klutka, J. et al. (2018) Artificial Intelligence in Higher Education: Current Uses and Future
Applications Louisville Ky: Learning House
   Lazandic, G., Justus, J.-A., and Rabinowitz, S. (2018) NAPLAN Online Automated Scoring Research
Program: Research Report, Canberra, Australia: Australian Curriculum, Assessment and Reporting
Authority
   Lynch, J. (2017) How AI will destroy education, buZZrobot, 13 November
   Mayfield, E. (2013) Six ways the edX Announcement Gets Automated Essay Grading Wrong, e-
Literate, April 8
   Ongweso jr. E. (2019) Racial Bias in AI Isn't Getting Better and Neither Are Researchers'
Excuses Motherboard: Tech by Vice, July 29
   Parachuri, V. (2013) On the automated scoring of essays and the lessons learned along the
way, vicparachuri.com, July 31
   Perelman. L. (2013) Critique of Mark D. Shermis & Ben Hamner, Contrasting State-of-the-Art
Automated Scoring of Essays: Analysis, Journal of Writing Assessment, Vol. 6, No.1
   Rouse, M. (2019) What is chatbot? Techtarget Network Customer Experience, 5 January
   Russell, S. and Norvig, P. (2010) Artificial Intelligence - A Modern Approach New Jersey: Pearson
Education
   Winkler, R. & Söllner, M. (2018): Unleashing the Potential of Chatbots in Education: A State-Of-The-
Art Analysis. Academy of Management Annual Meeting (AOM) Chicago: Illinois
   Zawacki-Richter, O. er al. (2019) Systematic review of research on artificial intelligence applications
in higher education - where are the educators? International Journal of Technology in Higher Education
(in press - details to be added)
                                                                                              8.7c Emerging technologies: artificial intelligence 445

   Zeide, E. (2019) Artificial Intelligence in Higher Education: Applications, Promise and Perils, and
Ethical Questions EDUCAUSE Review, Vol. 54, No. 3, August 26

                                                        Activity 8.7.c Artificial intelligence

              · what do you think about AI for teaching and learning? Is it so esoteric that you can safely not
                 worry about it? Or do you feel you need to be better informed about that it can and cannot do?

              · do you agree with the three minimum requirements for modern AI: large data sets, powerful
                 computing capacity, and powerful algorithms? Are there other possible applications of AI that do
                 not need to meet these three criteria?

              · can you think of areas of teaching and learning that could generate large data sets even in a class
                 of 30?

              · what other skills beside comprehension could AI facilitate? How would it do this?
      Click on the podcast below to get some feedback on these questions, plus some of my personal thoughts on
   AI and teaching and learning:

                           An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                        https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=1597
8.7.d Emerging technologies: conclusion and summary

Figure 8.7.d.1 Games designer at work

8.7d.1 Comparing the three emerging technologies
Section 8.7 has looked at three very different emerging technologies: serious games; immersive
technologies; and artificial intelligence. Each has the potential to influence profoundly teaching and
learning in a digital age.

   Both serious games and immersive technologies such as virtual and augmented reality will be
extremely valuable in `niche' areas of teaching and learning. They both have the potential to develop
some of the higher order learning skills of problem solving, analysis, intuitive thinking, and creative
thinking, and also can be used to develop affective skills, such as empathy.

   However, neither is likely to be a `core' technology that will be extensively used across all forms of
teaching. Also both need significant investment of time and possibly money if they are to be of good
quality for teaching purposes. In particular, they will need a multi-disciplinary team approach to design
and development.

   Therefore it will be essential to choose the right kind of project, such as topics that are difficult to
teach using other methods, or projects aimed at learners who struggle with more conventional teaching
methods. Above all, it will be necessary to identify and exploit the optimum educational affordances of
these two technologies.

   Artificial intelligence is somewhat different to the other two emerging technologies. Artificial

                                                                   447
448 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

intelligence to date manages well the presentation and testing of content acquisition, comprehension and
understanding, but so far has not shown much promise in supporting the development or assessment of
the higher level cognitive skills needed in a digital age. However, by focusing on supporting learners'
comprehension and understanding, AI can free up human teachers and instructors to focus their time
on the development of these higher order skills. Again, this emphasises the importance of teachers and
instructors moving their focus away from content delivery - which AI can increasingly manage well -
and focusing more on teaching methods that support higher order skills development.

   Furthermore these three technologies are not really separate and unrelated but will become
increasingly integrated. AI applications could improve the power and range of both serious games and
virtual reality. Games can be designed within a virtual reality. The extent to which these technologies
become feasible in education will depend heavily on applications outside education which can then be
carried over and adapted for educational purposes.

   Again though we come back to three critical issues:

         · what are the educational goals of the application?

         · to what extent does the application help with the development of higher order cognitive and/
            or affective skills?

         · what are the costs and organizational implications of such applications within education?

8.7d.2 Lessons to be learned from the use of emerging technologies

New technology developments show no sign of slowing down. Over time, other new technologies will
emerge beside the three technologies discussed in this section. Educators will continue to be challenged
to incorporate these new technologies as they emerge. In responding to this challenge, the following
needs to be considered:

       1. New technologies are not necessarily better than existing technologies for teaching. They
            may however offer new opportunities for teaching differently, and may enable new or better
            learning outcomes, as well as improving on existing learning outcomes.

       2. Old technologies rarely disappear completely as a result of popular new technologies. Older
            technologies become more focused and find a niche that they serve best.

       3. Most educators will be best served by not jumping on the latest technology bandwagon, but
            should wait a couple of years for a particular technology to reach at least the Gartner `slope
            of enlightenment' before experimenting with the new technology.

       4. More important than the general characteristics of a new technology is its design and
            application in education; in other words, how does it perform as an educational medium?
            Being a big success in the financial sector for instance does not mean a technology will be
            automatically appropriate for education. Indeed, the technology may need to be heavily
            adapted or modified to be useful in the educational sector.

       5. Given the rate of change and the number of new technologies entering the market, educators
            need a strong framework or set of criteria for selecting and evaluating technologies, not just
            emerging technologies but also existing technology. This will be discussing in the following
            final section of this chapter.
                                                                                   8.7.d Emerging technologies: conclusion and summary 449

                          Activity 8.7.d Assessing and developing applications of emerging technologies

           · Are there other emerging technologies that you would have chosen over these three?
           · How do you think teachers/instructors should react to emerging technologies? Ignore them? Wait

              for others in education to try them first? Or should they jump in and try a new technology as soon
              as possible?
           · Some institutions such as UBC and Drexel University have set up emerging media labs to
              encourage faculty to experiment with new technologies. What other methods could be used to
              encourage teachers and instructors to experiment with new technologies?
   For feedback on this activity, and my personal observations on these three emerging technologies, click on
the podcast below:

                       An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                    https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=1638
8.8 A framework for analysing the pedagogical characteristics of
educational media

Figure 8.8.1 Analysis of different media by pedagogical criteria (adapted from Bates, 2011)

8.8.1 Brief summary of pedagogical differences in media
I will now summarise the unique pedagogical characteristics of the different media discussed in
this chapter.

   Figure 8.8.1 presents a diagrammatic analysis of various learning media. I have arranged them
primarily by where they fit along an epistemological continuum of objectivist (black), constructivist
(blue) and connectivist (red), but also I have used two other dimensions, teacher control/learner control,
and credit/non-credit. Note that this figure also enables traditional teaching modes, such as lectures and
seminars, to be included and compared. Figure 8.8.1 represents my personal interpretation of these

                                                                   451
452 Chapter 8: Pedagogical differences between media

media, and other teachers or instructors may well re-arrange the diagram differently, depending on their
particular applications of these tools.

   Not all tools or media are represented here (for example, audio and video or MOOCs). The position
of any particular tool in the diagram will depend on its actual use. Learning management systems can
be used in a constructivist way, and blogs can be very teacher-controlled, if the teacher is the only one
permitted to use a blog on a course. Badia et al (2011) have shown that educational design and the
situational use of technology very much influence whether specific affordances or unique characteristics
of a medium are successfully exploited. Student preferences or pre-dispositions can inhibit or support
the successful implementation of specific affordances of different media (for instance, computer science
students' preferences for adaptive learning rather than the communication and discussion affordances of
ICT - Arenas, 2015).

   However, the aim here is not to provide a cast-iron categorization of the affordances of different
educational media, but to provide a framework for teachers in deciding which tools and media are
most likely to suit a particular teaching approach. Indeed, other teachers may prefer a different set of
pedagogical values as a framework for analysis of the different media and technologies.

   However, to give an example from Figure 8.8.1, a teacher may use an LMS to organize a set of
resources, guidelines, procedures and deadlines for students, who then may use several of the social
media, such as photos from mobile phones to collect data. The teacher provides a space and structure on
the LMS for students' learning materials in the form of an e-portfolio, to which students can load their
work. Students in small groups can use discussion forums or FaceBook to work on projects together.

   The example above is in the framework of a course for credit, but the framework would also fit the
non-institutional or informal approach to the use of social media for learning, with a focus on tools such
as FaceBook, blogs and YouTube. These applications would be much more learner driven, with the
learner deciding on the tools and their uses. The most powerful examples are connectivist or cMOOCs,
as we saw in Chapter 5.

8.8.2 Key takeaways

                                                             Chapter 8: Key Takeaways

   There is a very wide range of media available for teaching and learning. In particular:

              · text, audio, video, computing, social media and emerging technologies all have unique
                 characteristics that make them useful for teaching and learning;

              · the choice or combination of media will need to be determined by:

                             the overall teaching philosophy behind the teaching;

                             the presentational and structural requirements of the subject matter or content;

                             the skills that need to be developed in learners;

                             and not least by the imagination of the teacher or instructor (and increasingly learners
                               themselves) in identifying possible roles for different media;
                                               8.8 A framework for analysing the pedagogical characteristics of educational media 453

              · learners now have powerful tools through social media for creating their own learning materials
                 or for demonstrating their knowledge;

              · courses can be structured around individual students' interests, allowing them to seek appropriate
                 content and resources to support the development of negotiated competencies or learning
                 outcomes;.

              · content is now increasingly open and freely available over the Internet; as a result learners can
                 seek, use and apply information beyond the bounds of what a professor or teacher may dictate;

              · students can create their own online personal learning environments;
              · many students will still need a structured approach that guides their learning;
              · teacher presence and guidance is likely to be necessary to ensure high quality learning via social

                 media;
              · teachers need to find the middle ground between complete learner freedom and over-direction

                 to enable learners to develop the key skills needed in a digital age.

References

Arenas, E. (2015) Affordances of Learning Technologies in Higher Education Multicultural
Environments The Electronic Journal of e-Learning Volume 13 No. 4 (pp 217-227)

   Badia, A., Barberà, E., Guasch, T., Espasa, A. (2011). Technology educational affordance: Bridging
the gap between patterns of interaction and technology usage in: Digital Education Review, Vol.19, pp
20-35

   Bates, A. (2011) Understanding Web 2.0 and its implications for e-learning, in Lee, M. and
McCoughlin, C. (eds.) Web 2.0-based E-learning: applying social informatics for tertiary teaching
Hershey PA: Information Science

                                                    Activity 8.8 Choosing media for a teaching module

             1. Take a module or main topic of a course you are teaching. Identify the key learning outcomes, in
                 terms of skills to be taught, then the content area to be covered.

             2. Then look through the key characteristics of each of the media in this chapter, and think how each
                 medium might be used to teach your module. Use your analysis from Activities 8.2 to 8.7 Make a
                 list of the functions you have chosen and their relationship to content and skills in the module.

             3. Using Figure 8.8.1, allocate a range of tools and media that you might consider using and place
                 them on the continuum.

             4. Are you still happy with your choice?

      Don't worry - we haven't finished yet. The next chapter will provide a way to make decisions on a more
   realistic basis. The main purpose here is to get you thinking about possible uses of different media in your
   subject area.

      There is no feedback offered for this activity. Chapter 9 should give some guidance as to the appropriateness
   of your answers.
Chapter 9: Choosing and using media in education:
the SECTIONS model

                                                                      Purpose of the chapter

      The main purpose of this chapter is to provide a framework for making effective decisions about the choice
   and use of media for teaching and learning. The framework used is the SECTIONS model, which stands for:

              · S tudents
              · E ase of use
              · C osts
              · T eaching functions
              · I nteraction
              · O rganisational issues
              · N etworking
              · S ecurity and privacy
      On completion of this chapter, you should be able to choose appropriate media and technology for any
   subject that you may be teaching, and be able to justify your decision.

What is covered in this chapter

         · 9.1 Models for media selection
         · 9.2 Students
         · 9.3 Ease of Use
         · 9.4 Cost
         · 9.5 Teaching and media selection
         · 9.6 Interaction
         · 9.7 Organisational issues
         · 9.8 Networking (and novelty)
         · 9.9 Security and privacy
         · 9.10 Deciding
Also in this chapter you will find the following activities:

                                                                   455
456 A.W. (Tony) Bates

         · Activity 9.1 Making a preliminary decision
         · Activity 9.2 Knowing your students
         · Activity 9.3 Ease of use
         · Activity 9.4 How will cost affect your decision about what media to use?
         · Activity 9.5 Multimedia design principles
         · Activity 9.6 Using media to promote student activity
         · Activity 9.7 Organisational issues (no activity)
         · Activity 9.8 Networking (and novelty)
         · Activity 9.9 Security and privacy
         · Activity 9.10 Choosing media and technologies

                                                                     Chapter 9 Key Takeaways

      1. Selecting media and technologies is a complex process, involving a very wide range of interacting
   variables.

      2. There is currently no generally accepted theory or process for media selection. The SECTIONS model
   however provides a set of criteria or questions the result of which can help inform an instructor when making
   decisions about which media or technologies to use.

      3. Because of the wide range of factors influencing media selection and use, an inductive or intuitive
   approach to decision-making, informed by a careful analysis of all the criteria in the SECTIONS framework,
   is one practical way to approach decision-making about media and technologies for teaching and learning.

      4. However, media selection needs to be integrated within the broader framework of course design.
9.1 Models for media selection

Figure 9.1.1 The SECTIONS model

9.1.1 What the literature tells us
Given the importance of the topic, there is relatively little literature on how to choose appropriate
media or technologies for teaching. There was a flurry of not very helpful publications on this topic in
the 1970s and 1980s, but relatively little since (Baytak, undated). Indeed, Koumi (1994) stated that:

   there does not exist a sufficiently practicable theory for selecting media appropriate to given topics, learning
   tasks and target populations . . . the most common practice is not to use a model at all. In which case, it is no

                                                                   457
458 Chapter 9: Choosing and using media in education: the SECTIONS model

   wonder that allocation of media has been controlled more by practical economic and human/political factors
   than by pedagogic considerations (p. 56).

Mackenzie (2002) comments in a similar vein:

   When I am discussing the current state of technology with teachers around the country, it becomes clear that
   they feel bound by their access to technology, regardless of their situation. If a teacher has a television-
   computer setup, then that is what he or she will use in the classroom. On the other hand, if there is an LCD
   projector hooked up to a teacher demonstration station in a fully equipped lab, he or she will be more apt to
   use that set up. Teachers have always made the best of whatever they've got at hand, but it's what we have to
   work with. Teachers make due.

Mackenzie (2002) has suggested building technology selection around Howard Gardner's multiple
intelligences theory (Gardner, 1983, 2006), following the following sequence of decisions:

        learner  teaching objective  intelligences  media choice.
   Mackenzie then allocates different media to support the development of each of Gardner's
intelligences. Gardner's theory of multiple intelligences has been widely tested and adopted, and
Mackenzie's allocations of media to intelligences make sense intuitively, but of course it is dependent
on teachers and instructors applying Gardner's theory to their teaching.
   A review of more recent publications on media selection suggests that despite the rapid developments
in media and technology over the last 20 years, my ACTIONS model (Bates, 1995) is one of the major
models still being applied, although with further amendments and additions (see for instance, Baytak,
undated; Lambert and Williams, 1999; Koumi, 2006). Indeed, I myself modified the ACTIONS model,
which was developed for distance education, to the SECTIONS model to cover the use of media in
campus-based as well as distance education (Bates and Poole, 2003).
   Patsula (2002) developed a model called CASCOIME which includes some of the criteria in the
Bates models, but also adds additional and valuable criteria such as socio-political suitability, cultural
friendliness, and openness/flexibility, to take into account international perspectives. Zaied (2007)
conducted an empirical study to test what criteria for media selection were considered important by
faculty, IT specialists and students, and identified seven criteria. Four of these matched or were similar
to Bates' criteria. The other three were student satisfaction, student self-motivation and professional
development, which are more like conditions for success and are not really easy to identify before
making a decision.
   Koumi (2006) and Mayer (2009) have come closest to to developing models of media selection.
Mayer has developed twelve principles of multimedia design based on extensive research, resulting in
what Mayer calls a cognitive theory of multimedia learning. (For an excellent application of Mayer's
theory, see UBC Wikis.) Koumi (2015) more recently has developed a model for deciding on the best
mix and use of video and print to guide the design of xMOOCs.
   Mayer's approach is valuable at a more micro-level when it comes to designing specific multimedia
educational materials, as is Koumi's work. Mayer's cognitive theory of multimedia design suggests the
best combination of words and images, and rules to follow such as ensuring coherence and avoiding
cognitive overload. When deciding to use a specific application of multimedia, it provides very strong
guidelines. It is nevertheless more difficult to apply at a macro level. Because Mayer's focus is on
cognitive processing, his theory does not deal directly with the unique pedagogical affordances or
characteristics of different media. Neither Mayer nor Koumi address non-pedagogical issues in media
selection, such as cost or access. Mayer and Koumi's work is not so much competing as
complementary to what I am proposing. I am trying to identify which media (or combinations of
media) to use in the first place. Mayer's theory then would guide the actual design of the application. I
                                                                                                                      9.1 Models for media selection 459

will discuss Mayer's twelve principles further in Section 5 of this chapter, which deals with teaching
functions.

   Puentedura's SAMR model (2014), discussed in Chapter 7, Section 4, is valuable for assessing the
choice of a particular medium, but it focuses solely on pedagogical issues, particularly in terms of
whether the choice augments or transforms learning. Although this is a powerful criterion for media
selection, the SAMR model does not take into account other essential factors in media selection, such
as cost or ease of use.

   It is not surprising that there are not many models for media selection. The models developed in the
1970s and 1980s took a very reductionist, behaviourist approach to media selection, resulting in often
several pages of decision-trees, which are completely impractical to apply, given the realities of
teaching, and yet these models still included no recognition of the unique affordances of different
media. More importantly, technology is subject to rapid change, there are competing views on
appropriate pedagogical approaches to teaching, and the context of learning varies so much. Finding a
practical, manageable model founded on research and experience that can be widely applied has proved
to be challenging.

9.1.2 Why we need a model

At the same time, every teacher, instructor, and increasingly learner, needs to make decisions in this
area, often on a daily basis. A model for technology selection and application is needed therefore that
has the following characteristics:

         · it will work in a wide variety of learning contexts;

         · it allows decisions to be taken at both a strategic, institution-wide level, and at a tactical,
            instructional, level;

         · it gives equal attention to educational and operational issues;

         · it will identify critical differences between different media and technologies, thus enabling an
            appropriate mix to be chosen for any given context;

         · it is easily understood, pragmatic and cost-effective;

         · it will accommodate new developments in technology.

For these reasons, then, I will continue to use the Bates' SECTIONS model, with some modifications
to take account of recent developments in technology, research and theory. The SECTIONS model is
based on research, has stood the test of time, and has been found to be practical. SECTIONS stands for:

         · S tudents

         · E ase of use

         · C ost

         · T eaching functions, including pedagogical affordances of media

         · I nteraction

         · O rganizational issues

         · N etworking
460 Chapter 9: Choosing and using media in education: the SECTIONS model

         · S ecurity and privacy

I will discuss each of these criteria in the following sections, and will then suggest how to apply the
model.

References

Bates, A. (1995) Teaching, Open Learning and Distance Education London/New York: Routledge
   Bates, A. and Poole, G. (2003) Effective Teaching with Technology in Higher Education San

Francisco: Jossey-Bass/John Wiley and Son
   Baytak, A.(undated) Media selection and design: a case in distance education Academia.edu
   Gardner, H. (1983) Frames of Mind: The Theory of Multiple Intelligences New York: Basic Books
   Gardner, H. (2006) Multiple Intelligences: New Horizons and Theory in Practice New York: Basic

Books
   Koumi, J. (1994). Media comparisons and deployment: A practitioner's view British Journal of

Educational Technology, Vol. 25, No. 1
   Koumi, J. (2006). Designing video and multimedia for open and flexible learning London: Routledge
   Koumi, J. (2015) Learning outcomes afforded by self-assessed, segmented video-print combinations

Cogent Education, Vol. 2, No.1
   Lambert, S. and Williams R. (1999) A model for selecting educational technologies to improve

student learning Melbourne, Australia: HERDSA Annual International Conference, July
   Mackenzie, W. (2002) Multiple Intelligences and Instructional Technology: A Manual for Every

Mind Eugene, Oregon: ISTE
   Mayer, R. E. (2009). Multimedia Learning (2nd ed). New York: Cambridge University Press.
   Patsula, P. (2002) Practical guidelines for selecting media: An international perspective The

Useableword Monitor, February 1
   Puentedura, R. (2014) SAMR and Bloom's Taxonomy: Assembling the Puzzle common sense

education, September 24
   UBC Wikis (2014)Documentation: Design Principles for Multimedia Vancouver BC: University of

British Columbia
   Zaied, A. (2007) A Framework for Evaluating and Selecting Learning Technologies The International

Arab Journal of Information Technology, Vol. 4, No. 2

                                             Activity 9.1 Making a preliminary decision on media selection

      1. Choose a course that you are teaching or may be teaching. Identify what media or technologies you might
   be interested in using. Keep a note of your decision and your reasons for your choice of media/technologies.

      When you have finished reading this chapter you will be asked to do a final activity (Activity 9.10) and then
   you can compare your answers to both this activity and Activity 9.10 after reading the whole chapter.

      There is no feedback provided for this activity.
9.2 Students

The Malaysian Ministry of Education announced in 2012 that it will enable students to bring handphones to schools
under strict guidelines
Image: © NewStraightsTimes, 2012

   The first criterion in the SECTIONS model is students. At least three issues related to students need to be
considered whenchoosingmedia andtechnology:

         · student demographics;
         · access; and
         · differences in how students learn.

                                                                   461
462 Chapter 9: Choosing and using media in education: the SECTIONS model

9.2.1 Student demographics

One of the fundamental changes resulting from mass higher education is that university and college
teachers must now teach an increasingly diverse range of students. This increasing diversity of students
presents major challenges for all teachers, not just post-secondary teachers. However, it has been less
common for instructors at a post-secondary level to vary their approach within a single course to
accommodate to learner differences, but the increasing diversity of students now requires that all courses
should be developed with a wide variety of approaches and ways to learn if all students in the course are
to be taught well.

   In particular, it is important to be clear about the needs of the target group. First and second year
students straight from high school are likely to require more support and help studying at a university
or college level. They are likely to be less independent as learners, and therefore it may be a mistake to
expect them to be able to study entirely through the use of technology. However, technology may be
useful as a support for classroom teaching, especially if it provides an alternative approach to learning
from the face-to-face teaching, and is gradually introduced, to prepare them for more independent study
later in a program.

   On the other hand, for students who have already been through higher education as a campus student,
but are now in the workforce, a program delivered entirely by technology at a distance is likely to
be attractive. Such students will have already developed successful study skills, will have their own
community and family life, and will welcome the flexibility of studying this way.

   Third and fourth year undergraduate students may appreciate a mix of classroom-based and online
study or even one or two fully online courses, especially if some of their face-to-face classes are closed
to further enrolments, or if students are working part-time to help cover some of the costs of being at
college.

   Lastly, within any single class or group of learners, there will be a wide range of differences in prior
knowledge, language skills, and preferred study styles.The intelligent use of media and technology can
help accommodate these differences. In particular, if you are trying to reach students in remote areas,
or homeless or poor people, or students with physical disabilities, then this too should influence your
choice of technology. Indeed, for most courses, there is likely to be a mix of different student needs,
which suggests that a multi-media approach will be necessary to accommodate all student needs.

   So, once again, it is important to know your students, and to keep this in mind when making decisions
about what media or technology to use. This will be discussed further in Chapter 10.

9.2.2 Access

Of all the criteria in determining choice of technology, this is perhaps the most discriminating. No
matter how powerful in educational terms a particular medium or technology may be, if students cannot
access it in a convenient and affordable manner they cannot learn from it. Thus video streaming may
be considered a great way to get lectures to students off campus, but if they do not have Internet access
at home, or if it takes four hours or a day's wages to download, then forget it. Difficulty of access is a
particular restriction on using xMOOCs in developing countries. Even if potential learners have Internet
or mobile phone access, which 3.8 billion globally still do not (ITU, 2018), it often costs a day's wages
to download a single YouTube video - see Marron, Missen and Greenberg, 2014.

   Any teacher or instructor intending to use computers, tablets or mobile phones for teaching purposes
needs answers to a number of questions:
                                                                                                                                               9.2 Students 463

         · what is the institutional policy with regard to students' access to a computer, tablets or
            mobile phones?

         · can students use any device or is there a limited list of devices that the institution will
            support?

         · is the medium or software chosen for teaching compatible with all makes of devices students
            might use?

         · is the network adequate to support any extra students that this initiative will add?

         · who else in the institution needs to know that you are requiring students to use particular
            devices?

If students are expected to provide their own devices (which increasingly makes sense):

         · what kind of device do they need: one at home with Internet access or a portable that they can
            bring on to campus - or one that can be used both at home and on campus?

         · what kind of applications will they need to run on their device(s) for study purposes?

         · will they be able to use the same device(s) across all courses, or will they need different
            software/apps and devices for different courses?

         · what skills will students need in operating the devices and the apps that will be run on them?

         · if students do not have the skills, would it still be worth their learning them, and will there be
            time set aside in the course for them to learn these skills?

Students (as well as the instructor) need to know the answers to these questions before they enrol in
a course or program. In order to answer these questions, you and your department must know what
students will use their devices for. There is no point in requiring students to go to the expense of
purchasing a laptop computer if the work they are required to do on it is optional or trivial. This means
some advance planning on your part:

         · what are the educational advantages that you see in student use of a particular device?

         · what will students need to do on the device in your course?

         · is it really essential for them to use a device in these ways, or could they easily manage
            without the device? In particular, how will assessment be linked to the use of the device?

It will really help if your institution has good policies in place for student technology access (see Section
9.7). If the institution does not have clear policies or infrastructure for supporting the technologies you
want to use, then your job is going to be a lot harder.

   The answer to the question of access and the choice of technology will also depend somewhat on the
mandate of the institution and your personal educational goals. For instance, highly selective universities
can require students to use particular devices, and can help the relatively few students who have financial
difficulties in purchasing and using specified devices. If though the mandate of the institution is to reach
learners denied access to conventional institutions, equity groups, the unemployed, the working poor, or
workers needing up-grading or more advanced education and training, then it becomes critical to find
out what technology they have access to or are willing to use. If an institution's policy is open access
464 Chapter 9: Choosing and using media in education: the SECTIONS model

to anyone who wants to take its courses, the availability of equipment already in the home (usually
purchased for entertainment purposes) becomes of paramount importance.

   Another important factor to consider is access for student with disabilities. This may mean providing
textual or audio options for deaf and visually impaired students respectively. Fortunately there are
now well established practices and standards under the general heading of Universal Design standards.
Universal Design is defined as follows:

     Universal Design for Learning, or UDL, refers to the deliberate design of instruction to meet
     the needs of a diverse mix of learners. Universally designed courses attempt to meet all learners'
     needs by incorporating multiple means of imparting information and flexible methods of assessing
     learning. UDL also includes multiple means of engaging or tapping into learners' interests.
     Universally designed courses are not designed with any one particular group of students with a
     disability in mind, but rather are designed to address the learning needs of a wide-ranging group.

                                                                                                        Brokop, F. (2008)

   Most institutions with a centre for supporting teaching and learning will be able to provide assistance
to faculty to ensure the course meets universal design standards. For instance, BCcampus has produced
an accessibility toolkit (Coolidge et l., 2018) and Norquest College, Alberta, has published a detailed
guide to ensuring online materials are accessible for persons with disabilities.

9.2.3 Student differences with respect to learning with technologies

It may seem obvious that different students will have different preferences for different kinds of
technology or media. The design of teaching would cater for these differences. Thus if students are
`visual' learners, they would be provided with diagrams and illustrations. If they are auditory learners,
they will prefer lectures and podcasts. It might appear then that identifying dominant learning styles
should then provide strong criteria for media and technology selection. However, it is not as simple as
that.

   McLoughlin (1999), in a thoughtful review of the implications of the research literature on learning
styles for the design of instructional material, concluded that instruction could be designed to
accommodate differences in both cognitive-perceptual learning styles and Kolb's (1984) experiential
learning cycle. In a study of new intakes conducted over several years at the University of Missouri-
Columbia, using the Myers-Briggs inventory, Schroeder (1993) found that new students think
concretely, and are uncomfortable with abstract ideas and ambiguity.

   However, a major function of a university education is to develop skills of abstract thinking, and to
help students deal with complexity and uncertainty. Perry (1970) found that learning in higher education
is a developmental process. It is not surprising then that many students enter college or university
without such `academic' skills. Indeed, there are major problems in trying to apply learning styles and
other methods of classifying learner differences to media and technology selection and use. Laurillard
(2001) makes the point that looking at learning styles in the abstract is not helpful. Learning has to
be looked at in context. Thinking skills in one subject area do not necessarily transfer well to another
subject area. There are ways of thinking that are specific to different subject areas. Thus logical-rational
thinkers in science do not necessarily make thoughtful husbands, or good literary critics.

   Part of a university education is to understand and possibly challenge predominant modes of thinking
in a subject area. While learner-centered teaching is important, students need to understand the inherent
logic, standards, and values of a subject area. They also need to be challenged, and encouraged to think
                                                                                                                                               9.2 Students 465

outside the box. In particular, at a university level we need strategies to gradually move students from
concrete learning based on personal experience to abstract, reflective learning that can then be applied
to new contexts and situations. Technology can be particularly helpful for that, as we saw in Chapter 8.

   Thus when designing courses, it is important to offer a range of options for student learning within
the same course. One way to do this is to make sure that a course is well structured, with relevant
`core' information easily available to all students, but also to make sure that there are opportunities for
students to seek out new or different content. This content should be available in a variety of media such
as text, diagrams, and video, with concrete examples explicitly related to underlying principles. The
increasing availability of open educational resources (discussed in Chapter 11.2) makes the provision of
this `richness' of possible content much more viable.

   Similarly, technology enables a range of learner activities to be made available, such as researching
readings on the Web, online discussion forums, synchronous presentations, assessment through e-
portfolios, and online group work. The range of activities increases the likelihood that a variety of
learner preferences are being met, and also encourages learners to involve themselves in activities and
approaches to learning where they may initially feel less comfortable. Thus it is important to ensure that
students have a wide range of media (text, audio, video, computing) within a course or program.

   Lastly, one should be careful in the assumptions made about student preferences for learning
through digital technologies. On the one hand, technology `boosters' such as Mark Prensky (2001) and
Don Tapscott (2008) have argued that today's `digital natives' are different from previous generations
of students. They argue that today's students live within a networked digital universe and therefore
expect their learning also to be all digitally networked. It is also true that professors in particular tend
to underestimate students' access to advanced technologies (professors are often late adopters of new
technology), so you should always try to find up-to-date information on what devices and technologies
students are currently using, if you can.

   On the other hand, it is also dangerous to assume that all students are highly `digital literate' and
are demanding that new technologies should be used in teaching. Jones and Shao (2011) conducted a
thorough review of the literature on `digital natives', with over 200 appropriate references, including
surveys of relevant publications from countries in Europe, Asia, North America, Australia and South
Africa. They concluded that:

         · students vary widely in their use and knowledge of digital media;

         · the gap between students and their teachers in terms of digital literacy is not fixed, nor is the
            gulf so large that it cannot be bridged;

         · there is little evidence that students enter university with demands for new technologies that
            teachers and universities cannot meet;

         · students will respond positively to changes in teaching and learning strategies that include the
            use of new technologies that are well conceived, well explained and properly embedded in
            courses and degree programmes. However there is no evidence of a pent-up demand
            amongst students for changes in pedagogy or of a demand for greater collaboration;

         · the development of university infrastructure, technology policies and teaching objectives
            should be choices about the kinds of provision that the university wishes to make and not a
            response to general statements about what a new generation of students are demanding;

         · the evidence indicates that young students do not form a generational cohort and they do not
            express consistent or generationally organised demands, thus challenging general
            assumptions about the differences between post-millennials, millennials, Generation X and
466 Chapter 9: Choosing and using media in education: the SECTIONS model

            boomers in the way that they learn.

Graduating students that have been interviewed about learning technologies at the University of British
Columbia made it clear that they will be happy to use technology for learning so long as it contributes to
their success (in the words of one student, `if it will get me better grades') but the students also made it
clear that it was the instructor's responsibility to decide what technology was best for their studies.

   It is also important to pay attention to what Jones and Shao are not saying. They are not saying
that social media, personal learning environments, or collaborative learning are inappropriate, nor that
the needs of students and the workforce are unchanging or unimportant, but the use of these tools or
approaches should be driven by a holistic look at the needs of all students, the needs of the subject
area, and the learning goals relevant to a digital age, and not by an erroneous view of what a particular
generation of students are demanding.

   In summary, one great advantage of the intelligent application of technology to teaching is that it
provides opportunities for students to learn in a variety of ways, thus adapting the teaching more easily to
student differences. Thus, the first step in media selection is to know your students, their similarities and
differences, what technologies they already have access to, and what digital skills they already possess
or lack that may be relevant for your courses. This is likely to require the use of a wide range of media
within the teaching to accommodate these differences.

9.2.4 The information you need about your students

It is critical to know your students. In particular, you need the following information to provide an
appropriate context for decisions about media and technology:

   1. What is the mandate or policy of your institution, department or program with respect to student
access in general (selective vs open; accommodation of disabilities, etc.)? How will students who do not
have access to a chosen technology be supported?

   2. What are the likely demographics of the students you will be teaching? How appropriate is the
technology you are thinking of using for these students?

   3. If your students are to be taught at least partly off campus, to which technologies are they likely to
have convenient and regular access at home or work?

   4. If students are to be taught at least partly on campus, what is - or should be - your or your
department's policy with regard to students' access to devices in class?

   5. What digital skills do you expect your students to have before they start the program?
   6. If students are expected to provide their own access to technology, will you be able to provide
unique teaching experiences that will justify the purchase or use of such technology?
   7. What prior approaches to learning are the students likely to bring to your program? How suitable
are such prior approaches to learning likely to be to the way you need to teach the course? How could
technology be used to cater for student differences in learning?
   There are many different ways to get the information needed to answer these questions. In many
cases, you will still have to make decisions on insufficient evidence, but the more accurate information
you have about your potential students, the better your likely choice of media and technology. Almost
certainly, though, you will have a variety and diversity of students, so the design of your teaching will
need to accommodate this.
                                                                                                                                               9.2 Students 467

                                                              Activity 9.2: Knowing your students

              · How many of the questions in Section 9.2.4 can you answer off the top of your head?

              · What additional information do you need, and where can you find it?

      There is no feedback provided on these questions.

References

Brokop, F. (2008) Accessibility to E-Learning for Persons With Disabilities: Strategies, Guidelines, and
Standards Edmonton AB: NorQuest College

   Coolidge, A. et al (2018) B.C. Open Textbook Accessibility Toolkit Victoria BC: BCcampus.
   Dziuban, C. et al. (2000) Reactive behavior patterns go online The Journal of Staff, Program and
Organizational Development, Vol. 17, No.3
   International Telecommunications Union (2018) UN Broadband Commission sets global broadband
targets to bring online the world's 3.8 billion not connected to the Internet Davos: United Nations
Broadband Commission
   Jones, C. and Shao, B. (2011) The Net Generation and Digital Natives: Implications for Higher
Education Milton Keynes: Open University/Higher Education Academy
   Kolb. D. (1984) Experiential Learning: Experience as the source of learning and development
Englewood Cliffs NJ: Prentice Hall
   Laurillard, D. (2001) Rethinking University Teaching: A Conversational Framework for the Effective
Use of Learning Technologies New York/London: Routledge
   Marron, D. Missen, C. and Greenberg, J. (2014) "Lo-Fi to Hi-Fi": A New Way of Conceptualizing
Metadata in Underserved Areas with the eGranary Digital Library Austin TX: International Conference
on Dublin Core and Metadata Applications
   McCoughlin, C. (1999) The implications of the research literature on learning styles for the design of
instructional material Australian Journal of Educational Technology, Vol. 15, No. 3
   Norquest College (2008) Accessibility to E-Learning for Persons With Disabilities: Strategies,
Guidelines, and Standards Edmonton AB: Norquest College
   Perry, W. (1970) Forms of intellectual development and ethical development in the college years: a
scheme New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston
   Prensky, M. (2001) `Digital natives, Digital Immigrants' On the Horizon Vol. 9, No. 5
   Schroeder, C. (1993) New students - new learning styles, Change, Sept.-Oct
   Tapscott, D. (2008) Grown Up Digital New York: McGraw Hill
9.3 Ease of Use

Figure 9.3.1 Technology reliability is important!
Image: © pixgood.com

9.3.1 Keep it simple
In most cases, the use of technology in teaching is a means, not an end. Therefore it is important that
students and teachers do not have to spend a great deal of time on learning how to use educational
technologies, or on making the technologies work. The exceptions of course are where technology
is the area of study, such as computer science or engineering, or where learning the use of software
tools is critical for some aspects of the curriculum, for instance computer-aided design in architecture,

                                                                   469
470 Chapter 9: Choosing and using media in education: the SECTIONS model

spreadsheets in business studies, and geographical information systems in geology. In most cases,
though, the aim of the study is not to learn how to use a particular piece of educational technology, but
the study of history, mathematics, or biology.

   One advantage of face-to-face teaching is that it needs relatively little advance preparation time
compared with for instance developing a fully online course. Media and technologies vary in their
capacity for speed of implementation and flexibility in up-dating. For instance, blogs are much quicker
and easier to develop and distribute than virtual reality. Teachers and instructors then are much more
likely to use technology that is quick and easy to use, and students likewise will expect such features in
technology they are to use for studying. However, what's `easy' for instructors and students to use will
depend on their digital literacy.

9.3.2 Computer and information literacy

If a great deal of time has to be spent by the students and teachers in learning how to use for instance
software for the development or delivery of course material, this distracts from the learning and teaching.
Of course, there is a basic set of literacy skills that will be required, such as the ability to read and
write, to use a keyboard, to use word processing software, to navigate the Internet and use Internet
software, and increasingly to use mobile devices. These generic skills though could be considered pre-
requisites. If students have not adequately developed these skills in school, then an institution might
provide preparatory courses for students on these topics.

   It will make life a lot easier for both teachers and students if an institution has strategies for supporting
students' use of digital media. For instance, at the University of British Columbia, the Digital Tattoo
project prepares students for learning online in a number of ways:

         · introducing students to a range of technologies that could be used for their learning, such as
            learning management systems, open educational resources, MOOCs and e-portfolios;

         · explaining what's involved in studying online or at a distance;

         · setting out the opportunities and risks of social media;

         · advice on how to protect their privacy;

         · how to make the most of connecting, networking and online searching;

         · how to prevent cyber-bullying;

         · maintaining a professional online presence.

If your institution does not have something similar, then you could direct your students to the Digital
Tattoo site, which is fully open.

   It is not only students though who may need prior preparation. Technology can be too seductive. You
can start using it without fully understanding its structure or how it works. Even a short period of training
- an hour of less - on how to use common technologies such as a learning management system or lecture
capture could save you a lot of time and more importantly, enable you to see the potential value of
all features and not just those that you stumble across.
                   9.3 Ease of Use 471

9.3.3 Orientation

A useful standard or criterion for the selection of course media or software is that `novice' students
(students who have never used the software before) should be studying within 20 minutes of logging
on. This 20 minutes may be needed to work out some of the key functions of the software that may
be unfamiliar, or to work out how the course Web site is organized and navigated. This is more of
an orientation period though than learning new skills of computing. If there is a need to introduce
new software that may take a little time to learn, for instance, a synchronous `chat' facility, or video
streaming, it should be introduced at the point where it is needed. It is important though to provide time
within the course for the students to learn how to do this.

9.3.4 Interface design

The critical factor in making technology transparent is the design of the interface between the user and
the machine. Thus an educational program or indeed any Web site should be well structured, intuitive
for the user to use, and easy to navigate.

   Interface design is a highly skilled profession, and is based on a combination of scientific research
into how humans learn, an understanding of how operating software works, and good training in graphic
design. This is one reason why it is often wise to use software or tools that have been well established in
education, because these have been tested and been found to work well.

   The traditional generic interface of computers - a keyboard, mouse, and graphic user interface of
windows and pull-down menus and pop-up instructions - is still extremely crude, and not isomorphic
with most people's preferences for processing information. It places very heavy emphasis on literacy
skills and a preference for visual learning. This can cause major difficulties for students with certain
disabilities, such as dyslexia or poor eyesight. However, in recent years, interfaces have started to
become more user friendly, with touch screen and voice activated interfaces.

   Nevertheless a great deal of effort often has to go into the adaptation of existing computer or mobile
interfaces to make them easy to use in an educational context. The Web is just as much a prisoner of
the general computer interface as any other software environment, and the educational potential of any
Web site is also restricted by its algorithmic or tree-like structure. For instance, it does not always suit
the inherent structure of some subject areas, or the preferred way of learning of some students.

   There are several consequences of these interface limitations for teachers and instructors:

         · it is really important to choose teaching software or other technologies that are intuitively
            easy to use, both by the students in particular, but also for the teacher/instructor in creating
            materials and interacting with students;

         · when creating materials for teaching, the teacher needs to be aware of the issues concerning
            navigation of the materials and screen lay-out and graphics. While it is possible to add
            stimulating features such as audio and animated graphics, this comes at the cost of
            bandwidth. Such features should be added only where they serve a useful educational
            function, as slow delivery of materials is extremely frustrating for learners, who will
            normally have slower Internet access that the teacher creating the materials. Furthermore,
            web-based layout on desktop or laptop computers does not automatically transfer to the same
            dimensions or configurations on mobile devices, and mobile devices have a wide range of
            standards, depending on the device. Given that the design of Web-based materials requires a
472 Chapter 9: Choosing and using media in education: the SECTIONS model

            high level of specialized interface design skill, it is preferable to seek specialist help,
            especially if you want to use software or media that are not standard institutionally supported
            tools. This is particularly important when thinking of using new mobile apps, for instance;

         · third, we can expect in the next few years some significant changes in the general computer
            interface with the development of speech recognition technology, adaptive responses based
            on artificial intelligence, and the use of haptics (e.g. hand-movement) to control devices.
            Changes in basic computer interface design could have as profound an impact on the use of
            technology in teaching as the Internet has.

9.3.5 Reliability

The reliability and robustness of the technology is also critical. Most of us will have had the frustration
of losing work when our word programming software crashes or working `in the cloud' and being logged
off in the middle of a piece of writing. The last thing you want as a teacher or instructor is lots of
calls from students saying they cannot get online access, or that their computer keeps crashing. (If the
software locks up one machine, it will probably lock up all the others!) Technical support can be a huge
cost, not just in paying technical staff to deal with service calls, but also in lost time of students and
teachers.

   `Innovation in teaching' will certainly bring rewards these days as institutions jostle for position as
innovative institutions. It is often easier to get funding for new uses of technology than funding to sustain
older but successful technologies. Although podcasts combined with a learning management system can
be a very low-cost but highly effective teaching medium if good design is used, they are not sexy. It will
usually be easier to get support for much more costly and spectacular technologies such as xMOOCs or
virtual reality.

   On the other hand, there is much risk in being too early into a new technology. Software may not be
fully tested and reliable, or the company supporting the new technology may go out of business. Students
are not guinea pigs, and reliable and sustainable service is more important to them than the glitz and
glamour of untried technology. It is best to wait for at least a year for new apps or software to be fully
tested in general applications before adopting them for teaching. It is wise then not to rush in and buy
the latest software update or new product - wait for the bugs to be ironed out. Also if you plan to use
a new app or technology that is not generally supported by the institution, check first with IT services
to ensure there are not security, privacy or institutional bandwidth issues. Thus it is better to be at the
leading edge, just behind the first wave of innovation, rather than at the bleeding edge.

   A feature of online learning is that peak use tends to fall outside normal office hours. Thus it is
really important that your course materials sit on a reliable server with high-speed access and 24 hour,
seven days a week reliability, with automatic back-up on a separate, independent server located in a
different building. Ideally, the servers should be in a secure area (with for instance emergency electricity
supply) with 24 hour technical support, which probably means locating your servers with a central IT
service or `in the cloud', which means it is all the more important to ensure that materials are safely and
independently backed up.

   However, the good news is that most commercial educational software products such as learning
management systems and lecture capture, as well as servers, are very reliable. Open source software too
is usually reliable but probably slightly more at risk of technical failure or security breaches. If you
have good IT support, you should receive very few calls from students on technical matters. The main
technical issue that faculty face these days appears to be software up-grades to learning management
                                                                                                                                           9.3 Ease of Use 473

systems. This often means moving course materials from one version of the software to the new version.
This can be costly and time-consuming, particularly if the new version is substantially different from the
previous version. Overall, though, reliability should not be an issue.

   In summary, ease of use requires professionally designed commercial or open source course software,
specialized help in graphics, navigation and screen design for your course materials, and strong technical
support for server and software management and maintenance. Certainly in North America, most
institutions now provide IT and other services focused specifically on supporting technology-based
teaching. However, without such professional support, a great deal of your time as a teacher will be spent
on technical issues, and to be blunt, if you do not have easy and convenient access to such support, you
would be wise not to get heavily committed to technology-based teaching until that support is available.

9.3.6 Questions for consideration

Ease of use is another critical factor in the successful use of technology for teaching. Some of the
questions then that you need to consider are:

       1. How intuitively easy to use, both by students and by yourself, is the technology you are
            considering?

       2. How reliable is the technology?
       3. How easy is it to maintain and upgrade the technology?
       4. The company that is providing the critical hardware or software you are using: is it a stable

            company that is not likely to go out of business in the next year or two, or is it a new start-
            up? What strategies are in place to secure any digital teaching materials you create should the
            organisation providing the software or service cease to exist?
       5. Do you have adequate technical and professional support, both in terms of the technology
            and with respect to the design of materials?
       6. How fast developing is this subject area? How important is it to regularly change the teaching
            materials? Which technology will best support this?
       7. To what extent can the changes be handed over to someone else to do, and/or how essential is
            it for you to do them yourself?
       8. What rewards am I likely to get for using new technology in my teaching? Will use of a new
            technology be the only innovation, or can I also change my way of teaching with this
            technology to get better results?
       9. What are the risks in using this technology?

                                                               Activity 9.3 Ease of use

             1. what would be the main challenges of just putting a web cam in the lecture hall and recording
                 your lecture on your computer for streaming later for students who can't get to a lecture?
474 Chapter 9: Choosing and using media in education: the SECTIONS model

             2. how would you rank these technologies for ease of use (a) by you as a teacher/instructor (b) by
                 students?:
                             a learning management system
                             live video (e.g. a streamed, live lecture using video-conferencing software such as
                               Zoom, GoToMeeting, Microsoft Team)
                             books
                             virtual reality
                             a podcast (a digital audio recording)

      Click on the podcast below for my feedback on this activity:

                           An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                        https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=226
9.4 Cost

Figure 9.4.1 Total cost of a fully online masters' course over 7 years (from Bates and Sangrà, 2011). For an
explanation of this graph, click on the podcast below

                       An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                    https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=230

                                                                   475
476 Chapter 9: Choosing and using media in education: the SECTIONS model

9.4.1 A revolution in media

Until as recently as ten years ago, cost was a major discriminator affecting the choice of technology
(Hülsmann, 2000, 2003; Rumble, 2001; Bates, 2005). For instance, for educational purposes, audio
(lectures, radio, audio-cassettes) was far cheaper than print, which in turn was far cheaper than most
forms of computer-based learning, which in turn was far cheaper than video (television, cassettes or
video-conferencing). All these media were usually seen as either added costs to regular teaching, or too
expensive to use to replace face-to-face teaching, except for purely distance education on a fairly large
scale.

   However, there have been dramatic reductions in the cost of developing and distributing all kinds of
media (except face-to-face teaching) in the last ten years, due to several factors:

         · rapid developments in consumer technologies such as smartphones that enable text, audio
            and video to be both created and transmitted by end users at low cost;

         · compression of digital media, enabling even high bandwidth video or television to be carried
            over wireless, landlines and the Internet at an economic cost (at least in economically
            advanced countries);

         · improvements in media software, making it relatively easy for non-professional users to
            create and distribute all kinds of media;

         · increasing amounts of media-based open educational resources, which are already developed
            learning materials that are free for teachers and students alike to use.

The good news then is that in general, and in principle, cost should no longer be an automatic
discriminator in the choice of media. If you are happy to accept this statement at face value, than you
can skip the rest of this chapter. Choose the mix of media that best meets your teaching needs, and
don't worry about which medium is likely to cost more. Indeed, a good case could be made that it
would now be cheaper to replace face-to-face teaching with purely online learning, if cost was the only
consideration.

   In practice however costs can vary enormously both between and within media, depending once again
on context and design. Since the main cost from a teacher's perspective is their time, it is important to
know what are the `drivers' of cost, that is, what factors are associated with increased costs, depending
on the context and the medium being used. These factors are less influenced by new technological
developments, and can therefore be seen as `foundational' principles when considering the costs of
educational media.

   Unfortunately there are many different factors that can influence the actual cost of using media in
education, which makes a detailed discussion of costs very complex (for a more detailed treatment, see
Bates and Sangrà, 2011). As a result, I will try to identify the main cost drivers, then provide a table
that provides a simplified guide to how these factors influence the costs of different media, including
face-to-face teaching. This guide again should be considered as a heuristic device, so see this section as
Media Costs 101.

9.4.2 Cost categories

The main cost categories to be considered in using educational media and technologies, and especially
blended or online learning, are as follows:
                           9.4 Cost 477

9.4.2.1 Development

These are the costs needed to pull together or create learning materials using particular media or
technologies. There are several sub-categories of development costs:

         · production costs: making a video or building a course section in a learning management
            system, or creating a virtual world. Included in these costs will be the time of specialist staff,
            such as web designers or media or computer specialists, as well as any costs in web
            design or video production;

         · your time as an instructor: the work you have to do as part of developing or producing
            materials. This will include planning/course design as well as development. Your time is
            money, and probably the largest single cost in using educational technologies, but more
            importantly, if you are developing learning materials you are not doing other things, such as
            research or interacting with students, so there is a real cost, even if it is not expressed in
            dollar terms;

         · copyright clearance if you are using third party materials such as photos or video clips.
            Again, this is more likely to be thought of as time in finding and clearing copyright more than
            money;

         · probably the cost of an instructional designer in terms of their time.

Development costs are usually fixed or `once only' and are independent of the number of students. Once
media are developed, they are usually scalable, in that once produced, they can be used by any number
of learners without increased development costs. Using open educational resources can greatly reduce
media development costs.

9.4.2.2 Delivery

This includes the cost of the educational activities needed during offering the course and would include
instructional time spent interacting with students, instructional time spent on marking assignments,
and would include the time of other staff supporting delivery, such as teaching assistants, adjuncts for
additional sections and instructional designers and technical support staff.

   Because of the cost of human factors such as instructional time and technical support needed in media-
based teaching, delivery costs tend to increase as student numbers increase, and also have to be repeated
each time the course is on offer. In other words, they are recurrent. However, increasingly with Internet-
based delivery, there is usually a zero direct technology cost in delivery.

9.4.2.3 Maintenance costs

Once materials for a course are created, they need to be maintained. Urls go dead, set readings may
go out of print or expire, and more importantly new developments in the subject area may need to be
accommodated. Thus once a course is offered, there are ongoing maintenance costs.

   Instructional designers and/or media professionals can manage some of the maintenance, but
nevertheless teachers or instructors will need to be involved with decisions about content replacement
or updating. Maintenance is not usually a major time consumer for a single course, but if an instructor
is involved in the design and production of several online courses, maintenance time can build to a
significant amount.
478 Chapter 9: Choosing and using media in education: the SECTIONS model

   Maintenance costs are usually independent of the number of students, but are dependent on the
number of courses an instructor is responsible for, and are recurrent each year.

9.4.2.4 Overheads

These include infrastructure or overhead costs, such as the cost of licensing a learning management
system, lecture capture technology and servers for video streaming. These are real costs but not ones that
can be allocated to a single course but will be shared across a number of courses. Overheads are usually
considered to be institutional costs and, although important, probably will not influence a teacher's
decision about which media to use, provided these services are already in place and the institution does
not directly charge for such services.

   However, if a new online program is to be offered on a full cost-recovery basis, then other institutional
overheads will also need to be added. Some will be the same as for on-campus courses (for example,
a contribution towards the President's Office), but other overheads applied to on-campus students, such
as building maintenance, will not apply to a fully online program (which is the main reason that the net
cost of an online program is usually less than that of a campus-based program).

8.4.3 Cost drivers

The primary factors that drive cost are:

         · the development/production of materials;

         · the delivery of materials;

         · number of students/scalability;

         · the experience of an instructor working with the medium;

         · whether the instructor develops materials alone (self-development) or works with
            professionals.

Production of technology-based materials such as a video program, or a Web site, is a fixed cost, in that it
is not influenced by how many students take the course. However, production costs can vary depending
on the design of the course. Engle (2014) showed that depending on the method of video production, the
development costs for a MOOC could vary by a factor of six (the most expensive production method -
full studio production - being six times that of an instructor self-recording on a laptop).

   Nevertheless, once produced, the cost is independent of the number of students. Thus the more
expensive the course to develop, the greater the need to increase student numbers to reduce the average
cost per student. (Or put another way, the greater the number of students, the more reason to ensure
that high quality production is used, whatever the medium). In the case of MOOCs (which tend to be
almost twice as expensive to develop as an online course for credit using a learning management system
- University of Ottawa, 2013) the number of learners is so great that the average cost per student is
very small. Thus there are opportunities for economies of scale from the development of digital material,
provided that student course enrolments can be increased (which may not always be the case). This can
be described as the potential for the scalability of a medium.

   Similarly, there are costs in teaching the course once the course is developed. These tend to be
variable costs, in that they increase as class size increases. If student-teacher interaction, through online
discussion forums and assignment marking, is to be kept to a manageable level, then the teacher-student
                                                                                                                                                     9.4 Cost 479

ratio needs to be kept relatively low (for instance, between 1:25 to 1:40, depending on the subject area
and the level of the course). The more students, the more time a teacher will need to spend on delivery,
or additional contract instructors will need to be hired. Either way, increased student numbers generally
will lead to increased costs. MOOCs are an exception. Their main value proposition is that they do not
provide direct learner support, so have zero delivery costs. However, this is probably the reason why
such a small proportion of participants successfully complete MOOCs.

   There may be benefits then for a teacher or for an institution in spending more money up front for
interactive learning materials if this leads to less demand for teacher-student interaction. For instance, a
mathematics course might be able to use automated testing and feedback and simulations and diagrams,
and pre-designed answers to frequently asked questions, with less or even no time spent on individual
assignment marking or communication with the teacher. In this case it may be possible to manage
teacher-student ratios as high as 1:200 or more, without significant loss of quality.

   Also, experience in using or working with a particular medium or delivery method is also important.
The first time an instructor uses a particular medium such as podcasting, it takes much longer than
subsequent productions or offerings. Some media or technologies though need much more effort to learn
to use than others. Thus a related cost driver is whether the instructor works alone (self-development) or
works with media professionals. Self-developing materials will usually take longer for an instructor than
working with professionals.

   There are advantages in teachers and instructors working with media professionals when developing
digital media. Media professionals will ensure the development of a quality product, and above all
can save teachers or instructors considerable time, for instance through the choice of appropriate
software, editing, and storage and streaming of digital materials. Instructional designers can help in
suggesting appropriate applications of different media for different learning outcomes. Thus as with all
educational design, a team approach is likely to be more effective, and working with other professionals
will help control the time teachers and instructors spend on media development.

   Lastly, design decisions are critical. Costs are driven by design decisions within a medium. For
instance cost drivers are different between lectures and seminars (or lab classes) in face-to-face teaching.
Similarly, video can be used just to record talking heads, as in lecture capture, or can be used to exploit
the affordances of the medium (see Chapter 8), such as demonstrating processes or location shooting.
Computing has a wide and increasing range of possible designs, including online collaborative learning
(OCL), computer-based learning, animations, simulations or virtual worlds.

   Figure 9.4.3 attempts to capture the complexity of cost factors, focusing mainly on the perspective of a
teacher or instructor making decisions. Again, this should be seen as a heuristic device, a way of thinking
about the issue. Other factors could be added (such as social media, or maintenance of materials). I have
given my own personal ratings for each cell, based on my experience. I have taken conventional teaching
as a medium or `average' cost, then ranked cells as to whether there is a higher or lower cost factor for
the particular medium. Other readers may well rate the cells differently.
480 Chapter 9: Choosing and using media in education: the SECTIONS model
                                                 9.4 Cost 481

Figure 9.4.3 Cost drivers for educational media

   Although the time it takes to develop and deliver learning using different technologies is likely to
influence an instructor's decision about what technology to use, it is not a simple equation. For instance,
developing a good quality online course using a mix of video and text materials may take much more of
the instructor's time to prepare than if the course was offered through classroom teaching. However, the
online course may take less time in delivery over several years, because students may be spending more
time on task online, and less time in direct interaction with the instructor. Once again, we see that design
is a critical factor in how costs are assessed.

   In short, from an instructor perspective, time is the critical cost factor. Technologies that take a lot
of time to use are less likely to be used than those that are easy to use and thus save time. But once
again design decisions can greatly affect how much time teachers or instructors need to spend on any
medium, and the ability of teachers and students to create their own educational media is becoming
an increasingly important factor.

9.4.4 Issues for consideration

9.4.4.1 Lecture capture vs LMS: cost factors

In recent years, university faculty have generally gravitated more to lecture capture and video streaming
for online course delivery, particularly in institutions where online or distance learning is relatively new,
because it is `simpler' to do than redesign and create mainly text based materials in learning management
systems. Lecture capture also more closely resembles the traditional classroom method, so less change
is required of the instructor.

   Pedagogically though (depending on the subject area) lecture capture may be less effective than an
online course using collaborative learning and online discussion forums. Also, from an institutional
perspective lecture capture has a much higher technology cost than a learning management system. And,
of course, lecture capture is often used in conjunction with an LMS. What different technologies tend
to do though is change the spread of an instructors time between development and delivery. Media such
as an LMS can have higher initial development costs but much lower annual delivery and maintenance
costs than face-to-face teaching, for instance.

9.4.4.2 The student factor

Also, students themselves can now use their own devices to create multimedia materials for project work
or for assessment purposes in the form of e-portfolios. Media allow instructors, if they wish, to move a
lot of the hard work in teaching and learning from themselves to the students. Media allow students to
spend more time on task, and low cost, consumer media such as mobile phones or tablets enable students
themselves to create media artefacts, enabling them to demonstrate their learning in concrete ways. This
does not mean that instructor `presence' is no longer needed when students are studying online, but it
does enable a shift in where and how a teacher or instructor can spend their time in supporting learning.
482 Chapter 9: Choosing and using media in education: the SECTIONS model

9.4.5 Conclusion

Cost is a critical factor influencing media choice. For instructors, the main cost will be their time.
However it is important to look at time over the length of a course over several years, not just in
the initial production or preparation of materials. Carefully produced media may take more time in
production, but can save a great deal of time in delivery, especially if student activities and automated
feedback can be built into the design. This is why some institutions have a special fund for innovative
teaching or technology-based teaching and learning, to free up instructor time for design and
development.

   Media also differ considerably in the balance of costs between development, delivery, maintenance
and overheads. Face-to-face teaching has minimal development costs, but heavy delivery costs in terms
of instructor time; an LMS-based online course is has more of an equal balance between development
and delivery costs. Serious games usually have high development costs but very low delivery costs.

   Whatever the balance, cost is still a critical factor in media choice.

References

Bates, A. (2005) Technology, e-Learning and Distance Education London/New York: Routledge
   Bates, A. and Sangrà, A. (2011) Managing Technology in Higher Education San Francisco: Jossey-

Bass
   Engle, W. (2104) UBC MOOC Pilot: Design and Delivery Vancouver BC: University of British

Columbia
   Hülsmann, T. (2000) The Costs of Open Learning: A Handbook Oldenburg: Bibliotheks- und

Informationssytem der Universität Oldenburg
   Hülsmann, T. (2003) Costs without camouflage: a cost analysis of Oldenburg University's two

graduate certificate programs offered as part of the online Master of Distance Education (MDE): a
case study, in Bernath, U. and Rubin, E., (eds.) Reflections on Teaching in an Online Program: A Case
Study Oldenburg, Germany: Bibliothecks-und Informationssystem der Carl von Ossietsky Universität
Oldenburg

   Rumble, G. (2001) The Cost and Costing of Networked Learning Journal of Asynchronous Learning
Networks, Volume 5, Issue 2

   University of Ottawa (2013)Report of the e-Learning Working Group Ottawa ON: The University of
Ottawa

                                      Activity 9.4 How will cost affect your decision about what media to use?

             1. Are concerns about the possible cost/demands on your time influencing your decisions on what
                 media to use? If so in what ways? Has this section on costs changed your mind?

             2. How much time do you spend preparing lectures? Could that time be better spent preparing
                 learning materials, then using the time saved from delivering lectures on interaction with students
                 (online and/or face-to-face)?

             3. What kind of help can you get in your institution from instructional designers and media
                 professionals for media design and development? What media decisions will the answer to this
                 question suggest to you? For instance, if you are in a k-12 school with little or no chance for
                                                                                                                                             9.4 Cost 483

           professional support, what kind of media and design decisions are you likely to make?
      4. If you were filling in the cells for Figure 9.4.3, what differences would there be with my entries?

           Why?
      5. In Figure 9.4.3, add the following media: e-portfolios (in computing) and add another section

           under computing: social media. Add blogs, wikis and cMOOCs. How would you fill in the cells
           for each of these for development, delivery, etc.? Are there other media you would also add?
      6. Do you agree with the statement: It would now be cheaper to replace face-to-face teaching with
           purely online learning, if cost was the only consideration? What are the implications for your
           teaching if this is really true? What considerations would still justify face-to-face teaching?
For my feedback on some of these questions, click on the podcast below:

                   An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=230
9.5 Teaching and media selection

                      Figure 9.5.1 People do not necessarily learn better ... when the speaker's image
                      is added to the screen (Mayer, 2009).

9.5.1 The importance of design in multimedia teaching
Chapter 8 discussed the various pedagogical differences between media. Identifying appropriate uses of
media is both an increasingly important requirement of teachers and instructors in a digital age, and a
very complex challenge. This is one reason for working closely with instructional designers and media
professionals whenever possible. Teachers working with instructional designers will need to decide
which media they intend to use on pedagogical as well as operational grounds, which was the purpose
of Chapter 8.

                                                                   485
486 Chapter 9: Choosing and using media in education: the SECTIONS model

   However, once the choice of media has been made, by focusing on design issues we can provide
further guidelines for making appropriate use of media. In particular, having gone through the process
suggested in Chapter 8 of identifying possible teaching roles or functions for different media, we can
then draw on the work of Mayer (2012) and Koumi (2006, 2015) to ensure that whatever choice or mix
of media we have decided on, the design leads to effective teaching.

   Mayer's research focused heavily on cognitive overload in rich, multimedia teaching. From all
his research over many years, Mayer identified 12 principles of multimedia design, based on how
learners cognitively process multimedia:

9.5.1.1 Coherence

People learn better when extraneous words, pictures and sounds are excluded rather than included.
Basically, keep it simple in media terms.

9.5.1.2 Signalling

People learn better when cues that highlight the organization of the essential material are added. This
replicates earlier findings by Bates and Gallagher (1977). Students need to know what to look for in
multimedia materials.

9.5.1.3 [Avoid] Redundancy

People learn better from graphics + narration, than from graphics, narration and on-screen text.

9.5.1.4 Spatial contiguity

People learn better when corresponding words and pictures are presented near rather than far from
each other on the page or screen

9.5.1.5 Temporal contiguity

People learn better when corresponding words and pictures are presented simultaneously rather than
successively.

9.5.1.6 Segmenting

People learn better when a multimedia lesson is presented in user-paced segments rather than as a
continuous lesson. Thus several `YouTube' length videos are more likely to work better than a 50 minute
video.

9.5.1.7 Pre-training

People learn better from a multimedia lesson when they know the names and the characteristics of the
main concepts. This suggests a design feature for flipped classrooms, for instance. It may be better to
use a lecture or readings that provide a summary of key concepts and principles before showing more
detailed examples or applications of such principles in a video.
                          9.5 Teaching and media selection 487

9.5.1.8 Modality

People learn better from graphics and narration than from animation and on-screen text. This reflects
the importance of learners being able to combine both hearing and viewing at the same time to reinforce
each other in specific ways.

9.5.1.9 Multimedia

People learn better from words and pictures than from words alone. This also reinforces what I wrote in
1995: Make all four media available to teachers and learners (Bates, 1995, p.13).

9.5.1.10 Personalization

People learn better from multimedia lessons when words are in conversational style rather than
formal style. I would go even further than Mayer here. Multimedia can enable learners (particularly
distance learners) to relate to the instructor, as suggested by Durbridge's research (1983, 1984) on audio
combined with text. Providing a `human voice and face' to the teaching helps motivate learners, and
makes multimedia teaching feel that it is directed solely at the individual learner, if a conversational style
is adopted.

9.5.1.11 Voice

People learn better when the narration in multimedia lessons is spoken in a friendly human voice rather
than a machine voice.

9.5.1.12 [No] image

People do not necessarily learn better from a multimedia lesson when the speaker's image is added to
the screen.

   In re-reading Mayer's work, I am struck by the similarities in findings, using different research
methods, different multimedia technologies, and different contexts, to the research from the Audio-
Visual Media Research Group at the British Open University in the 1970s and 1980s (Bates, 1984).

   More recently, the University of British Columbia has done an excellent job of suggesting how
Mayer's design principles could be operationalised. Staff at the University of British Columbia have
combined Mayer's findings with Robert Talbert's experience from developing a series of successful
screencasts on mathematics, into a set of practical design guidelines for multimedia production.

   Talbert's key design principles are:

         · keep it Simple: focus on one idea at a time.

         · keep it Short: keep videos to a length 5-6 minutes max. to maximize attention.

         · keep it Real: model the decision making and problem solving processes of expert learners.

         · keep it Good: be intentional about planning the video; strive to produce the best video and
            audio quality possible.
488 Chapter 9: Choosing and using media in education: the SECTIONS model

Thus design decisions are critical in influencing the effectiveness of a particular technology. Well-
designed lectures will teach better than a poorly designed online course, and vice versa.

9.5.2 Teaching as a weak discriminator in media selection

Chapter 8 was exclusively focused on the best uses of each medium. Section 9.5.1 above then goes
on to look at effective design of multimedia. Most teachers and instructors would put the effectiveness
of a medium for teaching and learning as the first criterion for media selection. If the technology is
not educationally effective, why would you use it? Why do we need the other parts of the SECTIONS
model?

   However, if a student cannot access or use a technology, there will be no learning from that
technology, no matter how useful the educational affordances or how well the medium is
designed. Furthermore, motivated teachers will overcome educational weaknesses or shortcomings in a
particular technology, or conversely teachers inexperienced in using media will often under-exploit the
potential of a medium (such as using video for talking heads).

   Similarly, students will respond differently to different technologies due to preferred learning styles
or differences in motivation. Students who work hard can overcome poor use of learning technologies. It
is not surprising then that with so many variables involved, teaching and learning is a relatively weak
discriminator for selecting and using technologies. Access (and ease of use) are stronger discriminators
than teaching effectiveness in selecting media. This explains why teaching that does not really exploit
the educational affordances of a medium can often still get good results. Nevertheless, ideally one should
try to make best use of the pedagogical features of a medium because when it is then combined with the
other SECTIONS criteria, the teaching is likely to be more effective.

9.5.3 Questions for consideration

Therefore, it is not enough to focus just on the design of multimedia materials, as important as design
is, even considering just the pedagogical context. The choice and use of media need to be related to
other factors (what Mayer calls `boundary conditions'), such as individual differences between learners,
the complexity of the content, and the desired learning outcomes. Thus when considering media from a
strictly teaching perspective, the following questions need to be considered:

       1. Who are my students?

       2. What content needs to be covered?

       3. What are the desired learning outcomes from the teaching in terms of skills development?

       4. What instructional strategies or approaches to learning do I plan using?

       5. What are the unique pedagogical characteristics of different media? How might different
            media help with the presentation of content and development of student skills in this course?

       6. What is the best way to present the content to be covered in this course? How can media help
            with the presentation of content? Which media for what content?

       7. What skills am I trying to develop on this course? How can media help students with the
            development of the requisite skills for this course? Which media for which skills?

       8. What principles do I need to use when designing multimedia materials for their most
                                                           9.5 Teaching and media selection 489

effective use?

Working through these questions is likely to be an iterative rather than a sequential process. Depending
on the way you prefer to think about and make decisions, it may help to write down the answers to
each of the questions, but going through the process of thinking about these questions is probably more
important, leaving you with the freedom to make choices on a more intuitive basis, having first taken all
these - and other - factors into consideration.

References

Bates, A. (1984) Broadcasting in Education: An Evaluation London: Constables
   Bates, A. (1995) Teaching, Open Learning and Distance Education London/New York: Routledge
   Bates, A. and Gallagher, M. (1977) Improving the Effectiveness of Open University Television Case-

Studies and Documentaries Milton Keynes: The Open University, I.E.T. Papers on Broadcasting, No. 77
(out of print - copies available from tony.bates@ubc.ca)

   Durbridge, N. (1983) Design implications of audio and video cassettes Milton Keynes: Open
University Institute of Educational Technology (out of print)

   Durbridge, N. (1984) Audio-cassettes, in Bates, A. (ed.) The Role of Technology in Distance
Education London/New York: Croom Hill/St Martin's Press

   Koumi, J. (2006). Designing video and multimedia for open and flexible learning London: Routledge
   Koumi, J. (2015) Learning outcomes afforded by self-assessed, segmented video-print
combinations Cogent Education, Vol. 2, No.1
   Mayer, R. E. (2009). Multimedia learning (2nd ed). New York: Cambridge University Press
   UBC Wikis (2014) Documentation: Design Principles for Multimedia Vancouver BC: University of
British Columbia

                Activity 9.5 Multimedia design principles

      1. How well do you think Mayer's design principles (9.5.1 to 9.5.12) would apply to classroom
           teaching?

For feedback on this question, click on the podcast below.

   An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=233
9.6 Interaction

Figure 9.6.1 Computers enable learners to interact with learning materials (also `inherent' interaction)

   The fifth element of the SECTIONS model for selecting media is interaction. How do different media
enable interaction? The extent to which a medium enables interaction - and the kind of interaction -
is critically important, as there is now an overwhelming amount of research evidence to suggest that
students learn best when they are `active' in their learning. But what does this mean? And what role can
or do new technologies play in supporting active learning?

                                                                   491
492 Chapter 9: Choosing and using media in education: the SECTIONS model

9.6.1. Types of learner interaction

There are three different ways learners can interact when studying (Moore, 1989), and each of these
ways requires a somewhat different mix of media and technology.

9.6.1.1 Interaction with learning materials

This is the interaction generated when students work on a particular medium, such as a printed textbook,
a learning management system, or a short video clip, without direct intervention from an instructor or
other students. This interaction can be `reflective', without any overt actions, or it can be `observable',
in the form of an assessed response, such as a multiple choice test, or as notes to assist memory and
comprehension.

   Computer technology can greatly facilitate learners' interaction with learning resources. Self-
administered online tests can provide feedback to students on their comprehension or coverage of a
subject area. Such tests can also provide feedback to teachers on topic areas where students are having
difficulty, and can also be used for grading of students on their comprehension. Using standard test
software built into learning management systems, students can be automatically assessed and graded on
their comprehension of course materials. More advanced activities might include composing music
using software that converts musical notation to audio, entering data to test concepts through online
simulations, or participating in games or decision-making scenarios controlled by the
computer. Thus computer-managed learner interaction is particularly good for developing
comprehension and understanding of concepts and procedures, but it has limitations in developing the
higher order learning skills of analysis, synthesis and critical thinking, without additional human
intervention of some kind.

   There are other ways besides computer-managed learning to facilitate interaction between learners
and learning material. Textbooks may include activities set by the author (as in this textbook), or
instructors can set student activities around set readings. Other student activities might include reading
text or watching videos embedded in a learning management system, conducting a structured approach
to finding and analyzing web-based materials, or downloading and editing information from the web
to create e-portfolios of work. These activities may or may not be assessed, although evidence suggests
that students, and in particular students studying online, tend to focus more an assessed activities.

   In other words, with good design and adequate resources, technology-based instruction can provide
high levels of student interaction with the learning materials. There are strong economic advantages
in exploiting the possibilities of learners' interaction with learning materials, because intense student-
interaction with learning resources increases the time students spend on learning (`time-on-task'), which
tends to lead to increased learning (see Means et al., 2010). Perhaps more importantly, such activity,
when well designed, can reduce the time the teacher needs to spend on interacting with each student.

9.6.1.2 Interaction between students and teacher
                                                                                                                                            9.6 Interaction 493

Figure 9.6.2 Student-teacher interaction Image: © Joseph Mehling, DartmouthLife, 2007

   Student-teacher interaction is often needed though in order to develop many of the higher order
learning outcomes, such as analysis, synthesis, and critical thinking. This is particularly important for
developing academic learning, where students are challenged to question ideas, and to acquire deep
understanding. This often requires dialogue and conversation, either one-on-one between instructor and
students, or between an instructor and a group of students. The role of the teacher in for instance either
face-to-face seminars or online collaborative learning is therefore critical.

   Some technologies, such as online discussion forums, enable or encourage such dialogue or discourse
between students and instructors at a distance. The main limitation of student-teacher interaction is that
it can be time-demanding for the teacher, and therefore does not scale easily.

9.6.1.3 Student - student interaction
494 Chapter 9: Choosing and using media in education: the SECTIONS model

Figure 9.6.3 A student directed seminar at UBC Image: © University of British Columbia, 2014

   High quality student-student interaction can be provided equally well both in face-to-face and online
learning contexts. Asynchronous online discussion forums built into learning management systems can
enable this kind of interaction. Connectivist MOOCs and communities of practice also enable student-
student interaction.

   Again though quality depends on good design. Merely putting students together in a group, whether
online or face-to-face, is not likely to lead to either high levels of participation or high quality learning
without careful thought being given to the educational goals of discussion within a course, the topics for
discussion and their relationship to assessment and learning outcomes, and without strong preparation of
the students by the instructor for self-directed discussions (see Chapter 4, Section 4, for more on this.)

   In a technologically rich learning environment, then, a key decision for a teacher or course designer
is choosing the best mix of these three different kinds of interaction, taking into consideration the
epistemological approach, the amount of time available for both students and instructor, and the desired
learning outcomes. Technology can enable all three kinds of interaction.
9.6.2 The interactive characteristics of media and technologies
Different technologies can enhance or inhibit each of the three types of interactivity outlined above. This
again means looking at the dimension of interactivity as it applies to different media and technology.
This dimension has three components or points on the dimension in terms of the extent an active
response from a user is required when a medium or technology is used for teaching.

9.6.2.1 Inherent interactivity

Some media are inherently `active' in that they `push' learners to respond. An example is adaptive
learning, where students cannot progress to the next stage of learning without interacting through a test
                                                                                                                                            9.6 Interaction 495

that ascertains whether they have learned sufficiently to progress to the next stage, or what `corrective'
learning they still need to do. Behaviourist computer-based learning is inherently interactive, as it forces
learners to respond. Technologies that control how a learner responds are often associated with more
behaviourist approaches to teaching and learning.

9.6.2.2 Designed interactivity

Although some media or technologies are not inherently interactive, they can be explicitly designed to
encourage interaction with learners. For instance, although a web page is not inherently interactive, it
can be designed to be interactive, by adding a comment box or by requiring users to enter information
or make choices. In particular, teachers or instructors can add or suggest activities within a particular
medium. A podcast can be designed so that students stop the podcast every few minutes to do an activity
based on the content of the podcast. This approach can be applied just as much to textbooks, where
activities can be included, as to web pages.

   In many cases, though, a medium will require the intervention of a teacher or instructor both to set
activities around the learning materials and to provide appropriate feedback, thus adding to rather than
reducing the workload of instructors. Thus where instructors have to intervene either to design activities
or to provide feedback, the cost or time demands on the instructor are likely to be greater than if the
other two kinds of interaction are used.

9.6.2.3 User-generated interaction

Some media may not have explicit interaction built in, but end users may still voluntarily interact with
the medium, either cognitively and/or through some physical response. For instance someone in an art
gallery may cognitively or emotionally respond to a particular painting (while others may just glance at
it or pass it by). Students may choose to make sketches or drawings from the painting. Learners may
respond in similar ways to reading a novel or poem.

   The creators of the work may in fact deliberately design the work to encourage reflection or analysis,
but not in explicit ways, leaving the interpretation of a work to the viewer or reader. (This of course is
a constructivist approach to learning.) Media that encourage learners independently to be active without
the necessary intervention of a teacher or instructor also have cost advantages, although the quality of
the interaction will be more difficult to monitor or assess.

9.6.2.4 Who's in control?

Thus one dimension of interactivity is control: to what extent is interaction controlled or enabled by the
technology, by the creators/instructors, or by the users/learners? It can be seen that this is a complex
dimension, once again influenced by epistemological positions, and also by design decisions on the
teacher's part. These categories of interactivity are in no way `fixed', with different levels or types of
interaction possible within the same medium or technology. In the end, interaction needs to be linked
to desired learning outcomes. What kind of interaction will best lead to a particular type of learning
outcome, and what technology or medium best provides this kind of interaction?

9.6.3 Interaction and feedback

Feedback is an important aspect of interaction, and timely and appropriate feedback on learner activities
496 Chapter 9: Choosing and using media in education: the SECTIONS model

is often essential for effective learning. In particular, to what extent is feedback possible within a
particular medium? Although for instance a learner may respond actively to a poem in a book, feedback
on that interaction is usually not available just from the reading. Some other medium will need to be
used to provide that feedback, such as a face-to-face poetry class or an online discussion forum.

   On the other hand, with computer-based learning, once a student has responded to a multiple-
choice question, the computer can mark the question and give almost instant feedback. However,
with some technologies such as print, providing appropriate or immediate feedback to learners on their
activities may be difficult or impossible. Although `model' or `correct' answers might be provided in
a text on another page, quality feedback on activities must be provided by a teacher or instructor when
using a printed medium.

   Thus media and technologies again differ in their capacity to provide various kinds of feedback.
From a teaching perspective, it is important to be clear about what kind of feedback is likely to be
most effective, and then the most effective way to provide that feedback. In particular, under what
circumstances is it appropriate to automate feedback, and when should feedback be provided by a
teacher/instructor, or perhaps a teaching assistant, or even by other students?

9.6.4 Analysing the interactive qualities of different media

In Figure 9.6.4 I have analysed the interactive qualities of different educational media along two
different dimensions: different types of student interaction; and characteristics of the medium, in terms
of whether interaction is built into the medium, or needs to be added through deliberate design, or
whether it is left to the learner to decide how to interact.
                                                                                                                                            9.6 Interaction 497

          Figure 9.6.4 Media and student interaction

   I have allocated a number of different media here according to the type of learner activity they help
generate. The actual location though of some of these media will be dependent on design decisions made
by the instructor. For instance, a podcast could be accompanied by an activity (designed), or just be
a straight broadcast, with the student left to interpret its meaning and purpose in the course (learner-
generated). In some cases, an activity may be triggered by one medium (such as a podcast) but the actual
activity and the feedback may take place in another medium (such as through an online assessment).
9.6.5 Summary
Thus it can be seen that media and technology are somewhat slippery when it comes to categorising
them in terms of interaction, because instructors and learners often have a choice in how the medium
will actually be used, and that will affect how learner interaction and feedback takes place within a single
medium. Thus once again the quality of the design of the interactive experiences is as important as the
medium of choice for enabling the activity, although an inappropriate choice of technology can reduce
the level of activity and/or the quality of the interactions. In reality teachers and learners are likely to use
498 Chapter 9: Choosing and using media in education: the SECTIONS model

a combination of media and technologies to ensure high quality interactivity. However, using a number
of different media is likely to increase cost and workload for both instructors and learners.

   Once again, there is no evaluative judgement on my part in terms of which media or characteristics
provide the `best' interactivity. The choice of medium should depend on the kind of activities that are
judged important by a teacher or instructor within the overall context of the teaching. The purpose of
this analysis is to sensitize you to the differences between educational media in generating or facilitating
different types of interactivity, so that you can make informed decisions. In this case, though, there are
no clear media or technology `winners' in terms of interactivity. Design decisions are likely to be more
important than technology choice. Nevertheless, technology can enable students separated from their
instructors still to get quality activities and feedback, and when appropriately used, technology used to
support activities can result in more time on task for students.

9.6.6 Questions for consideration

       1. In terms of the skills I am trying to develop, what kinds of interaction will be most useful?
            What media or technology could I use to facilitate that kind of interaction?

       2. In terms of the effective use of my time, what kinds of interaction will produce a good
            balance between on the one hand student comprehension and student skills development, and
            on the other the amount of time I will be interacting personally or online with students?

                                                   Activity 9.6 Using media to promote student activity

             1. Go to YouTube and type in your subject area into the `search' box.

             2. Choose a YouTube video from the list that comes up that you might recommend to your students
                 to watch.

             3. What kind of interaction would the YouTube video require from your students? Does it force
                 them to respond in some way (inherent)?

             4. In what way are they likely to respond to the YouTube on their own, e.g. make notes, do an
                 activity, think about the topic (learner-generated)?

             5. What activity could you suggest that they do, after they have watched the
                 YouTube video (designed)? What type of knowledge or skill would that activity help develop?
                 What medium or technology would students use to do the activity?

             6. How would students get feedback on the activity that you set? What medium or technology would
                 they and/or you use for getting and giving feedback on their activity?

             7. How much work for you would that activity cause? Would the work be both manageable and
                 worthwhile? Could the activity be scaled for larger numbers of students?

             8. How could the YouTube video have been designed to generate more or better activity from
                 viewers or students?

      There is no feedback from me for this activity, which requires user-generated activity (that is, you have to
   do the work!)
           9.6 Interaction 499

Reference

Means, B. et al. (2009) Evaluation of Evidence-Based Practices in Online Learning: A Meta-Analysis
and Review of Online Learning Studies Washington, DC: US Department of Education

   Moore, M.G. (1989) Three types of interaction American Journal of Distance Education, Vol.3, No.2
9.7 Organisational issues

Figure 9.7.1 A video production studio at University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign Image: UIUC. Just as important
as the technical facilities are the media professionals who can help with the design of good quality educational videos.

9.7.1 Institutional readiness for teaching with technology
One of the critical issues that will influence the selection of media by teachers and instructors is:

         · the way the institution structures teaching activities;
         · the instructional and technology services already in place;
         · the support for media and technology use that their institution provides.

                                                                   501
502 Chapter 9: Choosing and using media in education: the SECTIONS model

If an institution is organised around a set number of classroom periods every day, and the use of physical
classrooms, the teachers are likely to focus mainly on classroom delivery. As Mackenzie was quoted in
Chapter 9 Section 1:

     `Teachers have always made the best of whatever they've got at hand, but it's what we have to work
     with. Teachers make due.'

   The reverse is equally true. If the school or university does not support a particular technology,
teachers and instructors quite understandably won't use it. Even if the technology is in place, such as a
learning management system or a video production facility, if instructors are not trained or oriented to its
use and potential, then it will either be under used or not used at all. Furthermore, if `core' technologies'
such as learning management systems or lecture capture facilities are not properly managed or if the
services are understaffed, teachers and instructors lose patience and confidence in the technology.

   Because of the inertia in institutions, there is often a bias towards those technologies that can be
introduced with the minimum of organisational change, although these may not be the technologies that
would have maximum impact on learning. These organisational challenges are extremely difficult, and
are often major reasons for the slow implementation of new technologies for teaching in education (see
Marshall, 2009) for a method for assessing the readiness of institutions for online learning).

   Most institutions that have successfully introduced media and technology for teaching on a large
scale have recognized the need for adequate professional support for faculty, by providing instructional
designers, media designers and IT support staff to support teaching and learning. Some institutions also
provide funding for innovative teaching projects.

9.7.2 Work with professionals
                                                                                                                              9.7 Organisational issues 503

                     Figure 8.7.2 Chris Crowley is an Instructional Designer/Project Manager for
                     UBC's Centre for Teaching, Learning and Technology. He is involved in the
                     design, development and delivery of online courses and learning resources in a
                     number of subject areas including Soil Science.

   Even those experienced in using media for teaching and learning would be wise to work with
instructional designers and professional media producers when creating any of the media discussed in
this chapter (with the possible exception of social media). It is important for the choice of technology to
be driven by educational goals, rather than starting with a particular medium or technology in mind.

   There are several reasons for working with professionals:
         · they understand the technology and as a result will enable you to develop a better product
            more quickly than working alone;
         · two heads are better than one: working collaboratively will result in new and better ideas
            about how you could be using the medium;
         · instructional designers and professional media producers will usually be familiar with project
            management and budgeting for media production, enabling resources to be developed in time
            and on budget. This is important as it is easy for teachers or instructors to get sucked into
            spending far more time than necessary on producing media.

The key point here is that although it is now possible for teachers and instructors to produce reasonably
504 Chapter 9: Choosing and using media in education: the SECTIONS model

good quality audio and video on their own, they will always benefit from the input of professionals in
media production.

9.7.3 Questions for consideration

       1. How much and what kind of help can I get from the institution in choosing and using media
            for teaching? Is help easily accessible? How good is the help? Do the support people have the
            media professionalism I will need? Are they up to date in the use of new technologies for
            teaching?

       2. Is there possible funding available to `buy me out' for a semester and/or to fund a teaching
            assistant so I can concentrate on designing a new course or revising an existing course? Is
            there funding for media production?

       3. To what extent will I have to follow `standard' technologies, practices and procedures, such
            as using a learning management system, or lecture capture system, or will I be encouraged
            and supported to try something new?

       4. Are there already suitable media resources freely available that I can use in my teaching,
            rather than creating everything from scratch? Can I get help from the library for instance in
            identifying these resources and dealing with any copyright issues (see Chapter 11, Section
            2)?

If the answers are negative for each of these questions, you would be wise to set very modest goals
initially for using media and technology.

   Nevertheless the good news is that it is increasingly easy to create and manage your own media
such as web sites, blogs, wikis, podcasts and simple video production using a desktop computer or
even a mobile phone. Furthermore students themselves are often capable and interested in participating
or helping with creating learning resources, if given the chance. Getting students involved in media
production is a very good way for them to get a deeper understanding of a subject. Above all, there is
an increasing amount of really good educational media coming available for free use for educational
purposes, as we shall see in Chapter 11, so it is not necessary always to create media from scratch.

References

Bates, A. and Sangrà, A. (2011) Managing Technology in Higher Education San Francisco: Jossey-Bass
   Marshall, S. (2009) E-Learning Maturity Model Version Two: New Zealand Tertiary Institution E-

Learning Capability: Informing and Guiding E-Learning Architectural Change and
Development Wellington NZ: Victoria University of Wellington

                                                                      Activity 9.7

   There is no activity provided for this section. The issues covered here are discussed in more depth in Bates and
   Sangrà (2011).
9.7 Organisational issues 505
9.8 Networking (and novelty)

Figure 9.8.1 UBC's Math Exam Wiki (click on image to go to web page)

9.8.1 Networking and novelty in course design
In earlier versions of the SECTIONS model, `N' stood for novelty. This was to recognise the importance
of teachers and instructors trying something new to improve on their practice, in this case to try a new
technology and see how well it worked for them. Also the `hype' surrounding new developments in
technology often provides a supportive environment for innovative teaching. This is still an important
issue; without experiment and trying new ways of teaching and new technologies for teaching, there will
be no improvement in practice.

   However, more recent developments in social media raise another, increasingly important, question
that needs to be asked when selecting media:

                                                                   507
508 Chapter 9: Choosing and using media in education: the SECTIONS model

     how important is it to enable learners to network beyond a course, with others such as subject
     specialists, professionals in the field, and relevant people in the community? Can the course, or
     student learning, benefit from such external connections?

   If the answer to this is an affirmative, then this will affect what media to use, and in particular will
suggest the use of social media such as blogs, wikis, Facebook, LinkedIn, or Google Hangout.

   Five different ways social media are influencing the application of networking in course design are
described below.

9.8.2 Supplementing `standard' learning technologies

Some instructors are combining social media for external networking with `standard' institutional
technologies such as a learning management system or video delivery. The LMS, which is password
protected and available only to the instructor and other enrolled students, allows for `safe'
communication within the course. The use of social media allows for connections with the external
world (contributions can still be screened by the course blog or wiki administrator by monitoring and
approving contributions.)

   For instance, a course on Middle Eastern politics could have an internal discussion forum focused on
relating current events directly to the themes and issues that are the focus of the course, but students may
manage their own, public wiki that encourages contributions from Middle East scholars and students,
and indeed anyone from the general public. Comments may end up being moved into and out of the
more closed class discussion forum as a result.

9.8.3 Exclusive use of social media for credit courses

Other instructors are moving altogether away from `standard' institutional technology such as learning
management systems and lecture capture into the use of social media for managing the whole course.
For instance, UBC's course ETEC 522 uses WordPress, YouTube videos and podcasts for instructor
and student contributions to the course. Indeed the choice of social media on this course changes
every year, depending on the focus of the course, and new developments in social media. Jon Beasley-
Murray at the University of British Columbia built a whole course around students creating a high level
(featured-article) Wikipedia entry on Latin American literature (Latin American literature WikiProject -
see Beasley-Murray, 2008).

9.8.4 Student generated learning resources

This is a particularly interesting development where students themselves use social media to create
resources to help other students. For instance, graduate math students at UBC have created the Math
Exam/Education Resources wiki, which provides `past exams with fully worked-out and
reviewed solutions, video lectures & pencasts by topic`. Such sites are open to anyone needing help in
their studying, not just UBC students. The project involves voluntary collaboration between graduate
students for the benefit of undergraduate students.
                                       9.8 Networking (and novelty) 509

9.8.5 Self-managed learning groups

cMOOCs are an obvious example of self-managed learning groups using social media such as webinars,
blogs and wikis.

9.8.6 Instructor-led open educational resources

YouTube in particular is becoming increasingly popular for instructors to use their knowledge to create
resources available to anyone. The best example is still the Khan Academy, but there are many other
examples, such as MIT's OpenCourseWare. xMOOCs are another example. This will be discussed more
in Chapter 11.

   Once again, the decision to `open up' teaching is as much a philosophical or value decision as a
technology decision, but the technology is now there to encourage and enable this philosophy.

9.8.7 Questions for consideration

       1. How important is it to enable learners to network beyond a course, with others such as
            subject specialists, professionals in the field, and relevant people in the community? Can the
            course, or student learning, benefit from such external connections?

       2. If this is important, what's the best way to do this? Use social media exclusively? Integrate it
            with other standard course technology? Delegate responsibility for its design and/or
            administration to students or learners?

References

Beasley-Murray, J. (2008) Was introducing Wikipedia to the classroom an act of madness leading only
to mayhem if not murder? Wikipedia, March 18

Activity 9.8 Networking (and novelty)

      1. How could you use social media in one of your courses to enable students in the course to
           connect to the outside world? How would it improve their learning? What would be the risks as
           well as the benefits?

For my feedback on this, click on the podcast below:

                   An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=246
510 Chapter 9: Choosing and using media in education: the SECTIONS model
9.9 Security and privacy

Figure 9.9.1 Strength of data protection laws. Click on image for more information.
Image: © 2019 DLA Piper

   `S' too is a change from the earlier ACTIONS model, where `S' stood for speed, in terms of
how quickly a technology enabled a course to be developed. However, the issues previously raised
under speed have also been included in SECTIONS `Ease of Use' (Chapter 9, Section 2). This allows
`Speed' to be replaced with `Security and privacy', issues which have become increasingly important
for education in a digital age.
9.9.1 The need for privacy and security when teaching
Teachers, instructors and students need a private place to work online. Instructors want to be able
to criticize politicians or corporations without fear of reprisal; students may want to keep rash or
radical comments from going public or will want to try out perhaps controversial ideas without having
them spread all over Facebook. Institutions want to protect students from personal data collection for
commercial purposes by private companies, tracking of their online learning activities by government

                                                                   511
512 Chapter 9: Choosing and using media in education: the SECTIONS model

agencies, or marketing and other unrequested commercial or political interruption to their studies. In
particular, institutions want to protect students, as far as possible, from online harassment or bullying.
Creating a strictly controlled environment enables institutions to manage privacy and security more
effectively.

   Learning management systems provide password protected access to registered students and
authorised instructors. Learning management systems were originally housed on servers managed by the
institution itself. Password protected LMSs on secure servers have provided that protection. Institutional
policies regarding appropriate online behaviour can be managed more easily if the communications are
managed `in-house.'

9.9.2 Cloud based services and privacy

However, in recent years, more and more online services have moved `to the cloud', hosted on massive
servers whose physical location is often unknown even to the institution's IT services department.
Contract agreements between an educational institution and the cloud service provider are meant to
ensure security and back-ups.

   Nevertheless, Canadian institutions and privacy commissioners have been particularly wary of data
being hosted out of country, where it may be accessed through the laws of another country. There has
been concern that Canadian student information and communications held on cloud servers in the USA
may be accessible via the U.S. Patriot Act. For instance, Klassen (2015) writes:

     Social media companies are almost exclusively based in the United States, where the
     provisions of the Patriot Act apply no matter where the information originates. The Patriot
     Act allows the U.S. government to access the social media content and the personally
     identifying information without the end users' knowledge or consent. The government of
     British Columbia, concerned with both the privacy and security of personal information,
     enacted a stringent piece of legislation to protect the personal information of British
     Columbians. The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act (FIPPA) mandates
     that no personally identifying information of British Columbians can be collected without
     their knowledge and consent, and that such information not be used for anything other than
     the purpose for which it was originally collected.

   Concerns about student privacy have increased even more when it became known that countries
were sharing intelligence information, so there remains a risk that even student data on Canadian-based
servers may well be shared with foreign countries.

   Perhaps of more concern though is that as instructors and students increasingly use social media,
academic communication becomes public and `exposed'. Bishop (2011) discusses the risks to
institutions in using Facebook:

         · privacy is different from security, in that security is primarily a technical, hence mainly an IT,
            issue. Privacy needs a different set of policies that involves a much wider range of
            stakeholders within an institution, and hence a different (and more complex) governance
            approach from security;

         · many institutions do not have a simple, transparent set of policies for privacy, but different
            policies set by different parts of the institution. This will inevitably lead to confusion and
            difficulties in compliance;
                                                                                                                               9.9 Security and privacy 513

         · there is a whole range of laws and regulations that aim to protect privacy; these cover not
            only students but also staff; privacy policy needs to be consistent across the institution and be
            compliant with such laws and regulation;

         · Facebook's current privacy policy (2011) leaves many institutions using Facebook at a high
            level of risk of infringing or violating privacy laws - merely writing some kind of disclaimer
            will in many cases not be sufficient to avoid breaking the law.

The controversy at Dalhousie University where dental students used Facebook for violent sexist remarks
about their fellow women students is an example of the risks endemic in the use of social media.

9.9.3 The need for balance

Although there may well be some areas of teaching and learning where it is essential to operate behind
closed doors, such as in some areas of medicine or areas related to public security, or in discussion of
sensitive political or moral issues, in general though there have been relatively few privacy or security
problems when teachers and instructors have opened up their courses, have followed institutional
privacy policies, and above all where students and instructors have used common sense and behaved
ethically. Nevertheless, as teaching and learning becomes more open and public, the level of risk does
increase.

9.9.4 Questions for consideration

1. What student information am I obliged to keep private and secure? What are my institution's policies
on this?

   2. What is the risk that by using a particular technology my institution's policies concerning privacy
could easily be breached? Who in my institution could advise me on this?

   3. What areas of teaching and learning, if any, need I keep behind closed doors, available only to
students registered in my course? Which technologies will best allow me to do this?

References

Bishop, J. (2011) Facebook Privacy Policy: Will Changes End Facebook for Colleges? The Higher Ed
CIO, October 4

   Klassen, V. (2015) Privacy and Cloud-Based Educational Technology in British Columbia
Vancouver BC: BCCampus

   See also:
   Bates, T. (2011) Cloud-based educational technology and privacy: a Canadian perspective, Online
Learning and Distance Education Resources, March 25

                                                         Activity 9.9 Security and privacy
514 Chapter 9: Choosing and using media in education: the SECTIONS model

             1. Who in your institution can advise you on the institution's policy or the state law on the use of
                 social media or indeed any network outside your institution's private internal network(s)?

      Click on the podcast for my personal comments on this issue:

                           An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                        https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=249
9.10 Deciding

Figure 9.9 The SECTIONS model

   If you've worked your way right through the last three chapters, you are probably feeling somewhat
overwhelmed by all the factors to take into consideration when selecting media. It is a complex issue,
but if you have read all the previous sections, you are already in a good position to make well informed
decisions. Let me explain.
9.10.1 Deductive versus inductive decision-making
Many years ago, when I first developed the ACTIONS model, I was approached by a good friend who

                                                                   515
516 Chapter 9: Choosing and using media in education: the SECTIONS model

worked for a large international computer company. (This was so long ago that data were entered to
computers using punched cards). We sat down over a cup of coffee, and he outlined his plan. Here's how
the conversation went.

     Pierre. Tony. I'm very excited about your model. We could take it and apply it in every
     school and university in the world.

     Tony. Really? Now how would you do that?

     Pierre. Well, you have a set of questions that teachers have to ask for each of the criteria.
     There is probably a limited set of answers to these questions. You could either work
     out what those answers are, or collect answers from a representative sample of teachers.
     You could then give scores to each technology depending on the answers they give. So
     when a teacher has to make a choice of technology, they would sit down, answer the
     questions, then depending on their answers, the computer would calculate the best choice
     of technology. Voilà!

     Tony. I don't think that's going to work, Pierre.

     Pierre: But why not?

     Tony. I'm not sure, but I have a gut feeling about this.

     Pierre. A gut feeling? My English is not so good. What do you mean by a gut feeling?

     Tony. Pierre, your English is excellent. My response is not entirely logical, so let me try
     and think it through now, both for you and me, why I don't think this will work. First,
     I'm not sure there is a limited number of possible answers to each question, but even if
     there is, it's not going to work.

     Pierre. Well, why not?

     Tony. Because I'm not sure how a teacher would score their response to each question and
     in any case there's going to be interaction between the the answers to the questions. It's
     not the addition of each answer that will determine what technology they might use, but
     how those answers combine. From a computing point of view, there could be very many
     different combinations of answers, and I'm not sure what the significant combinations are
     likely to be with regard to choosing each technology.

     Pierre. But we have very big and fast computers, and we can simplify the process through
     algorithms.

     Tony. Yes, but you have to take into account the context in which teachers will make
     media selections. They are going to be making decisions about media all the time, in
     many different contexts. It's just not practical to sit down at a computer, answer all the
     questions, then wait for the computer's recommendation.

     Pierre. But won't you give this a try? We can work through all these problems.
                                                                                                                                              9.10 Deciding 517

     Tony. Pierre, I really appreciate your suggestion, but my gut tells me this won't work, and
     I really don't want to waste your time or mine on this.

     Pierre. Well, what are you going to tell teachers then? How will they make their
     decisions?

     Tony. I will tell them to use their gut instinct, Pierre - when they have read and applied
     the ACTIONS model.

   This really is a true story, although the actual words spoken may have been different. The fact that we
do have artificial intelligence these days that technically could do this hasn't changed my mind, because
what we have in this scenario is a conflict between deductive reasoning (Pierre) and inductive reasoning
(Tony).

9.10.1.1 Deductive reasoning

With deductive reasoning, you would do what Pierre suggests: start without any prior conceptions about
which technology to use, answer each of the questions I posed at the end of each part of the SECTIONS
model, then write down all the possible technologies that would fit the answers to each question, see
what technology would best match each of the questions/criteria, and `score' each technology on a
recommended scale for each criterion. You would then try to find a way to add all those answers together,
perhaps by using a very large matrix, and then end up with a decision about what technology to use.

   A major problem though is that every teacher and every learning context is somewhat different each
time a decision needs to be made. Experienced teachers in particular will bring a whole lot of knowledge
with them - ideas about effective teaching methods, knowledge of the students, the requirement of the
content and the skills they are trying to develop at the moment of decision, and above all the context in
which the medium will be used (home, classroom, etc.) - before they have to make a decision.

9.10.1.2 Inductive reasoning

My solution is very different from Pierre's. Mine is a more inductive approach to decision making. The
main criterion for inductive logic is as follows:

     As evidence accumulates, the degree to which the collection of true evidence statements
     comes to support a hypothesis, as measured by the logic, should tend to indicate that false
     hypotheses are probably false and that true hypotheses are probably true.

                                                                            Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

   In terms of selecting media, you probably start with a number of possible technologies in mind at
the beginning of the process (hypotheses - or your gut feeling). My suggested process is start with your
gut feeling about which technologies you're thinking of using, but keeping an open mind, then move
through all the questions suggested in each of the SECTIONS criteria (that is, collecting evidence for
or against your initial `gut feeling'.) You then start building more evidence to support or reject the use
of a particular medium or technology. By the end of the process you have a `probabilistic' view of what
combinations of media will work best for you and why. This is not an exercise you would have to do in
detail or even consciously every time. Once you have done it just a few times, the choice of medium or
technology in each `new' situation will be quicker and easier, because the brain stores all the previous
518 Chapter 9: Choosing and using media in education: the SECTIONS model

information and you have a framework (the SECTIONS model) for organising new information as it
arrives and integrating it with your previous knowledge.

9.10.1.3 Rapid decision-making

Now you've read this chapter you already have a set of questions for consideration (I have listed them all
together in Appendix 1 for easy reference). You are now in the same position as the king who asked the
alchemist how to make gold. `It's easy', said the alchemist, `so long as you don't think about elephants.'
Well, having read the three chapters on media in full, you now have the elephants in your head. It will
be difficult to ignore them. The brain is in fact a wonderful instrument for making intuitive or inductive
decisions of this kind. The trick though is to have all this information somewhere in your head, so you
can pull it all out when you need it. The brain does this very quickly. Your decisions won't always be
perfect, but they will be a lot better than if you hadn't already thought about all these issues, and in life,
rough but ready usually beats perfect but late.

9.10.2 Grounding media selection within a course development framework

Media selection does not happen in a vacuum. There are many other factors to consider when designing
teaching. In particular, embedded within any decision about the use of technology in education and
training will be assumptions about the learning process. We have already seen earlier in this book how
different epistemological positions and theories of learning affect the design of teaching, and these
influences will also determine a teacher's or an instructor's choice of appropriate media. Media selection
is just one part of the course design process. It has to fit within the broader framework of course design.

   In Figure 9.10.2 below, Hibbitts and Travin's modification of the ADDIE model (see Chapter
4, Section 3) presents the following learning and technology development model that incorporates
the various stages of course design:
                                                                                                                                              9.10 Deciding 519

Figure 9.10.2 Hibbitts and Travin's Learning + technology development model

   The SECTIONS model is strategy that could be used for assessing the technology fit within this
course development process. Whether you are using ADDIE or an agile design approach, then, media
selection will be influenced by the other factors in course design, adding more information to be
considered. This will all be mixed in with your knowledge of the subject area and its requirements, your
beliefs and values about teaching and learning, and a lot of emotion as well.

   All this further reinforces the inductive approach to decision making that I have suggested. Don't
underestimate the power of your brain - it's far better than a computer for this kind of decision-making.
But it's important to have the necessary information, as far as possible. So if you skipped a part of this
chapter, or the previous two chapters on media, you might want to go back over it!

                                                      Activity 9.10: Choosing media and technologies

      1. Choose the same course that you chose for Activity 9.1.
      2. Go to Appendix 1, and see how many of the questions you can answer. Use Chapter 9 to help, if necessary,
   including your answers to some the activities in Chapter 9.
      3. When you have answered as many questions as you can from Appendix 1, what media or technologies
   will you now think of using. How does this differ from your original list? If there are changes, why?
      Again, no feedback is provided as each context will be different.
520 Chapter 9: Choosing and using media in education: the SECTIONS model

                                                                     Chapter 9 Key Takeaways

      1. Selecting media and technologies is a complex process, involving a very wide range of interacting
   variables.

      2. There is currently no generally accepted theory or process for media selection. The SECTIONS model
   however provides a set of criteria or questions the result of which can help inform an instructor when making
   decisions about which media or technologies to use.

      3. Because of the wide range of factors influencing media selection and use, an inductive or intuitive
   approach to decision-making, informed by a careful analysis of all the criteria in the SECTIONS framework,
   is one practical way to approach decision-making about media and technologies for teaching and learning.

      4. However, media selection needs to be integrated within the broader framework of course design.
Chapter 10: Modes of delivery

                                                                    The purpose of the chapter

      When you have completed this chapter you should be able to:
              · determine the most appropriate mode of delivery for any course or program you wish to offer;
              · determine what factors should influence this decision;
              · better identify the role of classroom teaching when students can now increasingly study most
                 things online.

What is covered in this chapter

         · 10.1 The continuum of technology-based learning
         · 10.2 Comparing delivery methods
         · 10.3 Which mode? Student needs
         · 10.4 Choosing between face-to-face and online teaching on campus
         · 10.5 The future of the campus
Also in this chapter you will find the following activities:
         · Activity 10.1 Where on the continuum are your courses?
         · Activity 10.2 Defining the `magic of the campus'
         · Activity 10.3 Knowing your students
         · Activity 10.4 Deciding on the mode of delivery
         · Activity 10.5 Redesigning your classroom space

                                                                Key Takeaways from this chapter

      1. There is a continuum of technology-based learning, from `pure' face-to-face teaching to fully online
   programs. Every teacher or instructor needs to decide where on the continuum a particular course or program
   should be.

      2. We do not have good research evidence or theories to make this decision, although we do have growing

                                                                   521
522 A.W. (Tony) Bates

   experience of the strengths and limitations of online learning. What is particularly missing is an evidence-based
   analysis of the strengths and limitations of face-to-face teaching when online learning is also available.

      3. In the absence of good theory, I have suggested four factors to consider when deciding on mode of
   delivery, and in particular the different uses of face-to-face and online learning in blended courses:

              · student characteristics and needs;
              · your preferred teaching strategy, in terms of methods and learning outcomes;
              · the pedagogical and presentational requirements of the subject matter, in terms of (a) content and

                 (b) skills;
              · the resources available to you as an instructor (including your time).

      4. The move to blended or hybrid learning in particular means rethinking the use of the campus and the
   facilities needed fully to support learning in a hybrid mode.
10.1 The continuum of technology-based learning

Figure 10.1.1 Why get on the bus when you can study online? (UBC bus loop)

   In Chapters 7, 8 and 9, the use of media incorporated into a particular course or program was
explored. In this chapter, the focus is on deciding whether a whole course or program should be offered
partly or wholly online. In Chapter 11 the focus is on deciding when and how to adopt an approach that
incorporates `open-ness' in its design and delivery.
10.1.1 The many faces of online learning
Online learning, blended learning, flipped learning, hybrid learning, flexible learning, open learning and
distance education are all terms that are often used inter-changeably, but there are significant differences
in meaning. More importantly, these forms of education, once considered somewhat esoteric and out

                                                                   523
524 Chapter 10: Modes of delivery

of the mainstream of conventional education, are increasingly taking on greater significance and in
some cases becoming mainstream themselves. As teachers and instructors become more familiar and
confident with online learning and new technologies, there will be more innovation in integrating online
and face-to-face teaching.

10.1.1.1 Variations on blended learning

At the time of writing though it is possible to identify at least the following modes of delivery:

         · classroom teaching with no technology at all (which is very rare these days);

         · blended learning, which encompasses a wide variety of designs, including:

                      technology-enhanced learning, or technology used as classroom aids; a typical
                        example would be the use of Powerpoint slides and/or clickers in a lecture;

                      the use of a learning management system to support classroom teaching, for
                        storing learning materials, providing a course schedule of topics, for online
                        discussion, and for submitting student assignments, but teaching is still delivered
                        mainly through classroom sessions;

                      the use of lecture capture for flipped classrooms, where students watch the lecture
                        via streamed video then come to class for discussion or other work; see for instance
                        a calculus course offered at Queen's University, Canada;

                      one semester face-to-face on campus and two semesters online (one model at Royal
                        Roads University);

                      hybrid or flexible learning requiring the redesign of teaching so that students can do
                        the majority of their learning online, coming to campus only for very specific face-
                        to-face teaching, such as lab or hands-on practical work, that cannot be done
                        satisfactorily online (for examples, see Section 10.1.1.2 below);

         · fully online learning with no classroom or on-campus teaching, which is one form of distance
            education, including:

                      courses for credit, which will usually cover the same content, skills and assessment
                        as a campus-based version, but are available only to students admitted to a
                        program;

                      non-credit courses offered only online, such as courses for continuing professional
                        education;

                      fully open courses, such as MOOCs.

More than one third of higher education students in the USA now take at least one fully online course,
and about 15 per cent of students are taking only online courses. While overall enrolments in the US
higher education system have slowly declined (by almost 4 per cent between 2012 to 2016), online
enrolments have grown by about 5 per cent over the same period (Seaman et al., 2018). In Canadian
post-secondary institutions in 2017, approximately 8 per cent of all credit course registrations were fully
online (Donovan et. al., 2018).
                                         10.1 The continuum of technology-based learning 525

10.1.1.2 Hybrid learning

There is an important development within blended learning that deserves special mention, and that is the
total re-design of campus-based classes that takes greater advantage of the potential of technology, which
I call hybrid learning, with online learning combined with focused small group face-to-face interactions
or mixing online and physical lab experiences. In such designs, the amount of face-to-face contact time
is usually reduced, for instance from three classes a week to one, to allow more time for students to study
online.

   In hybrid learning the whole learning experience is re-designed, with a transformation of teaching on
campus built around the use of technology. For instance:

· Carol Twigg at the National Center for Academic Transformation has for many years worked
   with universities and colleges to redesign usually large lecture class programs to improve
   learning and reduce costs through the use of technology. This program ran very successfully
   between 1999 and 2018;

· Virginia Tech many years ago created a successful program for first and second year math
   teaching built around 24 x 7 computer-assisted learning supported by `roving' instructors and
   teaching assistants (Robinson and Moore, 2006);

· The University of British Columbia launched in 2013 what it calls a flexible
   learning initiative focused on developing, delivering, and evaluating learning experiences
   that promote effective and dramatic improvements in student achievement. Flexible learning
   enables pedagogical and logistical flexibility so that students have more choice in their
   learning opportunities, including when, where, and what they want to learn.

Thus `blended learning' can mean minimal rethinking or redesign of classroom teaching, such as the
use of classroom aids, or complete redesign as in flexibly designed courses, which aim to identify
the unique pedagogical characteristics of face-to-face teaching, with online learning providing flexible
access for the rest of the learning.

   Instructors in more than three quarters of Canadian post-secondary institutions in 2017 were
integrating online with classroom teaching, but no more than one in five institutions had a significant
number of courses in this format. However, most institutions are predicting a rapid increase in such
courses over the next few years (Donovan et al., 2019)

10.1.2 The continuum of online learning
526 Chapter 10: Modes of delivery

Figure 10.1.2 The continuum of technology-based learning (modes of delivery). Adapted from Bates and Poole, 2003.

   Thus there is a continuum of technology-based learning, as illustrated in Figure 10.1.2 above.
10.1.3 Decisions, decisions!
These developments open up a whole new range of decisions for instructors. Every instructor now needs
to decide:

         · what kind of course or program should I be offering?
         · what factors should influence this decision?
         · what is the role of classroom teaching when students can now increasingly study most things

            online?
         · should I open up my teaching to anyone, and if so, under what circumstances?
This chapter aims to help you answer these questions.
References
Bates, A. and Poole, G. (2003) Effective Teaching with Technology in Higher Education: Foundations
for Success San Francisco: Jossey-Bass
   Donovan, T. et al. (2019) Tracking Online and Distance Education in Canadian Universities and
Colleges: 2018 Halifax NS: Canadian Digital Learning Research Association
   Robinson, B. and Moore, A. (2006) `Virginia Tech: the Math Emporium' in Oblinger, D. (ed.)
Learning Spaces Boulder CO: EDUCAUSE
                                                                                             10.1 The continuum of technology-based learning 527

   Seaman, J., Allen, I., and Seaman, J. (2018) Grade Increase: Tracking Distance Education in the
United States Wellesley MA: The Babson Survey Research Group

                                                Activity 10.1 Where on the continuum are your courses?

      1. If you are currently teaching, where on the continuum is each of your courses? How easy is it to decide?
   Are there factors that make it difficult to decide where on the continuum any of your courses should fit?

      2. How was it decided what the mode of delivery would be for the courses you teach? If you decided, what
   were the reasons for the location of each course on the continuum?

      3. Are you happy with the decision(s)?
      3. What kind of students do you have in each type of course?
      There is no feedback provided on this activity
10.2 Comparing modes of delivery

Figure 10.2.1 Which is the best?

   Many surveys have found that a majority of faculty still believe that online learning or distance
education is inevitably inferior in quality to classroom teaching (see for instance Jaschik and Letterman,
2014). In fact, there is no scientifically-based evidence to support this opinion. The evidence points in
general to no significant differences, and if anything research suggests that blended or hybrid learning
has some advantages over face-to-face teaching in terms of learning performance (see, for example,
Means et al., 2010).

9.2.1 The influence of distance education on online learning
We can learn a great deal from earlier developments in distance education. Although the technology is
different, fully online learning is, after all, just another version of distance education.

   Much has been written about distance education (see, for instance, Wedemeyer, 1981; Peters, 1983;
Holmberg, 1989; Keegan, 1990; Moore and Kearsley, 1996; Peters, 2002; Bates, 2005; Evans et al.,
2008) but in concept, the idea is quite simple: students study in their own time, at the place of their choice
(home, work or learning centre), and without face-to-face contact with a teacher. However, students are
`connected', today usually through the Internet, with an instructor, adjunct faculty or tutor who provides
learner support and student assessment.

   Distance education has been around a very long time. It could be argued that in the Christian
religion, St. Paul's epistle to the Corinthians was an early form of distance education (53-57 AD). The
first distance education degree was offered by correspondence by the University of London (UK) in
1858. Students were mailed a list of readings, and took the same examination as the regular on-campus
students. If students could afford it, they hired a private tutor, but the Victorian novelist Charles Dickens
called it the People's University, because it provided access to higher education to students from less
affluent backgrounds. The program still continues to this day, but is now called the University of London
(Worldwide), with more than 50,000 students in 180 countries.

                                                                   529
530 Chapter 10: Modes of delivery

   In North America, historically many of the initial land-grant universities, such as Penn State
University, the University of Wisconsin, and the University of New Mexico in the USA, and Memorial
University, University of Saskatchewan and the University of British Columbia in Canada, had state-
or province-wide responsibilities. As a result these institutions have a long history of offering distance
education programs, mainly as continuing education for farmers, teachers, and health
professionals scattered across the whole state or province. These programs have now been expanded to
cover undergraduate and professional masters students. Australia is another country with an extensive
history of both k-12 and post-secondary distance education.

   Qualifications received from most of these universities carry the same recognition as degrees taken on
campus. For instance, the University of British Columbia, which has been offering distance education
programs since 1936, makes no distinction on student transcripts between courses taken at a distance
and those taken on campus, as both kinds of students take the same examinations.

   Another feature of distance education, pioneered by the British Open University in the 1970s, but later
adopted and adapted by North American universities that offered distance programs, is a course design
process, based on the ADDIE model, but specially adapted to serve students learning at a distance. This
places a heavy emphasis on defined learning outcomes, production of high quality multimedia learning
materials, planned student activities and engagement, and strong learner support, even at a distance. As
a result, campus-based universities that offered distance education programs were well placed for the
move into online learning in the 1990s. These universities have found that in general, students taking
the online programs do almost as well as the on-campus students (course completion rates are usually
within 5-10 per cent of the on-campus students - see Ontario, 2011), which is somewhat surprising as
the distance students often have full-time jobs and families.

   It is important to acknowledge the long and distinguished pedigree of distance education from
internationally recognised, high quality institutions, because commercial diploma mills, especially in
the USA, have given distance education an unjustified reputation of being of lower quality. As with
all teaching, distance education can be done well or badly. However, where distance education has
been professionally designed and delivered by high quality public institutions, it has proved to be very
successful, meeting the needs of many working adults, students in remote areas who would otherwise be
unable to access education on a full-time basis, or on-campus students wanting to fit in an extra course or
with part-time jobs whose schedule clashes with their lecture schedule. However, universities, colleges
and even schools have been able to do this only by meeting high quality design standards.

   At the same time, there has also been a small but very influential number of campus-based teachers
and instructors who quite independently of distance education have been developing best practices in
online or computer-supported learning. These include Roxanne Hiltz and Murray Turoff (1978) who
were experimenting with online or blended learning as early as the late 1970s at the New Jersey Institute
of Technology, and Linda Harasim (2017) at Simon Fraser University, who all focused particularly on
online collaborative learning and knowledge construction within a campus or school environment.

   There is also plenty of evidence that teachers and instructors in many schools, colleges and
universities new to online learning have not adopted these best practices, instead merely transferring
lecture-based classroom practice to blended and online learning, often with poor or even disastrous
results.

10.2.2 What the research tells us

There have been thousands of studies comparing face-to-face teaching to teaching with a wide range
of different technologies, such as televised lectures, computer-based learning, and online learning, or
                                                                                                                 10.2 Comparing modes of delivery 531

comparing face-to-face teaching with distance education. With regard to online learning there have been
several meta-studies. A meta-study combines the results of many `well-conducted scientific' studies,
usually studies that use the matched comparisons or quasi-experimental method (Means et al., 2010;
Barnard et al., 2014). Nearly all such `well-conducted' meta-studies find no or little significant
difference between the modes of delivery, in terms of the effect on student learning or performance. For
instance, Means et al. (2010), in a major meta-analysis of research on blended and online learning for
the U.S. Department of Education, reported:

     In recent experimental and quasi-experimental studies contrasting blends of online and
     face-to-face instruction with conventional face-to-face classes, blended instruction has
     been more effective, providing a rationale for the effort required to design and implement
     blended approaches. When used by itself, online learning appears to be as effective as
     conventional classroom instruction, but not more so.

   Means et al. attributed the slightly better performance of blended learning to students spending more
time on task. This highlights a common finding, that where differences have been found, they are often
attributed to factors other than the mode of delivery. Tamim et al. (2011) identified `well-conducted'
comparative studies covering 40 years of research. Tamim et al. found there is a slight tendency for
students who study with technology to do better than students who study without technology. However,
the measured difference was quite weak, and the authors state:

     it is arguable that it is aspects of the goals of instruction, pedagogy, teacher effectiveness,
     subject matter, age level, fidelity of technology implementation, and possibly other factors
     that may represent more powerful influences on effect sizes than the nature of the
     technology intervention.

   Research into any kind of learning is not easy; there are just so many different variables or conditions
that affect learning in any context. Indeed, it is the variables we should be examining, not just the
technological delivery. In other words, we should be asking a question first posed by Wilbur Schramm as
long ago as 1977:

     What kinds of learning can different media best facilitate, and under what conditions?

   In terms of making decisions then about mode of delivery, we should be asking, not which is the best
method overall, but:

     What are the most appropriate conditions for using face-to-face, blended or fully online
     learning respectively?

   Fortunately, there is much research and best practice that provides guidance on that question, at least
with respect to blended and online learning (see, for instance, Anderson, 2008; Picciano et al., 2013;
Halverson et al., 2012; Zawacki-Richter and Anderson, 2014). Ironically, what we lack is good research
on the unique potential of face-to-face teaching in a digital age when so much can also be done just as
well online.
532 Chapter 10: Modes of delivery

10.2.3 Challenging the supremacy of face-to-face teaching

Although there has been a great deal of mainly inconclusive research comparing online learning
with face-to-face teaching in terms of student learning, there is very little evidence or even theory to
guide decisions about what is best done online and what is best done face-to-face in a blended learning
context, or about the circumstances or conditions when fully online learning is in fact a better option
than classroom teaching. Generally the assumption appears to have been that face-to-face teaching is the
default option by virtue of its superiority, and online learning is used only when circumstances prevent
the use of face-to-face teaching, such as when students cannot get to the campus, or when classes are so
large that interaction with students is at a minimum.

   However, online learning has now become so prevalent and effective in so many contexts that it is
time to ask:

     what are the unique characteristics of face-to-face teaching that make it pedagogically different
     from online learning?

   It is possible of course that there is nothing pedagogically unique about face-to-face teaching, but
given the rhetoric around `the magic of the campus' (Sarma, 2013) and the hugely expensive fees
associated with elite campus-based teaching, or indeed the high cost of publicly funded campus-based
education, it is about time that we had some evidence-based theory about what makes face-to-face
teaching so special. This will be discussed further in Section 5 of this chapter.

   In the meantime, a method for determining which mode of delivery (face-to-face, blended or online)
will be discussed in the next sections.

References

Anderson, A. (ed.) (2008) The Theory and Practice of Online Learning Athabasca AB: Athabasca
University Press

   Barnard, R. et al. (2014) Detecting bias in meta-analyses of distance education research: big pictures
we can rely on Distance Education Vol. 35, No. 3

   Bates, A.W. (2005) Technology, e-Learning and Distance Education London/New York: Routledge
   Evans, T., Haughey, M. and Murphy, D. (2008) International Handbook of Distance
Education Bingley UK: Emerald Publishing
   Halverson, L. R., Graham, C. R., Spring, K. J., & Drysdale, J. S. (2012) An analysis of high impact
scholarship and publication trends in blended learning Distance Education, Vol. 33, No. 3
   Harasim, L. (2017) Learning Theory and Online Technologies 2nd edition New York/London: Taylor
and Francis
   Hiltz S., and Turoff M.(1978) Network Nation: Human communication via computer Reading,
MA: Addison Wesley
   Holmberg, B. (1989) Theory and Practice of Distance Education New York: Routledge
   Jaschik, S. and Letterman, D. (2014) The 2014 Inside Higher Ed Survey of Faculty Attitudes to
Technology Washington DC: Inside Higher Ed
   Keegan, D. (ed.) (1990) Theoretical Principles of Distance Education London/New York: Routledge
   Means, B. et al. (2010) Evaluation of Evidence-Based Practices in Online Learning: A Meta-Analysis
and Review of Online Learning Studies Washington, DC: US Department of Education
                                                                                                                 10.2 Comparing modes of delivery 533

   Moore, M. and Kearsley, G. (1996) Distance Education: A Systems View Belmont CA: Wadsworth
   Ontario (2011) Fact Sheet Summary of Ontario eLearning Surveys of Publicly Assisted PSE
Institutions Toronto: Ministry of Training, Colleges and Universities
   Peters, O. (1983) Distance education and industrial production, in Sewart et al. (eds.) Distance
Education: International Perspectives London: Croom Helm
   Peters, O. (2002) Distance Education in Transition: New Trends and Challenges Oldenberg FGR:
Biblothecks- und Informationssystem der Universität Oldenberg
   Picciano, A., Dziuban, C. and & Graham, C. (eds.), Blended Learning: Research Perspectives, Volume
2. New York: Routledge, 2013
   Schramm, W. (1977) Big Media, Little Media Beverley Hills CA/London: Sage
   Sarma, S. (2013) The Magic Beyond the MOOCs Boston MA: LINC 2013 conference (recorded
presentation)
   Tamim, R. et al. (2011) What Forty Years of Research Says About the Impact of Technology on
Learning: A Second-Order Meta-Analysis and Validation Study Review of Educational Research, Vol.
81, No. 1
   Wedemeyer, C. (1981) Learning at the Back Door: Reflections on Non-traditional Learning in the
Lifespan Madison: University of Wisconsin Press
   Zawacki-Richter, O. and Anderson, T. (eds.) (2014) Online Distance Education: Towards a Research
Agenda Athabasca AB: AU Press, pp. 508

                                                       Activity 10.2 Defining the magic of the campus

      1. Can you define the `magic of the campus'? What is it about face-to-face teaching that makes it special,
   compared with teaching online? Write down the three things you think are the most important.

      2. Could you do the same for teaching online? If not, what are the things that make the campus special?

      Click on the podcast below for some feedback on these questions

                           An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                        https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=260
10.3 Which mode? Student needs

Figure 10.3.1 Who are your students? Image: UBC Library

When making choices about mode of delivery, teachers and instructors need to ask the following
   four questions:
         · who are - or could be - my students?
         · what is my preferred teaching approach?
         · what are the content and skills that I need to teach?
         · what resources will I have to support my decision?

As always, start with the learners.

                                                                   535
536 Chapter 10: Modes of delivery

10.3.1 Fully online/distance learners

Research (see for instance Dabbagh, 2007) has repeatedly shown that fully online courses suit some
types of student better than others:

         · older, more mature students;

         · students with already high levels of education;

         · part-time students who are working and/or with families.

This applies not only to MOOCs (see Chapter 5) and other non-credit courses, but even more so to
courses and programs for credit. There are in fact several different markets for online learning.

10.3.1.1 Undergraduate online students

Today, `distance' is more likely to be psychological or social, rather than geographical. For instance,
from survey data regularly collected from students at the University of British Columbia (UBC):

         · less than 20 per cent give reasons related to distance or travel for taking an online course;

         · most of the more than 10,000 or so UBC students (there are over 60,000 students in total)
            taking at least one fully online course are not truly distant. The majority (over 80 per cent)
            live in the Greater Vancouver Metropolitan Area, within 90 minutes commute time to the
            university, and almost half within the relatively compact City of Vancouver.
            Comparatively few (less than 10 per cent) live outside the province (although this proportion
            is slowly growing each year);

         · two thirds of UBC's online students have paid work of one kind or another;

         · many undergraduate students in their fourth year take an online course because the face-to-
            face classes are `capped' because of their large size, or because they are short of the required
            number of credits to complete a degree. Taking a course online allows these students to
            complete their program without having to come back for another year;

         · the main reason for most UBC students taking fully online courses is the flexibility they
            provide, given the work and family commitments of students and the difficulty caused by
            timetable conflicts for face-to-face classes.

In the USA, almost one in three undergraduate students are taking at least one online course (Allen and
Seaman, 2017). At an undergraduate level, students are likely to take a maximum of three to four online
courses as part of a regular campus-based degree program at universities and up to five online courses at
two year colleges, in Canada (Donovan et al., 2018).

   Until recently in North America, there were few undergraduate programs offered entirely online,
except in specialist institutions such as the open universities in Canada (Athabasca, Téluq, Thompson
Rivers Open Learning) and University of Phoenix, Western Governors University, and University of
Maryland University College in the USA. However, in recent years a number of specialist online
undergraduate programs have started to be offered, such as the Bachelor of Mining Engineering
Technology for working miners at Queen's University, Canada

   This suggests that fully online courses are more suitable for more experienced students with a strong
                                                                                                                  10.3 Which mode? Student needs 537

motivation to take such courses because of the impact they have on their quality of life. In general, online
students need more self-discipline in studying and a greater motivation to study to succeed. This does
not mean that other kinds of students cannot benefit from online learning, but extra effort needs to go
into the design and support of such students online.

10.3.1.2 Graduate online students

Although in the USA, the proportion of students taking distance education courses at a graduate level
overall is almost the same (17 per cent) as those taking on-campus graduate courses - 15 per cent, the
proportion of students taking distance education courses at a graduate level is much higher for private,
not-for profit - 37 per cent, and for-profit institutions - 28 per cent (Allen and Seaman, 2017). (As in
Canada - Donovan. et al., 2018 - distance education now is almost synonymous with online learning in
the USA).

   The most rapid area of growth in online courses is for masters programs aimed at working
professionals. So far, apart from MBAs and teacher education, public universities tend to be relatively
slow in recognising the importance of this market, which at worse could be self-financing, and at
best could bring in much needed additional revenues. The for-profit universities, though, such as the
University of Phoenix, Laureate University and Capella University, and especially some of the private,
not-for-profit universities in the USA have been quicker to move into this market.

10.3.1.3 Remote learners

Often it is also assumed that isolated or remote learners are the main market for distance or fully online
learners in that they are a long way away from any local school, college or university. Certainly in
Canada, there are such students and the ability to study locally rather than travel great distances can be
very appealing. However, in many remote rural areas, Internet access can be difficult, with either slow
satellite connections or telephone-based, slow-speed modems. Remote learners will also struggle if there
is no easily accessible or culturally appropriate local support for their studies.

   Since the vast majority of online learners are urban, living within one hour's travel of a college or
university campus, it is the flexibility rather than the distance that matters to these learners.

10.3.1.4 Lifelong learners

On the other hand, fully online courses really suit working professionals. In a digital age, the knowledge
base is continually expanding, jobs change rapidly, and hence there is strong demand for on-going,
continuing education, often in `niche' areas of knowledge. Online learning is a convenient and effective
way of providing such lifelong learning.

   Lifelong learners are often working with families and really appreciate the flexibility of studying fully
online. They often already have higher education qualifications such as a first degree, and therefore
have learned how to study successfully. They may be engineers looking for training in management,
or professionals wanting to keep up to date in their professional area. They are often better motivated,
because they can see a direct link between the new course of study and possible improvement in their
career prospects. They are therefore ideal students for online courses (even though they may be older
and less tech savvy than students coming out of high school).

   What is important for such learners is that the courses are technically well designed, in that learners
do not need to be highly skilled in using computers to be able to study the courses.
538 Chapter 10: Modes of delivery

10.3.1.5 Changing demographics

One other factor to consider is the impact of changing demographics. In the USA, overall higher
education enrolments declined by 3 per cent between 2012-2015, while distance education enrolments
increased by 4 per cent over the same period (Allen and Seaman, 2017).

   In jurisdictions where the school-age population is starting to decline, expanding into lifelong learning
markets may be essential for maintaining student enrolments. Although the rate of growth in distance
education/online learning is not spectacular, it may eventually turn out to be a way to keep some
academic departments alive.

10.3.1.6 New business models

However, to make lifelong learning online programs work, institutions need to make some important
adjustments. In particular there must be incentives or rewards for faculty to move in this direction and
there needs to be some strategic thinking about the best way to offer such programs.

   The University of British Columbia has developed a series of very successful, fully online, self-
financing professional masters' programs. Students can initially try one or two courses in the Graduate
Certificate in Rehabilitation before applying to the master's program. The certificate can be completed
in less than two years while working full-time, and paying per course rather than for a whole Master's
year, providing the flexibility needed by lifelong learners. UBC also partnered with Tec de Monterrey in
Mexico, with the same program being offered in English by UBC and in Spanish by Tec de Monterrey,
as a means of kick-starting its very successful Master in Educational Technology program, which, when
it opened, doubled the number of graduate students in UBC's Faculty of Education, and is still running
now almost 20 years after its initial offering. We shall see these examples are important when we
examine the development of modular programming in Section 11.5.2.

   Online learning also offers the opportunity to offer programs where an institution has unique research
expertise but insufficient local students to offer a full master's program. By going fully online, perhaps
in partnership with another university with similar expertise but in a different jurisdiction, it may be
able to attract students from across the country or even internationally, enabling the research to be more
widely disseminated and to build a cadre of professionals in newly emerging areas of knowledge - again
an important goal in a digital age.

10.3.2 Blended learning learners

In terms of blended learning, the `market' is less clearly defined than for fully online learning. The
benefit for students is increased flexibility, but they will still need to be relatively local in order to
attend the campus-based sessions. The main advantage is for the 50 per cent or more of students, at
least in Canada, who are working more than 15 hours a week (Marshall, 2010) to help with the cost
of their education and to keep their student debt as low as possible. Also, blended learning provides an
opportunity for the gradual development of independent learning skills, as long as this is an intentional
teaching strategy.

   The research also suggests that these skills of independent learning need to be developed while
students are on campus. In other words, online learning, in the form of blended learning, should be
deliberately introduced and gradually increased as students work through a program, so by the time they
graduate, they have the skills to continue to learn independently - a critical skill for the digital age. In
general, it is not a good idea to offer fully online courses in the early years of a university or college
                                                                                                                  10.3 Which mode? Student needs 539

career, unless they are exceptionally well designed with a considerable amount of online learner support
- and hence are likely to be expensive to mount, if they are to be successful.

   As well as the benefits of more flexibility for students, especially those working part-time, the
academic benefits of blended learning are being better understood. These will be discussed in more detail
in the next section. At this point, there is evidence that in Canada, at least, more and more institutions
are seeing a move by instructors to blended or hybrid learning, providing the advantages of both online
and face-to-face teaching (Donovan et al., 2018)

10.3.3 Face-to-face learners

Many students coming straight from high school will be looking for social, sporting and cultural
opportunities that a campus-based education provides. Also students lacking self-confidence or
experience in studying are likely to prefer face-to-face teaching, providing that they can access it in a
relatively personal way.

   However, the academic reasons for preference for face-to-face teaching by freshmen and women
are less clear, particularly if students are faced with very large classes and relatively little contact with
professors in the first year or so of their programs. In this respect, smaller, regional institutions, which
generally have smaller classes and more face-to-face contact with instructors, have an advantage. Also,
blended or flipped learning is increasingly being used for very large classes, with lectures available
online, and smaller groups meeting face-to-face with an instructor or teaching assistants.

   We shall see later in this chapter that blended and fully online learning offer the opportunity to re-think
the whole campus experience so that better support is provided to on-campus learners in their early years
in post-secondary education. More importantly, as more and more studying is done online, universities
and colleges will be increasingly challenged to identify the unique pedagogical advantages of coming to
campus, so that it will still be worthwhile for students to get on the bus to campus every morning.

10.3.4 Know your learners

It is therefore very important to know what kind of students you will be teaching. For some students, it
will be better to enrol in a face-to-face class but be gradually introduced to online study within a familiar
classroom environment. For other students, the only way they will take the course will be if it is available
fully online. It is also possible to mix and match face-to-face and online learning for some students who
want the campus experience, but also need a certain amount of flexibility in their studying. Going online
may enable you to reach a wider market (critical for departments with low or declining enrolments) or
to meet strong demand from working professionals. Who are (or could be) your students? What kind of
course will work best for them?

   We shall see that identifying the likely student market for a course or program is the strongest factor
in deciding on mode of delivery.

References

Allen, I. and Seaman, J. (2017) Digital Learning Compass: Distance Education Enrollment Report 2017
Babson Survey Research Group/eLiterate/WCET

   Dabbagh, N. (2007) The online learner: characteristics and pedagogical implications Contemporary
Issues in Technology and Teacher Education, Vol. 7, No.3
540 Chapter 10: Modes of delivery

   Donovan, T. et al. (2018) Tracking Online and Distance Education in Canadian Universities and
Colleges: 2018 Halifax NS: Canadian Digital Learning Research Association

   Marshall, K. (2010) Employment patterns of post-secondary students Perspectives on Labour and
Income Ottawa ON: Statistics Canada, September

                                                             Activity 10.3 Knowing your students

      1. Choose one of your courses. Do you know the key student demographics: age, gender, working or not,
   single or with families, language skills? If not how could you get this information?

      2. If you had this information, would it change the way you teach?
      3. If you are teaching a face-to-face class, are there other kinds of students who would be interested in taking
   your course if it was online?
      There is no feedback on this activity.
10.4 Choosing between face-to-face and online teaching on campus

Figure 10.4.1 What should students enrolled in campus courses do online? Image: UBC Library

   Analysing student demographics may help to decide whether or not a course or program should be
either campus-based or fully online, but we need to consider more than just student demographics to
make the decision about what to do online and what to do on campus for the majority of campus-based
courses and programs that will increasingly have an online component.

                                                                   541
542 Chapter 10: Modes of delivery

10.4.1 A suggested method

10.4.1.1 Finding an approach based on successful experience

It should be stated up front that there is no generally agreed theory or even best practices for making
this decision. The default mode has been that face-to-face teaching must be inherently superior, and you
only go online if you must. However, we have seen that online learning has over the last ten years or
so demonstrated clearly that many areas of knowledge can be taught just as well or better online. I will
look therefore to examples where there has been a conscious decision to identify the relative affordances
of different media, including face-to-face teaching. The area where this becomes most clear is in the
teaching of science.

   I am going to draw on a method used initially at the U.K. Open University for designing distance
education courses and programs in science in the 1970s. The challenge was to decide what was best
done in print, on television, via home experiment kits, and finally in a one week residential hands-
on summer school at a traditional university. Since then, Dietmar Kennepohl and Lawton Shaw, of
Athabasca University, have edited an excellent book about teaching science online (Kennepohl and
Shaw, 2010). Also, the Colorado Community College System has recently been using a combination
of remotely operated labs for student practical work, combined with home kits, for teaching online
introductory science courses (Schmidt and Shea, 2015).

   Each of these initiatives has adopted a pragmatic method for making decisions about what must
be done face-to-face and what can be done online. What each of these approaches had in common
wais trusting the knowledge and experience of subject experts who are willing to approach this question
in an open-minded way, and working with instructional designers or media producers on an equal
footing.

   From these experiences, I have extracted one possible process for determining when to go online and
when not to, on purely pedagogical grounds, for a course that is being designed from scratch in a blended
delivery mode. It is based on a five step process:

       1. identify the overall instructional approach/pedagogy required

       2. identify the main content to be covered

       3. identify the main skills to be taught

       4. analyse the resources available

       5. analyse the most appropriate mode of delivery for each of the learning objectives identified
            above

I will choose a subject area at random: haematology (the study of blood), in which I am not an expert.
But here's what I would suggest if I was working with a subject specialist in this area.
                                                                    10.4 Choosing between face-to-face and online teaching on campus 543

Figure 10.4.2 Can the study of haematology be done online?
Image: CC Wikimedia Commons: National Cancer Institute, USA
10.4.1.2 Step 1: identify the main instructional approach.

This is discussed in some detail in Chapters 2 to 4, but here are the kinds of decision to be considered:
544 Chapter 10: Modes of delivery

Figure 10.4.3 Which teaching approach?

   This should lead to a general plan or approach to teaching that identifies the teaching methods to be
used in some detail. In the example of haematology, the instructor wants to take a more constructivist
approach, with students developing a critical approach to the subject matter. In particular, she wants to
relate the course specifically to certain issues, such as security in handling and storing blood, factors in
blood contamination, and developing student skills in analysis and interpretation of blood samples.

10.4.1.3 Step 2. Identify the main content to be covered

Content covers facts, data, hypotheses, ideas, arguments, evidence, and description of things (for
instance, showing or describing the parts of a piece of equipment and their relationship). What do they
need to know in this course? In haematology, this will mean understanding the chemical composition
of blood, what its functions are, how it circulates through the body, descriptions of the relevant parts of
cell biology, what external factors may weaken its integrity or functionality, and so forth, the equipment
used to analyse blood and how the equipment works, principles, theories and hypotheses about blood
clotting, the relationship between blood tests and diseases or other illnesses, and so on.

   In particular, what are the presentational requirements of the content in this course? Dynamic
activities need to be explained, and representing key concepts in colour will almost certainly be valuable.
Observations of blood samples under many degrees of magnitude will be essential, which will
require the use of a microscope.

   There are now many ways to represent content: text, graphics, audio, video and simulations. For
instance, graphics, a short video clip, or photographs down a microscope can show examples of
blood cells in different conditions. Increasingly this content is already available over the web for free
                                                                    10.4 Choosing between face-to-face and online teaching on campus 545

educational use (for instance, see the American Society of Hematology's video library). Creating such
material from scratch is more expensive, but is becoming increasingly easy to do with high quality, low
cost digital recording equipment. Using a carefully recorded video of an experiment will often provide a
better view than students will get crowding around awkward lab equipment.

10.4.1.4 Step 3. Identify the main skills to be developed during the course

Skills describe how content will be applied and practiced. This might include analysis of the components
of blood, such as the glucose and insulin levels, the use of equipment (where ability to use equipment
safely and effectively is a desired learning outcome), diagnosis, interpreting results by making
hypotheses about cause and effect based on theory and evidence, problem-solving, and report writing.

   Developing skills online can be more of a challenge, particularly if it requires manipulation of
equipment and a `feel' for how equipment works, or similar skills that require tactile sense. (The same
could be said of skills that require taste or smell). In our hematology example, some of the skills that
need to be taught might include the ability to analyse analytes or particular components of blood, such as
insulin or glucose, to interpret results, and to suggest treatment. The aim here would be to see if there are
ways these skills can also be taught effectively online. This would mean identifying the skills needed,
working out how to develop such skills (including opportunities for practice) online, and how to assess
such skills online.

   Let's call Steps 2 and 3 the key learning objectives for the course.

10.4.1.5 Step 4: Analyse the most appropriate mode for each learning objective

Then create a table as in Figure 10.4.4:
546 Chapter 10: Modes of delivery

Figure 10.4.4 Allocating mode of delivery

   In this example, the instructor is keen to move as much as possible online, so she can spend as much
time as possible with students, dealing with laboratory work and answering questions about theory and
practice. She was able to find some excellent online videos of several of the key interactions between
blood and other factors, and she was also able to find some suitable graphics and simple animations of
the molecular structure of blood which she could adapt, as well as creating with the help of a graphics
designer her own graphics. Indeed, she found she had to create relatively little new material or content
herself.

   The instructional designer also found some software that enabled students to design their own
laboratory set-up for certain elements of blood testing which involved combining virtual equipment,
entering data values and running an experiment. However, there were still some skills that needed to be
done hands-on in the laboratory, such as inserting glucose and using a `real' microscope to analyse the
chemical components of blood. However, the online material enabled the instructor to spend more time
in the lab with students.

   It can be seen in this example that most of the content can be delivered online, together with a
critically important skill of designing an experiment, but some activities still need to be done `hands-
on'. This might require one or more evening or weekend sessions in a lab for hands-on work, thus
delivering most of the course online, or there may be so much hands-on work that the course may have
to be a hybrid of 50 per cent hands-on lab work and 50 per cent online learning.

   With the development of animations, simulations and online remote labs, where actual equipment
can be remotely manipulated, it is becoming increasingly possible to move even traditional lab work
                                                                    10.4 Choosing between face-to-face and online teaching on campus 547

online. At the same time, it is not always possible to find exactly what one needs online, although this
will improve over time. In other subject areas such as humanities, social sciences, and business, it is
much easier to move the teaching online.

   This is a crude method of determining the balance between face-to-face teaching and online learning
for a blended learning course, but it least it's a start. It can be seen that these decisions have to
be relatively intuitive, based on instructors' knowledge of the subject area and their ability to think
creatively about how to achieve learning outcomes online. However, we have enough experience now
of teaching online to know that in most subject areas, a great deal of the skills and content needed to
achieve quality learning outcomes can be taught online. It is no longer possible to argue that the default
decision must always be to do the teaching in a face-to-face manner.

   Thus every instructor now needs to ask the question: if I can move most of my teaching online, what
are the unique benefits of the campus experience that I need to bring into my face-to-face teaching?
Why do students have to be here in front of me, and when they are here, am I using the time to best
advantage?

10.4.2 Analyse the resources available

There is one more consideration besides the type of learners, the overall teaching method, and making
decisions based on pedagogical grounds, and that is to consider the resources available. (This should
really be Step 4, before allocating learning objectives to different modes, but it will be difficult to avoid
in any case.).

10.4.2.1 The time of the instructor

In particular, the key resource is the time of the teacher or instructor. Careful consideration is needed
about how best to spend the limited time available to an instructor. It may be all very well to identify a
series of videos as the best way to capture some of the procedures for blood testing, but if these videos
do not already exist in a format that can be freely used, shooting video specially for this one course may
not be justified, in terms of either the time the instructor would need to spend on video production, or
the costs of making the videos with a professional crew.

   Time to learn how to do online teaching is especially important. There is a steep learning curve and
the first time will take much longer than subsequent online courses. The institution should offer some
form of training or professional development for instructors thinking of moving online or into blended
learning. Ideally instructors should get some release time (up to one semester from one class) in order
to do the design and preparation for an online course, or a re-designed hybrid course. This however is
not always possible, but one thing we do know. Instructor workload is a function of course design. Well
designed online courses should require less rather than more work from an instructor.

10.4.2.2. Learning technology support staff.

If your institution has a service unit for faculty development and training, instructional designers and
web designers for supporting teaching, use them. Such staff are often qualified in both educational
sciences and computer technology. They have unique knowledge and skills that can make your life much
easier when teaching online. (This will be discussed further in Chapter 13.)

   The availability and skill level of learning technology support from the institution is a critical factor.
548 Chapter 10: Modes of delivery

Can you get the support of an instructional designer and media producers? If not, it is likely that much
more will be done face-to-face than online, unless you are already very experienced in online learning.

10.4.2.3 Readily available technology

Most institutions now have a learning management system such as Blackboard or Moodle, or a lecture
capture system for recording lessons. But increasingly, instructors will need access to media producers
who can create videos, digital graphics, animations, simulations, web sites, and access to blog and wiki
software. Without access to such technology support, instructors are more likely to fall back on tried and
true classroom teaching.

10.4.2.4 Colleagues experienced in blended and online learning

It really helps if there are experienced colleagues in the department who understand the subject
discipline and have done some online teaching. They will perhaps even have some materials already
developed, such as graphics, that they will be willing to share.

10.4.2.5 Money

Are there resources available to buy you out for one semester to spend time on course design? Many
institutions have development funds for innovative teaching and learning, and there may be external
grants for creating new open educational resources, for instance. This will increase the practicality and
hence the likelihood of more of the teaching moving online.

   We shall see that as more and more learning material becomes available as open educational
resources, teachers and instructors will be freed up from mainly content presentation to focusing on more
interaction with students, both online and face to face. However, although open educational resources
are becoming increasingly available, they may not exist in the topics required or they may not be of
adequate quality in terms of either content or production standards (see Chapter 11.2 for more on OERs).

   The extent to which these resources are available will help inform you on the extent to which you will
be able to go online and meet quality standards. In particular, you should think twice about going online
if none of the resources listed above is going to be available to you.

10.4.3 The case for multiple modes

Increasingly, it is becoming difficult to separate markets for particular courses or programs. Although
the majority of students taking a first year university course are likely to be coming straight from
high school, some will not. There may be a minority of students who left high school directly for
work, or went to a two year college to get vocational training, but now find they need a degree.
Especially in professional graduate programs, students may be a mix of those who have just completed
their bachelor's course and are still full-time students, and those that are already in the work-force but
need the specialist qualification. There will be a mix of students in third and fourth year undergraduate
courses, some of whom will be working over 15 hours a week, and others who are studying more or
less full time. In theory, then, it may be possible to identify a particular market for mainly face-to-face,
blended or fully online learning, but in practice most courses are likely to have a mix of students with
different needs.

   If, though, as seems likely, more and more courses will end up as blended learning, then it is worth
                                                                    10.4 Choosing between face-to-face and online teaching on campus 549

thinking about how courses could be designed to serve multiple markets. For instance, if we take our
haematology course, it could be offered to full-time third year undergraduate students studying biology,
or it could also be offered either on its own or with other related courses as a certificate in blood
management for nurses working in hospitals. It might also be useful for students studying medicine who
have not taken this particular course as an undergraduate, or even for patients with conditions related to
their blood levels, such as diabetes.

   If for instance our instructor developed a course where students spent approximately 50 per cent of
their time online and the rest on campus, it may eventually be possible to design this for other markets
as well, with perhaps practical work for nurses being done in the hospital under supervision, or just the
online part being offered as a short MOOC for patients. For some courses (perhaps not haematology), it
may be possible to offer the course wholly online, in blended format or wholly face-to-face. This would
allow the same course to reach several different markets.

10.4.4 Questions for consideration in choosing modes of delivery

In summary, here are some questions to consider, when designing a course from scratch:

1. What kind of learners are likely to take this course? What are their needs? Which mode(s) of delivery
will be most appropriate to these kinds of learners? Could I reach more or different types of learners by
choosing a particular mode of delivery?

2. What is my view of how learners can best learn on this course? What is my preferred method(s) of
teaching to facilitate that kind of learning on this course?

3. What is the main content (facts, theory, data, processes) that needs to be covered on this course? How
will I assess understanding of this content?

4. What are the main skills that learners will need to develop on this course? What are the ways in which
they can develop/practice these skills? How will I assess these skills?

5. How can technology help with the presentation of content on this course?

6. How can technology help with the development of skills on this course?

7. When I list the content and skills to be taught, which of these could be taught:

         · fully online
         · partly online and partly face-to-face
         · can only be taught face-to-face?

8. What resources do I have available for this course in terms of:

         · professional help from instructional designers and media producers;
         · possible sources of funding for release time and media production;
         · good quality open educational resources.
550 Chapter 10: Modes of delivery

9. What kind of classroom space will I need to teach the way I wish? Can I adapt existing spaces or will
I need to press for major changes to be made before I can teach the way I want to?

10. In the light of the answers to all these questions, which mode of delivery makes most sense?

References

Kennepohl, D. and Shaw, L. (eds.) (2010) Accessible Elements: Teaching Science Online and at a
Distance Athabasca AB: Athabasca University Press

   Schmidt, S. and Shea, P. (2015) NANSLO Web-based Labs: Real Equipment, Real Data, Real People!
WCET Frontiers

                                                       Activity 10.4 Deciding on the mode of delivery

      1. Try following the process above for a possible new course that you would like to teach or for revising a
   course you are already teaching.

      There is no feedback on this activity.
10.5 The future of the campus

Figure 10.5.1 The magic of the campus?
Image: © Cambridge Advanced Studies Program, Cambridge University, U.K., 2015

   As more and more teaching is moved online, even for campus-based students, it will become
increasingly important to think about the function of face-to-face teaching and the use of space on
campus.
10.5.1 Identifying the unique characteristics of face-to-face teaching in a digital world
Sanjay Sarma, Director of MIT's Office of Digital Learning, made an attempt at MIT's LINC 2013
conference to identify the difference between campus-based and online learning, and in particular
MOOCs. He made the distinction between MOOCs as open courses available to anyone, reflecting the
highest level of knowledge in particular subject areas, and the `magic' of the on-campus experience,
which he claimed is distinctly different from the online experience (Sarma, 2013).

   He argued that it is difficult to define or pin down the magic that takes place on-campus, but referred
to:

         · `in-the-corridor' conversations between faculty and staff;
         · hands-on engineering with other students outside of lectures and scheduled labs;
         · the informal learning that takes place between students in close proximity to one another.

                                                                   551
552 Chapter 10: Modes of delivery

There are a couple of other characteristics that Sarma hinted at but did not mention explicitly in his
presentation:

         · the very high standard of the students admitted to MIT, who `push' each other to even higher
            standards;

         · the importance of the social networks developed by students at MIT that provide
            opportunities later in life.

Easy and frequent access to laboratories is a serious contender for the uniqueness of campus-based
learning, as this is difficult to provide online, although there is an increasing number of developments
in remote labs and the use of simulations. Opportunities for finding future spouses is another contender.
Probably the most important though is access to social contacts that can further your career (see my
podcast feedback on Activity 10.2 for more on the `unique affordances' of campus-based teaching.).

   I leave it to you to judge whether these are unique features of face-to-face teaching, or whether the key
advantages of a campus experience are more specific to expensive and highly selective elite institutions.
For most teachers and instructors, though, more concrete and more general pedagogical advantages for
face-to-face teaching need to be identified.

10.5.2 The law of equal substitution

In the meantime, we should start from the assumption that from a strictly pedagogical
perspective, most courses can be taught equally well online or face-to-face, what I call the law of equal
substitution. This means that other factors, such as cost, convenience for teachers, social networking, the
skills and knowledge of the instructor, the type of students, or the context of the campus, will be stronger
determinants of whether to teach a course online or on campus than the academic demands of the subject
matter. These are all perfectly justifiable reasons for privileging the campus experience.

   At the same time, there are likely to be some critical areas where there is a strong pedagogical
rationale for students to learn in a face-to-face or hands-on context. In other words, we need to identify
the exceptions to the law of equal substitution. These unique pedagogical characteristics of campus-
based teaching need to be researched more carefully, or at least be more theory-based than at present,
but currently there is no powerful or convincing method or rationale to identify what the uniqueness is
of the campus experience in terms of learning outcomes. The assumption appears to be that the campus
experience must be better, at least for some things, because this is the way we have always done things.
We need to turn the question on its head: what is the academic or pedagogical justification for the
campus, when students can learn most things online?

10.5.3 The impact of online learning on the campus experience

This question becomes particularly important when we examine how an increased move to blended or
hybrid learning is going to impact on learning spaces. In some ways, this may turn out to be a ticking
time bomb for schools, colleges and universities.

10.5.3.1 Rethinking the design of classrooms

As we move from lectures to more interactive learning, we will need to think about the spaces in which
learning will take place, and how pedagogy, online learning and the design of learning spaces influence
                                                                                                                      10.5 The future of the campus 553

one another. To make it worthwhile for students to come to campus when they can do an increasing
amount of their study online, the on-campus activities must be meaningful. If for instance we want
students to come to campus for interpersonal communication and intense group work, will there be
sufficiently flexible and well-equipped spaces for students to do this, remembering that they will want
to combine their online work with their classroom activities?

   In essence, new technology, hybrid learning and the desire to engage students and to develop the
knowledge and skills needed in a digital age are leading some teachers and architects to rethink the
classroom and the way it is used.

Figure 10.5.2 Design for an interactive classroom from Steelcase (© Steelcase, 2013)

   Steelcase, a leading American manufacturer of office and educational furniture, is not only conducting
impressive research into learning environments, but is way ahead of many of our post-secondary
institutions in thinking through the implications of online learning for classroom design. Their
educational research website, and two of their reports: Active Learning Spaces and Rethinking Space:
Sparking Creativity are documents that all post-secondary institutions and even k-12 planners should be
looking at.

   In Active Learning Spaces, Steelcase reports:
     Formal learning spaces have remained the same for centuries: a rectangular box filled with rows
554 Chapter 10: Modes of delivery

     of desks facing the instructor and writing board....As a result, today's students and teachers suffer
     because these outmoded spaces inadequately support the integration of the three key elements of a
     successful learning environment: pedagogy, technology and space.
     Change begins with pedagogy. Teachers and teaching methods are diverse and evolving. From
     one class to the next, sometimes during the same class period, classrooms need change. Thus, they
     should fluidly adapt to different teaching and learning preferences. Instructors should be supported
     to develop new teaching strategies that support these new needs.
     Technology needs careful integration. Students today are digital natives, comfortable using
     technology to display, share and present information. Vertical surfaces to display content, multiple
     projection surfaces and whiteboards in various configurations are all important classroom
     considerations.
     Space impacts learning. More than three-quarters of classes include class discussions and nearly
     60 percent of all classes include small group learning, and those percentages are continuing to
     grow. Interactive pedagogies require learning spaces where everyone can see the content and can
     see and interact with others. Every seat can and should be the best seat in the room. As more schools
     adopt constructivist pedagogies, the "sage on the stage" is giving way to the "guide on the side."
     These spaces need to support the pedagogies and technology in the room to allow instructors who
     move among teams to provide real-time feedback, assessment, direction and support students in
     peer-to-peer learning. Pedagogy, technology and space, when carefully considered and integrated,
     define the new active learning ecosystem.
   In Rethinking Space: Sparking Creativity, Andrew Kim, Steelcase Education Researcher, states:
     Creative work is most effective in learning spaces that support team work flow and sharing of
     information.

Figure 10.5.4 Interactive classroom at Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario
                                                                                                                      10.5 The future of the campus 555

   The design of classroom spaces now needs to take into account that students are doing an increasing
amount of their work online (and often outside the classroom). The classroom must support opportunities
for accessing, working on, sharing and demonstrating knowledge gained both within and outside the
classroom. Thus if the classroom is organized into `clusters' of furniture and equipment to support small
group work, these clusters will also require power so students can plug in their devices, wireless Internet
access, and the ability to transmit work to shared screens around the room (in other words, a class
Intranet). Students also need quiet places or breakout spaces where they can work individually as well as
in groups. When faculty are presented with such use of space, they naturally adopt more active learning
approaches.

10.5.3.2 The impact of flipped classrooms and hybrid learning on classroom design

These classrooms designs assume that students are learning in relatively small classes. However, we
are also seeing the redesign of large lecture classes using hybrid designs such as flipped classrooms.
Indeed Mark Valenti (2013) of the Sextant Group (an audio-visual company) is reported as saying:
`We're basically seeing the beginning of the end of the lecture hall.'

   Nevertheless, given the current financial context, we should not assume that the classroom time for
these redesigned large lectures classes will be spent in small groups in individual classrooms (there are
probably not enough small classrooms to accommodate these classes which often have over a thousand
students). Larger spaces that can be organized into smaller working groups, then easily reconvened into
a large, single group, will be needed. What the space for these large classes certainly should not be is the
raked rows of benches which now are now the norm in most large lecture theatres.

   Steelcase is also doing research on appropriate spaces for faculty. For instance, if a university or
department is planning a learning commons or common area for students, why not locate faculty offices
in the same general area instead of in a separate building? Indeed, a case could be made for integrating
faculty office space with more open teaching areas.

10.5.3.3 The impact on capital building plans

It is obvious why a company such as Steelcase is interested in these developments. There is a tremendous
commercial opportunity for selling new and better forms of classroom furniture that meets these
needs. However, that is the problem. Universities, colleges and especially schools simply do not have
the money to move quickly towards new classroom designs, and even if they did, they should do some
careful thinking first about:

         · what kind of campus will be needed over the next 20 years, given the rapid moves to hybrid
            and online learning;

         · how much they need to invest in physical infrastructure when students can do much of their
            studies online.

Nevertheless, there are several opportunities for at least setting priorities for innovation in classroom
design:

         · where new campuses or major buildings are being built or renewed;
556 Chapter 10: Modes of delivery

         · where large first and second year classes are being redesigned: maybe a prototype classroom
            design could be tried for one of these large lecture redesigns and tested; if successful the
            model could be added slowly to other large lecture classes;

         · where a department or program is being redesigned to integrate online learning and
            classroom teaching in a major way; they would receive priority for funding a new classroom
            design;

         · all major new purchases of classroom furniture to replace old or worn out equipment should
            first be subject to a review of classroom designs.

The important point here is that investment in new or adapted physical classroom space should be
driven by decisions to change pedagogy/teaching methods. This will mean bringing together academics,
IT support staff, instructional designers and staff from facilities, as well as architects and furniture
suppliers. Second, as Winston Churchill said: `we shape our buildings and afterwards our buildings
shape us.' Providing teachers and instructors with a flexible, well-designed learning environment is
likely to encourage major changes in their teaching; stuffing them into rectangular boxes with rows of
desks will do the opposite.

   Perhaps most important of all, institutions need to start re-examining their future growth plans for
buildings on campus. In particular:

         · will we need additional classrooms and additional lecture theatre buildings if students will
            be spending up to half their time studying online or in flipped classes?

         · do we have enough learning areas where large numbers of students can work in small groups
            and can then quickly reconvene?

         · do we have the technical facilities that will allow students seamlessly to work and study both
            face-to-face and online, and to share and capture the work when working physically together
            on campus?

         · would we be better investing in the re-design of existing space rather than building new
            learning spaces?

What is clear is that institutions now need to do some hard thinking about online learning, its likely
impact on campus teaching, and above all what kind of campus experience we want students to have
when they can do much of their studying online. It is this thinking that should shape our investment in
buildings, desks and chairs.

10.5.4 Re-thinking the role of the campus

If we accept the principle of equal substitution for many academic purposes, then this brings us back to
the student on the bus question. If students can learn most things equally well (and more conveniently)
online, what can we offer them on campus that will make the bus journey worthwhile? This is the real
challenge that online learning presents.

   It is not just a question of what teaching activities need to be done in a face-to-face class or lab,
but the whole cultural and social purpose of a school, college or university. Students in many of our
large, urban universities have become commuters, coming in just for their lectures, maybe using the
                                                                                                                      10.5 The future of the campus 557

learning commons between lectures, getting a bite to eat, then heading home. As we have `massified'
our universities, the broader cultural aspects have been lost.

   Online and hybrid learning provides a chance to re-think the role and purpose of the whole campus,
as well as what we should be doing in classrooms when students have online learning available any time
and anywhere. Of course we could just close up shop and move everything online (and save a great deal
of money), but we should at least explore what would be lost before doing that.

References

Sarma, S. (2013) The Magic Beyond the MOOCs Boston MA: LINC 2013 conference
   Steelcase Education (undated) Active Learning Spaces Michigan: Grand Rapids
   Steelcase Education (undated) Rethinking Space: Sparking Creativity Michigan: Grand Rapids
   Valenti, M. (2013), in Williams, L., `AV trends: hardware and software for sharing screens, University

Business, June

                                                              Activity 10.5 Redesigning your classroom space

      Where the caretaker determines pedagogy: I worked in one school where every morning the chairs and
      desks were laid out in neat rows facing the front. The caretaker would get furious if they were left
      arranged in any other layout by the end of the day. I therefore spent too much lesson time with students
      re-arranging the desks for group work then tidying up afterwards. (I was young and didn't dare defy the
      caretaker, who was quite formidable).

         1. If you were designing from scratch a learning space for a group of 40 students (maximum), what
      would the learning space look like, given all the potential technology and teaching methods you and the
      students could be using?

         2.If you have a lecture class of 200 students and wanted to change your teaching method, how would
      you redesign the teaching and what kind of space(s) would you need?

                                                                        Key Takeaways from Chapter 10

   1. There is a continuum of technology-based learning, from `pure' face-to-face teaching to fully online
   programs. Every teacher or instructor needs to decide where on the continuum a particular course or program
   should be.

      2. We do not have good research evidence or theories to make this decision, although we do have growing
   experience of the strengths and limitations of online learning. What is particularly missing is an evidence-based
   analysis of the strengths and limitations of face-to-face teaching when online learning is also available.
558 Chapter 10: Modes of delivery

      3. In the absence of good theory, I have suggested four factors to consider when deciding on mode of
   delivery, and in particular the different uses of face-to-face and online learning in blended courses:

              · student characteristics and needs

              · your preferred teaching strategy, in terms of methods and learning outcomes

              · the pedagogical and presentational requirements of the subject matter, in terms of (a) content and
                 (b) skills

              · the resources available to an instructor (including the instructor's time).
      4. The move to blended or hybrid learning in particular means rethinking the use of the campus and the
   facilities needed fully to support learning in a hybrid mode.
Chapter 11: Trends in open education

                                                                   The purpose of this chapter

      When you have completed this chapter you should be able to determine:
              · how your role as an instructor is likely to be changed by developments in open learning;
              · when you should create your own material and when you should use open educational resources;
              · how to maximise the use of digital materials once created, in terms of the design of courses.

What is covered in this chapter
         · Scenario H: Watershed management
         · 11.1 Open learning
         · 11.2 Open educational resources (OER)
         · 11.3 Open textbooks, open research and open data
         · 11.4 Open pedagogy
         · 11.5 The implications of `open' for course and program design: towards a paradigm shift?

Also in this chapter you will find the following activities:
         · Activity 11.1 Should access to post-secondary education be completely open to everyone?
         · Activity 11.2 Deciding on OER
         · Activity 11.3 Using other open resources
         · Activity 11.4 Contemplating open pedagogy
         · Activity 11.5 Build your own scenario

                                                                            Key Takeaways

      1. Open educational resources offer many benefits but they need to be well designed and embedded within
   a rich learning environment to be effective.

      2. The increasing availability of OER, open textbooks, open research and open data means that in future,
   almost all academic content will be open and freely accessible over the Internet.

      3. As a result, students will increasingly look to institutions for learning support and help with the

                                                                   559
560 A.W. (Tony) Bates

   development of skills needed in a digital age rather than with the delivery of content. This will have major
   consequences for the role of teachers/instructors and the design of courses.

      4. OER and other forms of open education will lead to increased modularization and disaggregation of
   learning services, which are needed to respond to the increasing diversity of learner needs in a digital age.

      5. MOOCs are essentially a dead end with regard to providing learners who do not have adequate access to
   education with high quality qualifications. The main value of MOOCs is in providing opportunities for non-
   formal education and supporting communities of practice.

      6. OER, MOOCs, open textbooks and other digital forms of open-ness are important in helping to widen
   access to learning opportunities, but ultimately these are enhancements rather than a replacement for a well-
   funded public education system, which remains the core foundation for enabling equal access to educational
   opportunities.
Scenario H: Watershed management

Figure 11.H The Hart River, Yukon.
Image: © www.protectpeel.ca, CC BY-NC

        Over a number of years, research faculty in the Departments of Land Management and
     Forestry at the University of Western Canada had developed a range of digital graphics,
     computer models and simulations about watershed management, partly as a consequence
     of research conducted by faculty, and partly to generate support and funding for further
     research.

        At a faculty meeting several years ago, after a somewhat heated discussion, faculty
     members voted, by a fairly small majority, to make these educational resources openly
     available for re-use for educational purposes under a Creative Commons license that
     requires attribution and prevents commercial use without specific written permission from
     the copyright holders, the faculty responsible for developing the artefacts.

        What swayed the vote is that the majority of the faculty actively involved in the
     research wanted to make these resources more widely available. The agencies responsible
     for funding the work that resulted in the development of the learning artefacts (mainly
     national research councils) welcomed the move to makes these artefacts more widely
     available as open educational resources.

                                                                   561
562 Chapter 11: Trends in open education

        Initially, the researchers just put the graphics and simulations up on the research group's
     web site. It was left to individual faculty members to decide whether to use these resources
     in their teaching. Over time, faculty started to introduce these resources into a range of
     on-campus undergraduate and graduate courses.

        After a while, though, word seemed to get out about these OER. Research members
     began to receive e-mails and phone calls from other researchers around the world. It
     became clear that there was a network or community of researchers in this field who were
     creating digital materials as a result of their research, and it made sense to share and
     re-use materials from other sites. This eventually led to an international web `portal' of
     learning artefacts on watershed management.

        The researchers also started to get calls from a range of different agencies, from
     government ministries or departments of environment, local environmental groups, First
     Nations/aboriginal bands, and, occasionally, major mining or resource extraction
     companies, leading to some major consultancy work for the faculty in the departments.
     At the same time, the faculty were able to attract further research funding from non-
     governmental agencies such as the Nature Conservancy and some ecological groups, as
     well as from their traditional funding source, the national research councils, to develop
     more OER.

        By this time, the departments had access to a fairly large amount of OER. There
     were already two fourth and fifth level fully online courses built around the OER that
     were being offered successfully to undergraduate and graduate students. A proposal was
     therefore put forward to create initially a fully online post-graduate certificate program
     on watershed management, built around existing OER, in partnership with a university in
     the USA and another one in Sierra Leone. This certificate program was to be self-funding
     from tuition fees, with the tuition fees for the 25 Sierra Leone students to be initially
     covered by an international aid agency.

        The Dean, after a period of hard negotiation, persuaded the university administration
     that the departments' proportion of the tuition fees from the certificate program should go
     directly to the departments, who would hire additional tenured faculty from the revenues
     to teach or backfill for the certificate, and the departments would pay 25 per cent of
     the tuition revenues to the university as overheads.This decision was made somewhat
     easier by a fairly substantial grant from Foreign Affairs Canada to make the certificate
     program available in English and French to Canadian mining and resource extraction
     companies with contracts and partners in African countries.

        Although the certificate program was very successful in attracting students from North
     America, Europe and New Zealand, it was not taken up very well in Africa beyond the
     partnership with the university in Sierra Leone, although there was a lot of interest in
     the OER and the issues raised in the certificate courses. After two years of running the
     certificate, then, the departments made two major decisions:

         · another three courses and a research project would be added to the certificate
            courses, and this would be offered as a fully cost recoverable online master in
            watershed resource management. This would attract greater participation from
            managers and professionals in African countries in particular, and provide a
            recognised qualification that many of the certificate students were requesting;

         · drawing on the very large network of external experts now involved one way or
                                                                                                               Scenario H: Watershed management 563

            another with the researchers, the university would offer a series of MOOCs on
            watershed management issues, with volunteer experts from outside the university
            being invited to participate and provide leadership in the MOOCs. The MOOCs
            would be able to draw on the existing OER.

     Five years later, the following outcomes were recorded by the Dean at an international
     conference on sustainability:

         · the online master's program had doubled the total number of graduate students in
            her Faculty;

         · the master's program was fully cost-recoverable from tuition fees;

         · there were 120 graduates a year from the master's program;

         · the degree completion rate was 64 per cent;

         · six new tenured faculty had been hired, plus another six post-doctoral research staff;

         · several thousand students had registered and paid for at least one course in the
            certificate or master's program, of which 45 per cent were from outside Canada;

         · over 100,000 students had taken the MOOCs, almost half from developing
            countries;

         · there were now over 1,000 hours of OER on watershed management available and
            downloaded many times across the world;

         · the university was now internationally recognised as a world leader in watershed
            management.

Although this scenario is purely a figment of my imagination, it is influenced by real and exciting work
being done by the following at the University of British Columbia:

         · Dr. Hans Schreier, Watershed Management Courses, Institute of Resources, Environment and
            Sustainability, UBC

         · Virtual Soil Science Learning Resources (developed by a consortium of British Columbian
            universities)

         · Graduate Certificate in Technology-Based Learning, Division of Continuing Studies/Faculty
            of Education, UBC

         · International Master in Educational Technology, Faculty of Education, UBC
11.1 Open learning

Figure 11.1.1 `I'm just a committed and even stubborn person who wants to see every child getting quality
education...'
Malala Yousafzai's Nobel Prize speech, 2014. Click on image to see the speech.

   In recent years, there has been a resurgence of interest in open learning, mainly related to open
educational resources and MOOCs. Although in themselves open educational resources (OER) and
MOOCs are important developments, they tend to cloud other developments in open education that are
likely have even more impact on education as a whole. It is therefore necessary to step back a little to
get a broader understanding of not just OER and MOOCs, but open learning in general. This will help us
better understand the significance of MOOCs, OER and other developments in open education, and their
likely impact on teaching and learning now and in the future.
11.1.1 Open education as a concept
Open education can take a number of forms:

                                                                   565
566 Chapter 11: Trends in open education

         · education for all: free or very low cost school, college or university education available to
            everyone within a particular jurisdiction, usually funded primarily through the state;

         · open access to programs that lead to full, recognised qualifications. These are offered by
            national open universities or more recently by the OERu;

         · open access to courses or programs that are not for formal credit, although it may be possible
            to acquire badges or certificates for successful completion. MOOCs are a good example;

         · open educational resources that instructors or learners can use for free. MIT's
            OpenCourseware, which provides free online downloads of MIT's video recorded lectures
            and support material, is one example;

         · open textbooks, online textbooks that are free for students to use (such as this one);

         · open research, whereby research papers are made available online for free downloading (see
            for instance Open Research Central);

         · open data, that is, data open to anyone to use, reuse, and redistribute, subject only, at most, to
            the requirement to attribute and share; see for example the World Bank's Open Data Bank;

         · open pedagogy, a method of teaching and learning that builds on principles of open-ness and
            learner participation

Each of these developments is discussed in more detail in this chapter, except for MOOCs, which are
discussed extensively in Chapter 5.

11.1.2 Education for all - except higher education

Open education is primarily a goal, or an educational policy. An essential characteristic of open
education is the removal of barriers to learning. It can mean no prior qualifications to study, no
discrimination by gender, race, age or religion, affordability for everyone, and for students with
disabilities, through a determined effort to provide education in a suitable form that overcomes the
disability (for example, audio recordings for students who are visually impaired). Ideally, no-one should
be denied access to an open educational program. Thus open learning must be scalable as well as
flexible.

11.1.2.1 State-funded schools

State-funded public education for the education of children from around the age of five through to
sixteen or in some countries eighteen is the most extensive and widespread form of open education. For
example, the British government passed the 1870 Education Act that set the framework for schooling of
all children between the ages of 5 and 13 in England and Wales. Although there were some fees to be
paid by parents, the Act established the principle that education would be paid for mainly through taxes
and no child would be excluded for financial reasons. Schools would be administered by elected local
school boards (Living Heritage, undated).

   Over time, access to publicly funded education in most economically developed countries has been
widened to include all children up to the age of 18. UNESCO's Education for All (EFA) movement is
a global commitment to provide quality basic education for all children, youth and adults, supported, at
                                                                                                                                      11.1 Open learning 567

least in principle, by 164 national governments. Nevertheless today there are over 250 million of `out-
of-school' children, adolescents and youth worldwide (UNESCO, 2018), or roughly one in five.

11.1.2.2 Post-secondary education

Access to post-secondary or higher education has been more limited than access to schools, partly on
financial grounds, but also in terms of `merit'. Universities have required those applying for university
to meet academic standards determined by prior success in school examinations or institutional entry
exams. This has enabled elite universities in particular to be highly selective.

   However, after the Second World War, the demand for an educated population, both for social
and economic reasons, in most economically advanced countries resulted in the gradual expansion of
universities and post-secondary education in general. In most OECD countries, roughly 35-60 per cent
of an age cohort will go on to some form of post-secondary education. Especially in a digital age, there is
an increasing demand for highly qualified workers, and post-secondary education is a necessary gateway
to most of the best jobs. Therefore there is increasing pressure for full and free open access to post-
secondary, higher or tertiary education.

11.1.2.3 The cost of widening access

However, as we saw in Chapter 1, the cost of widening access to ever increasing numbers results
in increased financial pressure on governments and taxpayers. Following the financial crisis of 2008,
many states in the USA found themselves in severe financial difficulties, which resulted in substantial
funding cuts to the U.S. higher education system (see for instance, Rivera, 2012), which in turn resulted
in a rapid increase in tuition fees.

   It is probably more than co-incidental that other forms of open education such as MOOCs and OER
arose at a time of increasing cuts to the funding of public education in the USA. Solutions that enable
increased access without a proportionate increase in funding or tuition fees are almost desperately being
sought by governments and institutions. It is against this background that the renewed interest in open
education should be framed.

11.1.3 Open access in higher education

11.1.3.1 Open universities

In the 1970s and 1980s, there was a rapid growth in the number of open universities that required no or
minimal prior qualifications for entry. In the United Kingdom, for instance, in 1969, less than 10 per cent
of students leaving secondary education went on to university. This was when the British government
established the Open University, a distance teaching university open to all, using a combination of
specially designed printed texts, and broadcast television and radio, with one week residential summer
schools on traditional university campuses for the foundation courses (Perry, 1976; Weinbren, 2015).

   The Open University started in 1971 with 25,000 students in the initial entry intake, and now has over
200,000 registered students. It has been consistently ranked by government quality assurance agencies
in the top ten U.K. universities for teaching, and in the top 30 for research, and number one for student
satisfaction (out of over 180). It currently has over 200,000 registered students (Weinbren, 2015).
However, it can no longer cover the full cost of its operation from government grants and there is now
a range of different fees to be paid. In addition access to higher education has now widened to the point
568 Chapter 11: Trends in open education

where 50% of a high school cohort now enter some form of higher education in the UK (UK Department
of Education, 2018).

   There are now nearly 100 publicly funded open universities around the world, including Canada
(Athabasca University and Téluq). These open universities are often very large. The Open University
of China has over one million enrolled undergraduate students and 2.4 million junior high school
students, Anadolou Open University in Turkey has over 1.2 million enrolled undergraduate students, the
Open University of Indonesia (Universitas Terbuka) almost half a million, and the University of South
Africa 350,000. These large, degree awarding national open universities provide an invaluable service
to millions of students who otherwise would have no access to higher education (see Daniel, 1998, and
more recently, Contact North, 2019, for a good overview).

11.1.3.2 Alternatives to open universities

It should be noted however that there is no publicly funded open university in the USA, which is one
reason why MOOCs have received so much attention there. The Western Governors' University is the
most similar to an open university, and private, for-profit universities such as the University of Phoenix
fill a similar niche in the market.

   As well as the national open universities, which usually offer their own degrees, there is also the
OERu, which is basically an international consortium of mainly British Commonwealth and U.S.
universities and colleges offering open access courses that enable learners either to acquire full credit for
transfer into one of the partner universities or to build towards a full degree, offered by the university
from which most credits have been acquired. Students pay a fee for assessment.

11.1.4 Limitations of open learning

Open, distance, flexible and online learning are rarely found in their `purest' forms. No teaching system
is completely open (minimum levels of literacy are required, for instance). Thus there are always degrees
of openness. Openness has particular implications for the use of technology. If no-one is to be denied
access, then technologies that are available to everyone need to be used. If an institution is deliberately
selective in its students, it has more flexibility with regard to choice of technology. It can for instance
require all students who wish to take an online or blended course to have their own computer and
Internet access. It cannot do that if its mandate is to be open to all students. Truly open universities then
will always be behind the leading edge of educational applications of technology.

   Despite the success of many open universities, open universities often lack the status of a campus-
based institution. Their degree completion rates are often very low. The U.K. OU's degree completion
rate is 22 per cent (Woodley and Simpson, 2014), but nevertheless still higher for whole
degree programs than for most single MOOC courses.

   Lastly, some of the open universities have been established for more than 40 years and have not
always quickly adapted to changes in technology, partly because of their large size and their substantial
prior investment in older technologies such as print and broadcasting, and partly because they do not
wish to deny access to potential students who may not have access to the latest technology.

   Thus open universities are now increasingly challenged by both an explosion in access to higher
education generally, and in the use of online learning by conventional universities. For instance, in
Canada, Donovan et. (2018) report that nearly all universities and most colleges are now offering fully
online courses (although access is still mainly based on prior qualifications). New developments such as
                                                                                                                                      11.1 Open learning 569

MOOCs, and open educational resources, the topic of the next section, are further challenges for open
universities.

References

Contact North (2019) Searchable Directory of More than 65 Open Universities Worldwide Sudbury ON:
Teachonline.ca

   Daniel, J. (1998) Mega-Universities and Knowledge Media: Technology Strategies for Higher
Education. London: Kogan Page

   Donovan, T. et al. (2018) Tracking Online and Distance Education in Canadian Universities and
Colleges: 2018 Halifax NS: Canadian Digital Learning Research Association

   Living Heritage (undated) Going to school: the 1870 Education Act, London: UK Parliament
   Perry, W. (1976) The Open University Milton Keynes: Open University Press
   Rivera, C. (2012) Survey offers dire picture of California's two-year colleges Los Angeles Times,
August 28
   U.K. Department of Education (2018) Participation Rates in Higher Education: Academic Years
2006/2007 - 2017/2018 (Provisional) London: Department of Education HE Statistics
   UNESCO (2014) Education for All, 2000-2015: achievements and challenges Paris FR: The
UNESCO 2015 EFA Global Monitoring Report team
   UNESCO (2018) One in Five Children, Adolescents and Youth is Out of School Paris FR: UNESCO
Institute for Statistics Fact Sheet No 42
   Weinbren, D. (2015) The Open University: A History Manchester UK: Manchester University Press/
The Open University
   Woodley, A. and Simpson, O. (2014) `Student drop-out: the elephant in the room' in Zawacki-Richter,
O. and Anderson, T. (eds.) (2014) Online Distance Education: Towards a Research Agenda Athabasca
AB: AU Press, pp. 508

                           Activity 11.1 Should access to post-secondary education be completely open to anyone?

      1. Should access to post-secondary or higher education be open to everyone?

      If yes, what are reasonable limitations on this principle?

      What should be the government's role, if any, in making this possible?

      If your answer is no to the first part of this question, why should education up to post-secondary education
   be open, but not afterwards? Is it simply money, or are there other reasons?

      2. Are open universities still relevant in a digital age?
11.2 Open educational resources (OER)

Figure 11.2.1 © Giulia Forsyth, 2012

   Open educational resources are somewhat different from open learning, in that they are primarily
content, while open learning includes both content and educational services, such as specially designed
online materials, in-built learner support and assessment.

   Open educational resources cover a wide range of online formats, including online textbooks, video
recorded lectures, YouTube clips, web-based textual materials designed for independent study,
animations and simulations, digital diagrams and graphics, some MOOCs, or even assessment materials
such as tests with automated answers. OER can also include Powerpoint slides or pdf files of lecture

                                                                   571
572 Chapter 11: Trends in open education

notes. In order to be open educational resources, though, they must be freely available for at least
educational use.

11.2.1 Principles of OER

David Wiley is one of the pioneers of OER. He and colleagues have suggested (Hilton et al., 2010)
that there are five core principles (the 5Rs) of open publishing:

         · re-use: The most basic level of openness. People are allowed to use all or part of the work for
            their own purposes (for example, download an educational video to watch at a later time);

         · re-distribute: People can share the work with others (for example, send a digital article by-
            email to a colleague);

         · revise: People can adapt, modify, translate, or change the work (for example, take a book
            written in English and turn it into a Spanish audio book);

         · re-mix: People can take two or more existing resources and combine them to create a new
            resource (for example, take audio lectures from one course and combine them with slides
            from another course to create a new derivative work);

         · retain: No digital rights management restrictions (DRM); the content is yours to keep,
            whether you're the author, an instructor using the material, or a student.

This open textbook you are reading meets all five criteria (it has a CC BY-NC license - see Section
11.2.2 below). Users of OER though need to check with the actual license for re-use, because sometimes
there are limitations, as with this book, which cannot be reproduced for commercial purposes without
permission. For example, the origin of the work must be accurately attributed to the original author
(BY), and it cannot be converted by a commercial publisher into a printed book to be sold at a profit
(NC), at least without written permission from the author. To protect your rights as an author of
OER usually means publishing under a Creative Commons or other open license.

11.2.2 Creative Commons licenses

This seemingly simple idea, of an `author' creating a license enabling people to freely access and adapt

copyright material, without charge or special permission, is one of the great ideas of the 21st
century. This does not take away the author's copyright, but the license gives permission
automatically for different kinds of use of the material without charge or any paperwork
or written permissions.
                                                                                                          11.2 Open educational resources (OER) 573

Figure 11.2.2 The spectrum of Creative Commons licenses
© The Creative Commons, 2013

There are several possible Creative Commons licenses:
         · CC BY Attribution: lets others distribute, remix, tweak, and build upon your work, even
            commercially, as long as they credit you for the original creation. This is the most
            accommodating of licenses offered. Recommended for maximum dissemination and use of
            licensed materials;
         · CC BY-SA: lets others remix, tweak, and build upon your work even for commercial
            purposes, as long as they credit you and license their new creations under the identical terms.
            This is particularly important if your work also includes other people's materials licensed
            through the Creative Commons;
         · CC BY-ND: allows for redistribution, commercial and non-commercial, as long as it is
            passed along unchanged and in whole, with credit to you;
574 Chapter 11: Trends in open education

         · CC BY-NC: lets others remix, tweak, and build upon your work non-commercially, and
            although their new works must also acknowledge you and be non-commercial, they don't
            have to license their derivative works on the same terms;

         · CC BY-NC-SA: lets others remix, tweak, and build upon your work non-commercially, as
            long as they credit you and license their new creations under the identical terms;

         · CC BY-NC-ND: the most restrictive of the six main licenses, only allowing others to
            download your works and share them with others as long as they credit you, but they can't
            change them in any way or use them commercially.

If you wish to offer your own materials as open educational resources, it is a relatively simple process
to choose a licence and apply it to any piece of work (see Creative Commons Choose a License). If in
doubt, check with a librarian.

11.2.3 Sources of OER

There are many `repositories' of open educational resources (see for instance, for post-secondary
education, MERLOT, OER Commons, and for k-12, Edutopia).The Open Professionals Education
Network has an excellent guide to finding and using OER.

   However, when searching for possible open educational resources on the web, check to see whether
or not the resource has a Creative Commons license or a statement giving permission for re-use. It may
be common practice to use free (no cost) resources without worrying unduly about copyright, but there
are risks without a clear license or permission for re-use. For instance, many sites, such as OpenLearn,
allow only individual, personal use for non-commercial purposes, which means providing a link to the
site for students rather than integrating the materials directly into your own teaching. If in any doubt
about the right to re-use, check with your library or intellectual property department.

11.2.4 Limitations of OER

The take-up of OER, other than open textbooks (see next section), by instructors is still minimal, other
than by those who created the original version. For instance, in Canada in 2017, less than half the
institutions reported use of OER (Donovan et al., 2018).

11.2.4.1 Quality issues

The main criticism is of the poor quality of many of the OER available at the moment - reams of text
with no interaction, often available in PDFs that cannot easily be changed or adapted, crude simulation,
poorly produced graphics, and designs that fail to make clear what academic concepts they are meant to
illustrate.

   Falconer (2013), in a survey of potential users' attitudes to OER in Europe, came to the following
conclusion:

     The ability of the masses to participate in production of OER - and a cultural mistrust of getting
     something for nothing - give rise to user concerns about quality. Commercial providers/publishers
     who generate trust through advertising, market coverage and glossy production, may exploit this
     mistrust of the free. Belief in quality is a significant driver for OER initiatives, but the issue of
                                                                                                          11.2 Open educational resources (OER) 575

     scale-able ways of assuring quality in a context where all (in principle) can contribute has not been
     resolved, and the question of whether quality transfers unambiguously from one context to another
     is seldom [addressed]. A seal of approval system is not infinitely scale-able, while the robustness of
     user reviews, or other contextualised measures, has not yet been sufficiently explored.

   If OER are to be taken up by others than the creators of the OER, they will need to be well designed.
It is perhaps not surprising then that the most used OER on iTunes University were the Open
University's, until the OU set up its own OER portal, OpenLearn, which offers as OER mainly textual
materials from its courses designed specifically for online, independent study. Once again, design is a
critical factor in ensuring the quality of an OER.

11.2.4.2 Instructors' professional self-image

Hampson (2013) has suggested another reason for the slow adoption of OER, mainly to do with the
professional self-image of many faculty. Hampson argues that faculty don't see themselves as `just'
teachers, but creators and disseminators of new or original knowledge. Therefore their teaching needs to
have their own stamp on it, which makes them reluctant to openly incorporate or `copy' other people's
work.

   OER can easily be associated with `packaged', reproductive knowledge, and not original work,
changing faculty from `artists' to `artisans'. It can be argued that this reason is absurd - we all stand on
the shoulders of giants - but it is the self-perception that's important, and for research professors, there
is a grain of truth in the argument. It makes sense for them to focus their teaching on their own research.
But then how many Richard Feynmans are there out there?

11.2.4.3 Free or open?

There is also considerable confusion between `free' (no financial cost) and `open', which is compounded
by lack of clear licensing information on many OER. For instance, some Coursera MOOCs are free, but
not `open': it is a breach of copyright to re-use the material in most Coursera MOOCs within your own
teaching without permission. The edX MOOC platform is open source, which means other institutions
can adopt or adapt the portal software, but institutions even on edX tend to retain copyright. However,
there are exceptions on both platforms: a few MOOCs do have an open licence.

11.2.4.4 Situating OER

There is also the issue of the context-free nature of OER. Research into learning shows that content is
best learned within context (situated learning), when the learner is active, and that above all, when the
learner can actively construct knowledge by developing meaning and `layered' understanding. Content
is not static, nor a commodity like coal. In other words, content is not effectively learned if it is
thought of as shovelling coal into a truck. Learning is a dynamic process that requires questioning,
adjustment of prior learning to incorporate new ideas, testing of understanding, and feedback. These
`transactional' processes require a combination of personal reflection, feedback from an expert (the
teacher or instructor) and even more importantly, feedback from and interaction with friends, family and
fellow learners.

   The weakness with open content is that by its nature, at its purest it is stripped of these developmental,
contextual and `environmental' components that are essential for effective learning. In other words, OER
576 Chapter 11: Trends in open education

are just like coal, sitting there waiting to be loaded. Coal of course is still a very valuable product. But it
has to be mined, stored, shipped and processed.

   More attention needs to be paid to those contextual elements that turn OER from raw `content' into a
useful learning experience. This means instructors need to build learning experiences or environments
into which the OER will fit. (See Chapter 11, Section 4 for more discussion of this issue)

11.2.4.5 Study the research

For a useful overview of the research on OER, see the Review Project from the Open Education Group.
Another important research project is ROER4D, which aims to provide evidence-based research on OER
adoption across a number of countries in South America, Sub-Saharan Africa and Southeast Asia.

11.2.5 How to use OER

Despite these limitations, teachers and instructors are increasingly creating open educational resources,
or making resources freely available for others to use under a Creative Commons license. There are
increasing numbers of repositories or portals where faculty can access open educational resources. As
the quantity of OER expands, it is more likely that teachers and instructors will increasingly be able to
find the resources that best suit their particular teaching context.

   There are therefore several choices:

         · take OER selectively from elsewhere, and incorporate or adapt them into your own courses;

         · create your own digital resources for your own teaching, and make them available to others
            (see for instance Creating OER and Combining Licenses from Florida State University);

         · build a course around OER, where students have to find content to solve problems, write
            reports or do research on a topic (see Scenario H at the beginning of this chapter, and Chapter
            11, Section 4.2);

         · take a whole course from OERu, then build student activities and assessment and provide
            learner support for the course.

Learners can use OER to support any type of learning. For instance, MIT's OpenCourseWare (OCW)
could be used just for interest, or students who struggle with the topics in a classroom lecture for a credit
course may well go to OCW to get an alternative approach to the same topic.

11.2.6 Still worth the effort

Despite some of the current limitations or weaknesses of OER, their use is likely to grow, simply because
it makes no sense to create everything from scratch when good quality materials are freely and easily
available. We have seen in Chapter 9 on selecting media that there is now an increasing amount of
excellent open material available to teachers and instructors. This will only grow over time. We shall see
in Section 11.5 that this is bound to change the way courses are designed and offered. Indeed, OER will
prove to be one of the essential features of teaching in a digital age.
                                           11.2 Open educational resources (OER) 577

References

Donovan, T. et al. (2018) Tracking Online and Distance Education in Canadian Universities and
Colleges: 2018 Halifax NS: Canadian Digital Learning Research Association

   Falconer, I. et al. (2013) Overview and Analysis of Practices with Open Educational Resources
in Adult Education in Europe Seville, Spain: European Commission Institute for Prospective
Technological Studies

   Hampson, K. (2013) The next chapter for digital instructional media: content as a competitive
difference Vancouver BC: COHERE 2013 conference

   Hilton, J., et al. (2010). The four R's of openness and ALMS Analysis: Frameworks for open
educational resources Open Learning: The Journal of Open and Distance Learning, 25(1), 37-44

            Activity 11.2 Deciding on OER

   1. Have you used OER in your own course(s)? Was this a positive or negative experience?

   2. If you have not used OER, what is/are the main reason(s)? Have you explored to see what is available?
What is the quality like? How could they be improved?

   3. Under what circumstances would you be prepared to create or convert your own material as OER?
11.3 Open textbooks, open research and open data

                                                                   579
580 Chapter 11: Trends in open education
                                        11.3 Open textbooks, open research and open data 581

Figure 11.3.1 Open Stax open textbooks

11.3.1 Open textbooks

Textbooks are an increasing cost to students. Some textbooks cost $200 or more, and in the USA a
university undergraduate spends on average between $530 - $640 a year on textbooks (Hill, 2015),
although the cost of recommended textbooks is between $968 and $1221 (Caulfield, 2015).

   An open textbook on the other hand is an openly-licensed, online publication free for downloading for
educational or non-commercial use. You are currently reading an open textbook. There is an increasing
number of sources for open textbooks, such as OpenStax College from Rice University, and the Open
Academics Textbook Catalog at the University of Minnesota.

   In British Columbia, the provincial government funded the B.C. open textbook project, which
operates in collaboration initially with the provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan, but now also with
other provinces through the Canada OER Group. The B.C. open textbook project focuses on making
available openly-licensed textbooks in the highest-enrolled academic subject areas and also in trades
and skills training. In the B.C. project, as in many of the other sources, all the books are selected, peer
reviewed and in some cases developed by local faculty. Often these textbooks are not `original' work, in
the sense of new knowledge, but carefully written and well illustrated summaries of current thinking in
the different subject areas.

11.3.1.1 Advantages of open textbooks

Students and governments, through grants and financial aid, pay billions of dollars each year on
textbooks. Open textbooks can make a significant impact on reducing the cost of education. The
government of British Columbia estimates that the BC Open Textbook project has saved the roughly
300,000 post-secondary students in the province more that $4 million in textbook costs between 2012 to
2017 (Bernard, 2017).

   Cable Green, the Interim CEO of the Creative Commons, has a `vision' for open textbooks: 100 per
cent of students have 100 per cent free, digital access to all course materials by day one. That is far from
the case today.

   DeNoyelles and Raible at the University of Central Florida found (2017) that due to high costs:

         · 30 percent of [student] respondents said they have opted not to purchase a textbook at least
            once,

         · 41 percent have delayed purchasing a textbook, and

         · 15 percent have taken fewer courses or decided not take a particular class.

DeNoyelles and Raible concluded that:

         · the cost of textbooks is negatively impacting student access to required materials (66.6% did
            not purchase the required textbook) and learning (37.6% earn a poor grade; 19.8% fail a
            course).
582 Chapter 11: Trends in open education

A survey of all public post-secondary students in Florida conducted by the Florida Virtual Campus
(2016) found that due to the high costs of textbooks:

         · time to graduation and/or access to courses is impacted by cost. Students reported that they
            occasionally or frequently take

                      fewer courses (47.6%);

                      do not register for a course (45.5%);

                      drop a course (26.1%), or

                      withdraw from courses (20.7%).

There are also other considerations. It is a common sight to see lengthy line-ups at college bookstores all
through the first week of the first semester (which eats into valuable study time). Because students may
be searching for second-hand versions of the books from other students, it may well be into the second
or third week of the semester before students actually get their copy.

   So why shouldn't government pay the creators of textbooks directly, cut out the middleman
(commercial publishers), save over 80 per cent on the cost, and distribute the books to students (or
anyone else) for free over the Internet, under a Creative Commons license?
                                                                                          11.3 Open textbooks, open research and open data 583

Figure 11.3.2 Open textbooks: no bookstore line-ups! Image: The Saskatoon StarPhoenix

11.3.1.2 Limitations of open textbooks

Faculty resistance is still a problem for open textbooks. Open textbooks had been adopted in between
half and two thirds of all post-secondary institutions in Canada in 2017, and a further 20 per cent were
exploring their use. However, this varied considerably by province. In British Columbia, 90 per cent
of all post-secondary institutions had adopted open textbooks for some courses; in Saskatchewan and
Quebec, less than a third of institutions were using open textbooks (Donovan et al., 2018). This indicates
clearly the impact of government support for open textbooks. Adoption was highest in universities and
large institutions. Donovan et al. also found that there was a lack of knowledge and even more so of
training for instructors in the use of open textbooks and OER.

   Murphy (2013) has questioned the whole idea of textbooks, whether open or not. She sees textbooks
as a relic of 19th century industrialism, a form of mass broadcasting. In the 21st century, students
should be finding, accessing and collecting digital materials over the Internet. Textbooks are merely
packaged learning, with the authors doing the work for students. Nevertheless, it has to be recognized
that textbooks are still the basic currency for most forms of education, and while this remains the case,
open textbooks are a much better alternative for students than expensive printed textbooks.

   Quality also remains a concern. There is an in-built prejudice that `free' must mean poor
584 Chapter 11: Trends in open education

quality.Thus the same arguments about quality of OER also apply to open textbooks. In particular, the
expensive commercially published textbooks usually include in-built activities, supplementary materials
such as extra readings, and even assessment questions. Nevertheless, Jhangiani and Jhangiani (2017), in
a survey of 320 undergraduate students in British Columbia who had actually used an open textbook for
one or more of their courses, found that 96% of respondents perceived the quality of their open textbook
to be equal or superior to a commercial textbook.

   Others (including myself) question the likely impact of `open' publishing on creating original works
that are not likely to get subsidized by government because they are either too specialized, or are not yet
part of a standard curriculum for the subject; in other words will open publishing impact negatively on
the diversity of publishing? What is the incentive for someone now to publish a unique work, if there is
no financial reward for the effort? Writing an original, single authored book remains hard work, however
it is published.

   Although there is now a range of `open' publishing services, there are still costs for an author to
create original work. Who will pay, for instance, for specialized graphics, for editing or for review?
I have used my blog to get sections of this book reviewed generally, and this has proved extremely
useful. Nevertheless one can still approach top quality reviewers for an independent review, as was done
for this book (see Appendix 3). I also received free technical support from both BCcampus and Contact
North, but other potential open textbook authors may not have that kind of access.

   Marketing is another issue. It takes time and specialised knowledge to market books effectively. On
the other hand, my experience, having published twelve books commercially, is that publishers are very
poor at properly marketing specialised textbooks, expecting the author to mainly self-market, while
the publisher still takes 85-90 per cent of all sales revenues. Nevertheless there are still real costs in
marketing an open textbook.

   How can all these costs be recovered? Much more work still needs to be done to support the open
publishing of original work in book format. If so, what does that mean for how knowledge is created,
disseminated and preserved? If open textbook publishing is to be successful, new, sustainable business
models will need to be developed. In particular, some form of government subsidy or financial support
for open textbooks is probably going to be essential.

   Nevertheless, although these are all important concerns, they are not insurmountable problems. Just
getting a proportion of the main textbooks available to students for free is a major step forward. To see
whether or not I felt it worthwhile to write the first edition of this book, see `Writing an Online Book: Is
it Worth it?' (Bates, 2015)

11.3.1.3 Learn how to adopt and use an open textbook

BC campus has mounted a short MOOC on the P2PU portal on Adopting Open Textbooks. Although the
MOOC may not be active when you access the site, it still has most of the materials, including videos,
available.

11.3.2 Open research

Governments in some countries such as the USA, Canada and the United Kingdom are requiring all
research published as a result of government funding to be openly accessible in a digital format. In
Canada, the Minister of State for Science and Technology announced (February 27, 2015) that:

     The harmonized Tri-Agency Open Access Policy on Publications requires all peer-reviewed journal
                                                                                          11.3 Open textbooks, open research and open data 585

     publications funded by one of the three federal granting agencies to be freely available online within
     12 months.

   Also in Canada, Supreme Court decisions and new legislation in 2014 means that it is much easier
to access and use free of charge online materials for educational purposes, although there are still some
restrictions.

   Commercial publishers, who have dominated the market for academic journals, are understandably
fighting back. Where an academic journal has a high reputation and hence carries substantial weight
in the assessment of research publications, publishers are charging researchers for making the research
openly available. The kudos of publishing in an established journal acts as a disincentive for researchers
to publish in less prestigious open journals without having to pay to get published.

   However, it can only be a question of time before academics fight back against this system, by
establishing their own peer reviewed journals that will be perceived to be of the highest standard by the
quality of the papers and the status of the researchers publishing in such journals. Once again, though,
open research publishing will flourish only by meeting the highest standards of peer review and quality
research, by finding a sustainable business model, and by researchers themselves taking control over the
publishing process.

   Over time, therefore, we can expect nearly all academic research in journals to become openly
available.

11.3.3 Open data

The two main sources of open data are from science and government. Following an intense discussion
with data-producing institutions in member states, the OECD published in 2007 the OECD Principles
and Guidelines for Access to Research Data from Public Funding. In science, the Human Genome
Project is perhaps the best example of open data, and several national or provincial governments have
created web sites to distribute a portion of the data they collect, such as the B.C. Data Catalogue in
Canada.

   Again, increasing amounts of important data are becoming openly available, providing more
resources with high potential for learning.

   The significance for teaching and learning of the developments in open access, OER, open textbooks
and open data will be explored more fully in the next section.

References

Bates, T. (2015) Writing an online, open textbook: is it worth it? Online Learning and Distance
Education Resources, June 10

   Bernard, R. (2017) `Open textbooks' catching on at BC colleges and universities CityNews, February
10

   Caulfield, M. (2015) Asking What Students Spend on Textbooks Is the Wrong Question, Hapgood,
November 9

   DeNoyelles, A. and Raible, J. (2017) Exploring the Use of E-Textbooks in Higher Education: A
Multiyear Study EDUCAUSE Review, October 9

   Donovan, T. et al. (2018) Tracking Online and Distance Education in Canadian Universities and
Colleges: 2018 Halifax NS: Canadian Digital Learning Research Association
586 Chapter 11: Trends in open education

   Florida Virtual Campus (2016) 2016 Florida Student Textbook & Course Materials Survey.
Tallahassee, FL.

   Hill, P. (2015) How Much Do College Students Actually Pay For Textbooks? e-Literate, March 25
   Jhangiani, R. and Jhangiani, S. (2017) Investigating the Perceptions, Use, and Impact of Open
Textbooks: A survey of Post-Secondary Students in British Columbia International Review of Research
in Open and Distributed Learning, Vol. 18, No.4
   Murphy, E. (2103) Day 2 panel discussion Vancouver BC: COHERE 2013 conference
   OECD (2017) OECD Principles and Guidelines for Access to Research Data from Public Funding
Paris FR: OECD

                                                          Activity 11.3 Using other open resources

      1. Check with OpenStax College, the Open Academics Textbook Catalog and the B.C. open textbook
   project to see if there are any suitable open textbooks for your subject.

      2. What open journals are there in your subject area? (The help of a librarian may be useful here.) Are the
   articles of good quality? Could your students use these if they were conducting research in this area?

      3. Ask your librarian for help in looking for open data sites that might have useful data that you could use in
   your teaching. Would students be able to find these data sites by themselves, with just a little guidance? How
   could they or you use this open data in their learning?
11.4 Open pedagogy

Figure 11.4.1 Current landscape of Open. Image: Paul Stacey, 2018

11.4.1 What is open pedagogy?
David Wiley (2013) originally defined open pedagogy as:

     that set of teaching and learning practices only possible in the context of the free access and 4R
     permissions characteristic of open educational resources
   It will be seen later in this section that Wiley has since (2017) recanted on this definition and indeed
questions the whole idea of an open pedagogy. However, this definition was influential in framing the
more recent discussion of open pedagogy around the use of OER (see DeRosa and Jhangiani, 2017, for
an excellent discussion about open pedagogy, its origins, and its development since 2013).

                                                                   587
588 Chapter 11: Trends in open education

   Indeed, even in 2019, BCcampus still defined open pedagogy as follows:

     Open pedagogy, also known as open educational practices (OEP), is the use of open educational
     resources (OER) to support learning, or the open sharing of teaching practices with a goal of
     improving education and training at the institutional, professional, and individual level.

   However, it is now realised that for open educational resources to be widely adopted, as well as to
change teaching practice, they need to be embedded in a much broader ecology of teaching and learning,
of which open pedagogy is a critical component. The following definition from the University of Texas
Arlington Libraries represents this thinking:

     Open pedagogy is the practice of engaging with students as creators of information rather than
     simply consumers of it. It's a form of experiential learning in which students demonstrate
     understanding through the act of creation. The products of open pedagogy are student created
     and openly licensed so that they may live outside of the classroom in a way that has an impact
     on the greater community. Open projects frequently result in the creation of open educational
     resources (OER). OER are free teaching and learning materials that are licensed to allow for
     revision and reuse. They can be fully self-contained textbooks, videos, quizzes, learning modules,
     and more.

   I like the above definition because it focuses on student behaviour, where open educational materials
are a by-product of their learning, rather than the starting point, although open pedagogy can also
embrace OER as a starting point.

   Hegarty (2015) describes eight attributes of open pedagogy:

         · participatory technologies: socially constructed media such as blogs, wikis and other
            `sharing' social media;

         · people, openness and trust: students' willingness to learn is fragile, with participation and
            interactions unlikely to flourish unless an element of trust can be built (Mak et., 2010);

         · innovation and creativity: finding new models of teaching and learning that better exploit
            OER and more emphasis on choosing digital technologies and methods that encourage the
            sharing of knowledge and resources;

         · sharing ideas and resources: an open pedagogy needs peers to share willingly within a
            connected and trusting and professional community;

         · connected community: a technologically linked community with common interests;

         · learner-generated: this requires `opening up' the process to empower students to take the
            lead, solve problems, and work collectively to produce artifacts that they share, discuss,
            reconfigure, and redeploy

         · reflective practice: when students and teachers collaborate in partnerships, it facilitates
            deeper pedagogical reflection

         · peer review: Conole (2014) sees learners as publishers and users of a range of open tools,
            with peer interactions and critique embedded in the learning experience.

Hegarty also makes the point that it is almost impossible to separate the components of an open
                                                                                                                                    11.4 Open pedagogy 589

pedagogy into neat, segregated dimensions. Components in each of the eight dimensions overlap in
many ways.

Figure 11.4.2 Hegarty's Attributes of Open Pedagogy. Image: Hegarty, 2015

DeRosa and Robison (2017) set out the key idea of open pedagogy in the following:
     By replacing a static textbook -- or other stable learning material -- with one that is openly
     licensed, faculty have the opportunity to create a new relationship between learners and the
590 Chapter 11: Trends in open education

     information they access in the course. Instead of thinking of knowledge as something students need
     to download into their brains, we start thinking of knowledge as something continuously created
     and revised. Whether students participate in the development and revision of OER or not, this
     redefined relationship between students and their course `texts' is central to the philosophy of
     learning that the course espouses. If faculty involve their students in interacting with OER, this
     relationship becomes even more explicit, as students are expected to critique and contribute to the
     body of knowledge from which they are learning. In this sense, knowledge is less a product that has
     distinct beginning and end points and is instead a process in which students can engage, ideally
     beyond the bounds of the course.

11.4.2 Examples of open pedagogy

There is a close connection between networking, social media such as blogs and wikis, which enable
students to create open educational resources, and open pedagogy.

   Jon Beasley-Murray's course where students created a Wikipedia entry on Latin American literature
is a good example, as is the Math Exam Resources created by graduate students at UBC (see Chapter
9, Section 8.8.3). This approach is particularly valuable for partly redressing cultural and historical bias,
through the organization of Wikipedia edit-a-thons. For two examples, see Women in Red/Indigenous
Women. and Indigenous Literature Edit-a-Thon.

   The Universidad de Guadalajara (Mexico) has an interesting web site (in English) that provides a
number of examples of open pedagogy from around the world, related to its Agora project.

   Another practice of open pedagogy are textbook-free degrees, called Zed Creds or Z-degrees but also
ZTC (zero textbook cost). Royal Roads University's Masters of Arts in Learning and Technology is the
first master of arts degree in Canada to go textbook-free. Students can access all of the course materials
through open educational resources, e-books, journal articles and other free digital resources. These
types of courses aim to improve access to education and enhance student outcomes.

   Many more examples of open pedagogy in practice can be found in Jhangiani and Biswas-Diener
(2017) and in the Open Pedagogy Notebook.

   Lastly, there is a related movement around open educational infrastructure and technology that
challenges educational institutions and students to think about who owns the technology and data being
used for teaching and learning and how open education practices can be enabled by open educational
technologies (see, for example OpenETC.)

11.4.3 The need to provide a framework to support open educational resources

The search for a pedagogical and organizational framework to support the use of open educational
resources has been driven partly by the relative slowness of adoption of OER. To give a simple example,
instructors are reluctant to move away from expensive commercial first year textbooks, because these
books often come with a wide range of support materials, such as interactive web sites with sample exam
questions and answers, multiple-choice questions, and alternative reading. Open textbooks need to come
with similar supporting materials, student activities and a wider `network' of support to compete with
commercial textbooks.

   Paul Stacey, the Director of the Open Education Consortium, has mused (2018) that too much focus
is given to licensing and content development, and not enough to collectively managing open resources
so that they are sustainable and dynamic. He argues that OER, to be effective, need `commoning', which
reflects the management and sustainability of common, shared resources and services. He argues for:
                                                                                                                                    11.4 Open pedagogy 591

         · a social system for the long-term stewardship of resources that preserves shared values and
            community identity;

         · a self-organized system by which communities manage resources (both depletable and and
            replenishable) with minimal or no reliance on the Market or State. Simply having a
            community and pool of resources is not enough. There needs to be a set of protocols, values
            and norms devised by the community to manage its resources.

Open pedagogy could provide an important pedagogical part of such a framework, but Stacey seems to
be suggesting that support needs to go beyond pedagogy to a social and management structure.

11.4.4 Is open pedagogy a useful construct?

Some of you may feel like Molière's Bourgeois Gentilhomme after a lesson from his tutor: `I have been
speaking prose for 40 years and never realised it.' The concept of `open pedagogy' has been around for
a long time, even if it has seen a revival resulting from the development of OER.

   Lord Crowther, in a speech presenting the charter of the British Open University in 1969, defined the
Open University as:

         · open to people: "We took it as axiomatic" said the Planning Committee "that no formal
            academic qualifications would be required for registration as a student...Anyone could try his
            or her hand, and only failure to progress adequately would be a bar to continuation of
            studies."

         · open to places: "This University has no cloisters - a word meaning closed. We have no courts
            - or spaces enclosed by buildings....Wherever the English language is spoken or understood,
            or used as a medium of study, and wherever there are men and women seeking to develop
            their individual potentialities beyond the limits of the local provision - and I have defined a
            large part of the world - there we can offer our help."

         · open to methods: `Every new form of human communication will be examined to see how it
            can be used to raise and broaden the level of human understanding."

         · open to ideas: "It has been said that there are two aspects of education, both necessary. One
            regards the individual human mind as a vessel, of varying capacity, into which is to be poured
            as much as it will hold of the knowledge and experience by which human Society lives and
            moves. This is the Martha of education - and we shall have plenty of these tasks to perform.
            But the Mary regards the human mind rather as a fire that has to be set alight and blown with
            the divine efflatus'.

I am not sure that open pedagogy is the divine efflatus, but Crowther's understanding of openness in
methods is much wider than modern concepts of open pedagogy.

   Claude Paquette, following the cultural revolution in Québec, wrote in 1979:

     Une pédagogie ouverte est centrée sur l'interaction qui existe dans une classe entre l'étudiant
     et l'environnement éducatif qui lui est proposé....Il s'agit d'une façon de penser et d'une façon
     d'agir. L'éducateur aura donc pour rôle premier de contribuer à l'aménagement de cet
     environnement éducatif.
592 Chapter 11: Trends in open education

     [My translation: Open pedagogy is focused on the interaction within a class between a learner and
     the educational environment that is created for him. It is about a way of thinking and a way of
     acting. The primary role of the teacher then is to contribute to the management of this educational
     environment.'

   Note that there is no mention of free or open educational resources, and the quote could have come
straight from Rousseau's `Emile' (1972). It is the basis for the whole of Chapter 6 in this book.

   David Wiley (who was the originator of the term `open educational resources') writes (2017):

     "Open" .... does not have anything to say about the nature of learning. ...you can't actually
     build a pedagogy on a foundation of open (well, not one that isn't incredibly impoverished). Your
     foundational commitments in terms of pedagogy should be to an understanding of how learning
     happens. Once we have made fundamental commitments in terms of a theory of learning, then we
     can add open to our list of facilitating methods in order get better leverage.

     I wonder if it isn't nonsensical to talk about "open pedagogy" at all ...... Perhaps we should
     only use open as a modifier for other pedagogies, like "open constructionist pedagogy" or "open
     connectivist pedagogy" or "open constructivist pedagogy." It's clear in each of those cases how
     open gives you better leverage in terms of supporting learning.

   Although many of the practices associated with open pedagogy have been around long before open
educational resources were created, OER nevertheless make such practices much easier to implement
and more powerful. But does this make a new pedagogy?

   Morgan (2017) raises this issue with respect to the project she worked on for the Universidad de
Guadalajara's Agora project.

     The Agora design process was focussed on what an open design would actually be a means to which
     can be summarized as:

       1. Open as a means to facilitate a faculty culture of collaboration across the university and
            across disciplines

       2. Open as a means to connect with a broader, global community

       3. Open as means to challenge and expand existing understandings of student centre learning

       4. Open as means to challenge ways of doing, in this case, the options and possibilities of
            digital technology and mobile learning

       5. Open as a means to make the lives of faculty easier in their pursuit of better teaching and
            learning

       6. Open as a means to create a sustainable approach to faculty development

     Ultimately we did create content that fits quite nicely with the 5Rs, but the goal of our open
     pedagogy design process was not to create OERs as a means towards or even as an essential
     component of open pedagogy. The Agora was alternatively all of the `isms - behaviourism,
     connectivism, constructivism, constructionism - but the ism doesn't really matter. Importantly, the
     open pedagogy design was at times technology-enabled and at times it didn't use technology or the
                                                                                                                                    11.4 Open pedagogy 593

     internet at all. OERs didn't allow us to practice a different pedagogy, rather the open pedagogy of
     the Agora was a bricolage of activities and practices that at times resulted in OERs and at times
     didn't.

   Pedagogy is primarily about practice: what teachers or learners do. Obviously, practice is and should
be driven by ideas and beliefs, but it is different from philosophy. Learner-centred teaching or learners
creating knowledge (with or without OER) is a pedagogy; `open' is more of an idea and a value.
In other words, looking at the quotations above, open is more a philosophy, a way of thinking, that
informs practice, rather than the practice itself. However, this is a somewhat academic distinction. OER
is enabling changes in teaching practice. However, I prefer a broader vision for teaching in a digital age
than one so closely tied to OER.

11.4.5 Another vision for pedagogy in a digital age

The increasing availability of high quality open content is likely to facilitate the shift from information
transmission by the instructor to knowledge management by the learner. Also in a digital age there
is a need for greater focus on skills development embedded within a subject domain than on the
memorisation of content.

   The use of open educational resources could enable these developments in a number of ways, such as:

         · a learner-centered teaching approach that focuses on students accessing content on the
            Internet (and in real life) as part of developing knowledge, skills and competencies defined
            by the instructor, or learners managing their learning for themselves; however, content would
            not be restricted to officially designated open educational resources, but to everything on the
            Internet, because one of the core skills students will need is how to assess and evaluate
            different sources of information;

         · a consortium of teachers or institutions creating common learning materials within a broader
            program context, that can be shared both within and outside the consortium. However, not
            only would the content be freely available, but also the underlying instructional principles,
            learning outcomes, learner assessment strategies, what learner support is needed, learner
            activities, and program evaluation techniques, so that other instructors or learners can adapt
            all this to their own context. This approach is already being taken by:

                      the Carnegie Mellon Open Learning Initiative

                      to some extent by the UK Open University's OpenLearn project

                      the Virtual University of Small States of the Commonwealth

                      OER Africa

                      OERu

Overall, such developments are likely to lead to a severe reduction in lecture-based teaching and a move
towards more project work, problem-based learning and collaborative learning. It will also result in a
move away from fixed time and place written examinations, to more continuous, portfolio-based forms
of assessment.

   The role of the instructor then will shift to providing guidance to learners on where and how to find
594 Chapter 11: Trends in open education

content, how to evaluate the relevance and reliability of content, what content areas are core and what
peripheral, and to helping students analyse, apply and present information, within a strong learning
design that focuses on clearly defined learning outcomes, particularly with regard to the development of
skills. Students will work mainly online and collaboratively, developing multi-media learning artefacts
or demonstrations of their learning, managing their online portfolios of work, and editing and presenting
selected work for assessment.

   This is a far broader vision of pedagogy than that built around the use of OER.

11.4.6 Conclusion

In summary:

         · increasingly, educational resources are becoming more freely and more openly available for
            teachers and learners;

         · OER open up the possibility of greater student participation in the creation as well as the
            selection of learning materials;

         · it is essential to embed OER within a robust and appropriate teaching framework or
            pedagogy that exploits the potential of OER;

       · OER may lead to a new, open pedagogy, but more likely will lead to the greater
          adoption and adaptation of existing teaching methods that benefit from the
          potential of OER;

         · it is also essential to create organizational environments or management frameworks that
            encourage and support the development and use of high quality open educational resources;
            they cannot successfully exist in a vacuum;

         · what should drive open educational practices and use of OERs should be a broader vision of
            teaching and learning that focuses on the knowledge and skills students need in a digital age.
            OER should be embedded in a wider concept of pedagogy than just `open' pedagogy.

References

Conole, G. (2014) The 7Cs of Learning Design - a new approach to rethinking design practice 9th
International Conference on Networked Learning, Edinburgh

   Crowther, G. (1969) This is the Open University, London, UK, 23 July
   DeRosa, R. and Jhangiani, R. (2017) Open Pedagogy, in Mays, E. (ed.) A Guide to making Open
Textbooks with Students, The Rebus Community
   DeRosa, R. and Robison, S. (2017) From OER to Open Pedagogy: Harnessing the Power of Open
in Jhangiani, R S. and Biswas-Diener, R. (2017 Open: The Philosophy and Practices that are
Revolutionizing Education and Science London: Ubiquity Press.
   Hegarty, B. (2015) Attributes of open pedagogy: a model for using open educational resources
Educational Technology, July-August
   Jhangiani, R. and Biswas-Diener, R. (eds.) (2017) Open: The Philosophy and Practices that are
Revolutionizing Education and Science London: Ubiquity Press.
   Mak, S. et al. (2010). Blogs and forums as communication and learning tools in a MOOC in
                                                                                                                                    11.4 Open pedagogy 595

L. Dirckinck-Holmfeld et al. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Networked
Learning 2010 (pp. 275-284)

   Morgan, T. (2017) Reflections on #OER17 - From Beyond Content to Open Pedagogy Explorations
in the Ed Tech World, 13 April

   Paquette, C. (1979) Quelques fondements d'une pédagogie ouverte Québec Français, Vol. 36
   Rousseau, J.-J. (1762) Émile, ou de l'Éducation (Trans. Allan Bloom). New York: Basic Books, 1979
   Stacey, P. (2018) Global Education Commons Steward Musings on the Ed Tech Frontier, February 8
   Wiley, D. (2017) When opens collide, iterating toward openness, 21 April

                                                  Activity 11.4 Contemplating open pedagogy

             1. How does open pedagogy differ from other teaching methods such as experiential learning or
                 problem-based learning? What makes open pedagogy unique, if anything? Does it matter?

             2. Look at one of the modules or topics you are currently teaching. How could you re-design it to
                 reflect an open pedagogical approach? What would be the advantages and disadvantages of doing
                 this?

             3. What support beyond your commitment and time would be necessary for you to be able
                 successfully to integrate OER into your teaching?
11.5 The implications of `open' for course and program design: towards
a paradigm shift?

11.4.1 An open and free beach, Pie de la Cuesta, Mexico
Image: © Tony Bates 2015 CC BY-NC

   Although in recent years MOOCs, emerging technologies and artificial intelligence have been
receiving all the media attention, I believe that developments in open educational resources, open
textbooks, open research and open data will be far more important and far more revolutionary. Here are
some reasons why.

                                                                   597
598 Chapter 11: Trends in open education

11.5.1 Nearly all educational content will be free and open

Eventually most academic content will be easily accessible and freely available through the Internet -
for anyone. This could well mean a shift in power from teachers and instructors to students. Students will
no longer be dependent on `live' instructors as their primary source of content. Already some students
are skipping lectures at their local institution because the teaching of the topic is better and clearer on
OpenCourseWare, MOOCs or the Khan Academy. If students can access the best lectures or learning
materials for free from anywhere in the world, including the leading Ivy League universities, why would
they want to get content from a middling lecturer at Midwest State University? What is the added value
that this lecturer is providing for the students?

   There are good answers to this question, but it means considering very carefully how content will
be presented and shaped by a teacher or instructor that makes it uniquely different from what students
can access elsewhere. For research professors this may include access to their latest, as yet unpublished,
research; for other instructors, it may be their unique perspective on a particular topic, and for others, a
unique mix of topics to provide an integrated, inter-disciplinary approach. What will not be acceptable
to most students is repackaging of `standard' content that can easily be found elsewhere on the Internet
and at a higher quality.

   Furthermore, if we look at knowledge management as one of the key skills needed in a digital age, it
may be better to enable students to find, analyze, evaluate and apply content than for instructors to do it
for them. If most content is available elsewhere, what students will look for increasingly from their local
institutions is support with their learning, rather than the delivery of content. This means directing them
to appropriate sources of content, helping when students are struggling with concepts, and providing
opportunities for students to apply their knowledge and to develop and practice skills. It means giving
prompt and relevant feedback as and when students need it. Above all, it means creating a rich learning
environment in which students can study (see Chapter 6). It means moving teaching from information
transmission to knowledge management, from selecting, structuring and delivering content to learner
support.

   Thus for most students within their university or college (with the possible exception of the most
advanced research universities) the quality of the learning support will eventually matter more than the
quality of content delivery, which they can get from anywhere. This is a major challenge for instructors
who see themselves primarily as content experts and deliverers.

11.5.2 Modularisation
                                      11.5 The implications of `open' for course and program design: towards a paradigm shift? 599

Figure 11.5.2 Four-sided pyramid, by Sol LeWitt, 1999
Image: Cliff, Flickr, © CC Attribution 2.0

   The creation of open educational resources, either as small learning objects but increasingly as short
`modules' of teaching, from anywhere between five minutes to one hour of material, and the increasing
diversification of markets, is beginning to result in two of the key principles of OER being applied, re-
use and re-mix. In other words, the same content, available in an openly accessible digital form, may
be integrated into a range of different applications, and/or combined with other OER to create a single
teaching module, course or program, as in Scenario H.

   Between 2015 to 2018, the Ontario government, through its online course development fund,
encouraged institutions to create OER. As a result, several universities brought together faculty within
their own institution but working in different departments that teach the same area of content (for
example, statistics) to develop `core' OER that can be shared between departments. The logical next
step would be for statistics faculty across the Ontario system to get together and develop an integrated
set of OER modules on statistics that would cover substantial parts of the statistics curriculum. Working
together would have the following benefits:
600 Chapter 11: Trends in open education

         · higher quality by pooling resources (two subject expert heads are better than one, combined
            with support from instructional designers and web producers);

         · more OER than one instructor or institution could produce;
         · subject coherence and lack of duplication;
         · more likelihood of faculty in one institution using materials created in another if they have

            had input to the selection and design of the OER from other institutions.

As the range and quality of OER increases, instructors (and students) will be able to build curriculum
through a set of OER `building blocks'. The aim would be to reduce instructor time in creating materials
and using their time more in supporting student learning than in delivering content. When they do create
original material, it can then be shared with other instructors.

11.5.3 Disaggregation of services

Open education and digitisation enable what has tended to be offered by institutions as a complete
bundle of services to be split out and offered separately, depending on the market for education and the
unique needs of individual learners. These different services could be as follows:

         · academic guidance (assessment of learning needs; admission counselling)
         · choice of educational goals/outcomes/competencies
         · access to `open' digital content in the form of OER or MOOCs
         · learner support, including a choice of

                      topic guidance (build a curriculum)
                      tutoring on demand (for example, when students are `stuck')
                      different learning activities (tests, projects, etc.)
                      feedback on learning activities
                      assessment preparation
         · assessment on demand

Learners will select and use those modules or services that best fit their needs. This is likely to be the
pattern for lifelong learners in particular. Some early indications of this process are already occurring,
although most of the really significant changes are yet to come.
                                      11.5 The implications of `open' for course and program design: towards a paradigm shift? 601

Figure 11.5.3 Disaggregation
Image: © Aaron `tango' Tan, Flickr, CC Attribution 2.0

11.5.3.1 Admission and program counselling

This is a service already offered by Empire State University, a part of the State University of New York,
through its pre-enrollment advisers. Adult learners considering a return to study or a career change can
receive mentoring about what courses and combinations they can take from within the college that fit
with their previous life and their future wishes. In essence, within boundaries potential students are able
to design their own degree. In the future, some institutions might specialise in this kind of service at a
system level.

11.5.3.2 Build a curriculum

Students could be advised on an appropriate curriculum that can be built to fit their needs. For instance,
Dalhousie University's Faculty of Computer Sciences has built a tool called Daedalus which basically
enables the construction of a map showing the inter-relatedness between specific learning outcomes
and course content, including course sequencing (see Contact North's Pockets of Innovation for more
details).

   Once such a map of a degree program or other qualification or curriculum has been built, students can
then navigate their own choice of courses or route through a curriculum - and perhaps negotiate what is
needed for a degree. This could just as easily be based on OER as classroom teaching.
602 Chapter 11: Trends in open education

Figure 11.5.4 Daedalus. This shows the relationship between the pre-requisite courses for CSCI 2110 (below) and the
courses for which CSCI 2110 is a preparation (above). By clicking on each of the courses listed, students can see the
learning outcomes both needed before studying and what they should achieve after studying each course.

11.5.3.3 Learner support

Students may have already determined what they want to study through the Internet, such as a MOOC.
What they are looking for is help with their studies: how to write assignments, where to look for
information, feedback on their work and thinking. They are not necessarily looking for a credit, degree
or other qualification, but if they are they will pay for assessment separately. Currently, students pay
private tutors for this service. However, it is feasible that institutions could also provide this service,
provided that a suitable business model can be built.

11.5.3.4 Assessment

Learners may feel that through prior study and work, they are able to take a challenge exam for credit.
Alternatively a learner may wish to present a portfolio of work to demonstrate their knowledge and
skills. All they require from the institution is a chance to be assessed. Institutions such as Western
Governors' University or the Open Learning division of Thompson Rivers University are already
offering this service, and this would be a logical next step for the many other universities or colleges
with some form of prior learning assessment or PLAR.

11.5.3.5 `Assembled' qualifications

Learners may have acquired a range of credits, badges or certificates from a range of different
institutions. The institution assesses these qualifications and experiences and helps the learner to take
                                      11.5 The implications of `open' for course and program design: towards a paradigm shift? 603

any further studies that are necessary, then awards the qualification. Prior learning assessment or PLAR
is one step in this direction, but not the only one.

11.5.3.6 A discount on fully online courses and programs

For learners who cannot or do not want to attend campus, the course fees would be lower for online
courses than for students receiving a full campus experience.

11.5.3.7 Open access to content

In this case, the learner is not looking for any qualification, but wants access to content, particularly new
and emerging knowledge. MOOCs are one example, but other examples include OpenLearn and open
textbooks.

11.5.3.8 The full campus experience

This would be the `traditional' integrated package that full-time, campus-based students now receive.
This would though be fully costed and much more expensive than any of the other single disaggregated
services.

11.5.3.9 Funding models

Note that I have been careful not to link any of these services to a specific funding model. This is
deliberate, because it could be:

         · covered through privatisation, where each service is separately priced and the user pays for
            that service (but not for others not used);

         · financed through a voucher system, whereby everyone at the age 18 is entitled to a notional
            amount of financial support from the state for post-secondary education, and can pay for a
            range of service from that voucher until their individual fund is exhausted;

         · all or some services would be available for free as part of a publicly funded open education
            system

         · a mix of the above.

Whatever the funding model, institutions disaggregating services will need to be able to price different
services accurately.

11.5.3.10 The argument against disaggregation

There are also strong arguments against the disaggregation of services. Gallagher (2019) argues that the
successful colleges and universities of the future will be integrated: coherently and cohesively designed
to help students achieve a lifelong learning experience that is more than the sum of its parts.

   However, this is not a question of either/or and should be driven to some extent by the needs of
learners at different points in their learning cycle. Most younger students coming from high school
probably will need an integrated college experience. However, working adults or students who have
604 Chapter 11: Trends in open education

graduated may not want, need or can afford the full package. Disaggregation will provide the flexibility
needed for lifelong learning.

11.5.3.11 The need for more flexibility in services

In any case, there is now an increasing diversity of learners' needs, from high school students wanting
full-time education, graduate students wanting to do research, and lifelong learners, most of whom will
have already passed through a publicly funded higher education system, wanting to keep learning either
for vocational or personal reasons. This increasing diversity of needs requires a more flexible approach
to providing educational opportunities in a digital age. Disaggregation of services and new models
of funding, combined with increased accessibility to free, open content, are some ways in which this
flexibility can be provided. For alternative views on this issue, see Carey, 2015; Large, 2015.

11.5.4 Conclusions

Despite all the hoopla around MOOCs, they are essentially a dead end with regard to providing learners
who do not have adequate access to education with what they want: high quality qualifications. The main
barrier to education is not lack of cheap content but lack of access to programs leading to credentials,
either because such programs are too expensive, or because there are not enough qualified teachers, or
both. Making content free is not a waste of time (if it is properly designed for secondary use), but it still
needs a lot of time and effort to integrate it properly within a learning framework.

   Open educational resources do have an important role to play in online education, but they need to be
properly designed, and developed within a broader learning context that includes the critical activities
needed to support learning, such as opportunities for student-instructor and peer interaction, and within
a culture of sharing, such as consortia of equal partners and other frameworks that provide a context that
encourages and supports sharing. In other words, OER need skill and hard work to make them useful,
and selling them as a panacea for education does more harm than good.

   Although open and flexible learning and distance education and online learning mean different things,
the one thing they all have in common is an attempt to provide alternative means of high quality
education or training for those who either cannot take conventional, campus-based programs, or choose
not to.

   Lastly, there are no insurmountable legal or technical barriers now to making educational material
free. The successful use of OER does though require a particular mindset among both copyright holders
- the creators of materials - and users - teachers and instructors who could use this material in their
teaching. Thus the main challenge is one of cultural change.

   In the end, a well-funded public higher education system remains the best way to assure access
to higher education for the majority of the population. Having said that, there is enormous scope for
improvements within that system. Open education and its tools offer a most promising way to bring
about some much needed improvements.

11.5.5 The future is yours

This is just my interpretation of how approaches to `open' content and resources could radically change
the way we teach and how students will learn in the future. At the beginning of this chapter there is a
scenario I created which suggests how this might play out in one particular program.

   More importantly, there is not just one future scenario, but many. The future will be determined by
                                      11.5 The implications of `open' for course and program design: towards a paradigm shift? 605

a host of factors, many outside the control of teachers and instructors. But the strongest weapon we
have as teachers is our own imagination and vision. Open content and open learning reflect a particular
philosophy of equality and opportunity created through education. There are many different ways in
which we as teachers, and even more our learners, can decide to apply that philosophy. However, the
technology now offers us many more choices in making these decisions. Thus there is scope for many
more scenarios that aim to extend access and educational opportunities.

References and further reading

Carey, K. (2015) The End of College New York: Riverhead Books
   Large, L. (2015) Rebundling College Inside Higher Ed, April 7
   Gallagher, C. (2019) Integrative Learning for a Divided World Baltimore ML: John Hopkins Press

                                                                     Activity 11.5 Build your own scenario

   1. Re-read Scenario H. Could you build a future scenario for your own courses and programs, that exploit fully
   the use of OER and different delivery modes?

      (This will be easier and more effective if you could do this with a range of other faculty, instructional
   designers and web producers, through, for instance, a faculty development workshop).

                                                                            Key Takeaways

      1. Open educational resources offer many benefits but they need to be well designed and embedded within
   a rich learning environment to be effective.

      2. The increasing availability of OER, open textbooks, open research and open data means that in future,
   almost all academic content will be open and freely accessible over the Internet.

      3. As a result, students will increasingly look to institutions for learning support and help with the
   development of skills needed in a digital age rather than with the delivery of content. This will have major
   consequences for the role of teachers/instructors and the design of courses.

      4. OER and other forms of open education will lead to increased modularization and disaggregation of
   learning services, which are needed to respond to the increasing diversity of learner needs in a digital age.

      5. MOOCs are essentially a dead end with regard to providing learners who do not have adequate access to
   education with high quality qualifications. The main value of MOOCs is in providing opportunities for non-
   formal education and supporting communities of practice.

      6. OER, MOOCs, open textbooks and other digital forms of open-ness are important in helping to widen
   access to learning opportunities, but ultimately these are enhancements rather than a replacement for a well-
   funded public education system, which remains the core foundation for enabling equal access to educational
   opportunities.
Chapter 12: Ensuring quality teaching in a digital age

   Purpose of the chapter
      When you have read this chapter, and in conjunction with what has been learned in previous chapters, you

   should be able to:
              · define quality in terms of teaching in a digital age;
              · determine what your preferred approaches are to teaching and learning;
              · decide what mode of delivery is most appropriate for any course you are responsible for;
              · understand why teamwork is essential for effective teaching in a digital age;
              · make best use of existing resources for any course;
              · choose and use the right technology and tools to support your learning;
              · set appropriate learning goals for teaching in a digital age;
              · design an appropriate course structure and set of learning activities;
              · know when and how to communicate with learners;
              · evaluate your teaching, make necessary improvements, and improve your teaching through
                 further innovation.

What is covered in this chapter

         · 12.1 What do we mean by quality when teaching in a digital age?
         · 12.2 Nine steps to quality teaching in a digital age
         · 12.3 Step One: Decide how you want to teach
         · 12.4 Step two: what kind of course or program?
         · 12.5 Step three: work in a team
         · 12.6 Step four: build on existing resources
         · 12.7 Step five: master the technology
         · 12.8 Step six: set appropriate learning goals
         · 12.9 Step seven: design course structure and learning activities
         · 12.10 Step eight: communicate, communicate, communicate
         · 12.11 Step nine: evaluate and innovate

                                                                   607
608 A.W. (Tony) Bates

         · 12.12 Building a strong foundation of course design

Also in this chapter you will find the following activities:

         · Activity 12.1 Defining quality in teaching and learning
         · Activity 12.2 There is no activity for this section
         · Activity 12.3 Re-thinking your teaching
         · Activity 12.4 Which mode of delivery?
         · Activity 12. 5 There is no activity for this section
         · Activity 12.6 Building on existing resources
         · Activity 12.7 Mastering the technology
         · Activity 12.8 Setting learning goals
         · Activity 12.9 Structuring your course or program
         · Activity 12.10 Communicating with your students
         · Activity 12.11 Evaluating your course or program
         · Activity 12.12 There is no activity for this section.

                                                                            Key Takeaways

      1. For the purposes of this book, quality is defined as: teaching methods that successfully help learners
   develop the knowledge and skills they will require in a digital age.

      2. Formal national and institutional quality assurance processes do not guarantee quality teaching and
   learning. In particular, they focus on past `best' practices, processes to be done before actual teaching, and
   often ignore the affective, emotional or personal aspects of learning. Nor do they focus particularly on the
   needs of learners in a digital age.

      3. New technologies and the needs of learners in a digital age require a re-thinking of traditional campus-
   based teaching, especially where it is has been based mainly on the transmission of knowledge. This means re-
   assessing the way you teach and determining how you would really like to teach in a digital age. This requires
   imagination and vision rather than technical expertise.

      4. It is important to determine the most appropriate mode of delivery, based on teaching philosophy, the
   needs of students, the demands of the discipline, and the resources available.

      5. It is best to work in a team. Blended and especially fully online learning require a range of skills that most
   instructors are unlikely to have. Good course design not only enables students to learn better but also controls
   faculty workload. Courses look better with good graphic and web design and professional video production.
   Specialist technical help frees up instructors to concentrate on the knowledge and skills that students need to
   develop.

      6. Full use should be made of existing resources, including institutionally-supported learning technologies,
   open educational resources, learning technology staff, and the experience of your colleagues.

      7. The main technologies you will be using should be mastered, so you are professional and knowledgeable
   about their strengths and weaknesses for teaching.
                                                                                                                     Teahing in a Digital Age - 2e 609

   8. Learning goals that are appropriate for learners in a digital age need to be set. The skills students need
should be embedded within their subject domain, and these skills should be formally assessed.

   9. A coherent and clearly communicable structure and learning activities for a course should be developed
that are manageable in terms of workload for both students and instructor.

   10. Regular and on-going instructor/teacher presence, especially when students are studying partly or wholly
online, is essential for student success. This means effective communication between teacher/instructor and
students. It is particularly important to encourage inter-student communication, either face-to-face or online.

   11. The extent to which the new learning goals of re-designed courses aimed at developing the knowledge
and skills needed in a digital age have been achieved should be carefully evaluated and ways in which the
course could be improved should be identified.
12.1 What do we mean by quality when teaching in a digital age?

Figure 12.1.1 What do we mean by quality?
Image: © Wikipedia Commons

   If you have followed the journey through all the previous chapters of this book, you will have been
subject to a great deal of information: philosophical, empirical, technological, and administrative, set
within a framework of issues related to the needs of learners in a digital age. It is now time to pull all
this together into a pragmatic set of action steps that will enable you to apply these ideas and concepts
within the everyday circumstances of teaching.

   Thus the aim of this chapter is to provide some practical guidelines for teachers and instructors to
ensure quality teaching in a digital age. This will mean drawing on all the previous chapters in this book,
so there will inevitably be some repetition in this chapter of the content of earlier chapters. They aim
here is to pull it all together towards developing quality digitally-based courses and programs fit for a
digital age.

                                                                   611
612 Chapter 12: Ensuring quality teaching in a digital age

   . Before I do this, however, it is necessary to clarify what is meant by `quality' in teaching and
learning, because I am using `quality' here in a very specific way.

12.1.1 Definitions

Probably there is no other topic in education which generates so much discussion and controversy as
`quality'. Many books have been written on the topic, but I will cut to the chase and give my definition
of quality up-front. For the purposes of this book, quality is defined as:

     teaching methods that successfully help learners develop the knowledge and skills they will
     require in a digital age.

   This of course is my short answer to the question of what is quality. A longer answer means looking,
at least briefly, at:

         · institutional and degree accreditation;
         · internal (academic) quality assurance processes;
         · differences in quality assurance between traditional classroom teaching and online and

            distance education;
         · the relationship between quality assurance processes and learning outcomes;
         · `quality assurance fit for purpose': meeting the goals of education in a digital age.

This will then provide the foundations for my recommendations for quality teaching that will follow in
this chapter.

12.1.2 Institutional and degree accreditation

Most governments act to protect consumers in the education market by ensuring that institutions are
properly accredited and the qualifications they award are valid and are recognised as of being of
`quality.' However, the manner in which institutions and degrees are accredited varies a great deal. The
main difference is between the USA and virtually any other country.

   The U.S. Department of Education's Network for Education Information states in its description of
accreditation and quality assurance in the USA:

     Accreditation is the process used in U.S. education to ensure that schools, postsecondary
     institutions, and other education providers meet, and maintain, minimum standards of quality and
     integrity regarding academics, administration, and related services. It is a voluntary process based
     on the principle of academic self-governance. Schools, postsecondary institutions and programs
     (faculties) within institutions participate in accreditation. The entities which conduct accreditation
     are associations comprised of institutions and academic specialists in specific subjects, who
     establish and enforce standards of membership and procedures for conducting the accreditation
     process.

     Both the federal and state governments recognize accreditation as the mechanism by which
                                                                      12.1 What do we mean by quality when teaching in a digital age? 613

     institutional and programmatic legitimacy are ensured. In international terms, accreditation by a
     recognized accrediting authority is accepted as the U.S. equivalent of other countries' ministerial
     recognition of institutions belonging to national education systems.
   In other words, in the USA, accreditation and quality assurance is effectively self-regulated by
the educational institutions through their control of accreditation agencies, although the government
does have some `weapons of enforcement', mainly through the withdrawal of student financial aid for
students at any institution that the U.S. Department of Education deems to be failing to meet standards.
   In many other countries, government has the ultimate authority to accredit institutions and approve
degrees, although in countries such as Canada and the United Kingdom, this too is often exercised
by arm's length agencies appointed by government, but consisting mainly of representatives from the
various institutions within the system. These bodies have a variety of names, but Degree Quality
Assurance Board is a typical title. However, in recent years, some regulatory agencies such as the United
Kingdom's Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education have adopted formal quality assurance
processes based on practices that originated in industry. The U.K. QAA's revised Quality Code for
Higher Education is set out below:

Figure 12.1.2 The UK Higher Education Quality Code (accessed September, 2019)
614 Chapter 12: Ensuring quality teaching in a digital age

   However, although hardly contentious, such system-wide codes are too general for the specifics of
ensuring quality in a particular course. Many institutions as a result of pressure from external agencies
have therefore put in place formal quality assurance processes over and beyond the normal academic
approval processes (see Clarke-Okah and Daniel, 2010, for a typical, low-cost example).

12.1.3 Internal quality assurance

It can be seen then that the internal processes for ensuring quality programs within an institution
are particularly important. Although again the process can vary considerably between institutions, at
least in universities the process is fairly standard.

12.1.3.1 Assuring the quality of a program

A proposal for a new degree will usually originate from a group of faculty/instructors within a
department. The proposal will be discussed and amended at departmental and/or Faculty meetings, then
once approved will go to the university senate for final approval. The administration in the form of the
Provost's Office will usually be involved, particularly where resources, such as new appointments, are
required.

   Although this is probably an over-generalisation, significantly the proposal will contain information
about who will teach the course and their qualifications to teach it, the content to be covered within
the program (often as a list of courses with short descriptions), a set of required readings, and usually
something about how students will be assessed. Increasingly, such proposals may also include broad
learning outcomes for the program.

   If there is a proposal for courses within a program or the whole program to be delivered fully online,
it is likely that the proposal will come under greater internal scrutiny. What is unlikely to be included in
a proposal though is what methods of teaching will be used. This is usually considered the responsibility
of individual faculty members or the individual teacher (unless you are an adjunct or contract instructor).
It is this aspect of quality - the effectiveness of the teaching method or learning environment for
developing the knowledge and skills in a digital age - with which this chapter is concerned.

12.1.3.2 Assuring the quality of classroom teaching

There are many guidelines for quality traditional classroom teaching. Perhaps the most well known are
those of Chickering and Gamson (1987), based on an analysis of 50 years of research into best practices
in teaching. They argue that good practice in undergraduate education:

       1. Encourages contact between students and faculty.
       2. Develops reciprocity and cooperation among students.
       3. Encourages active learning.
       4. Gives prompt feedback.
       5. Emphasizes time on task.
       6. Communicates high expectations.
                                                                      12.1 What do we mean by quality when teaching in a digital age? 615

       7. Respects diverse talents and ways of learning.

However, these standards should apply equally to both face-to-face and online teaching.

12.1.3.3 Quality in online courses and programs

Because online learning was new and hence open to concern about its quality, there have also been many
guidelines, best practices and quality assurance criteria created and applied to online programming.
All these guidelines and procedures have been derived from the experience of previously successful
online programs, best practices in teaching and learning, and research and evaluation of online teaching
and learning. A comprehensive list of online quality assurance standards, organizations and research on
online learning can be found in Appendix 2.

   Jung and Latchem (2012), in a review of quality assessment processes in a large number of online
and distance education institutions around the world, make the following important points about quality
assurance processes for online and distance education within institutions:

         · focus on outcomes as the leading measure of quality;

         · take a systemic approach to quality assurance;

         · see QA as a process of continuous improvement;

         · move the institution from external controls to an internal culture of quality;

         · poor quality has very high costs so investment in quality is worthwhile.

Ensuring quality in online learning is not rocket science. There is no need to build a bureaucracy around
this, but there does need to be some mechanism, some way of monitoring instructors or institutions when
they fail to meet these standards. However, we should also do the same for campus-based teaching. As
more and more already accredited (and `high quality') campus-based institutions start moving into
hybrid learning, the establishment of quality in the online learning elements of programs will become
even more important.

12.1.4 Consistency in applying quality standards

There are plenty of evidence-based guidelines for ensuring quality in teaching, both face-to-face and
online. The main challenge then is to ensure that teachers and instructors are aware of these best
practices and that institutions have processes in place to ensure that guidelines for quality teaching are
implemented and followed.

   Quality assurance methods are valuable for agencies concerned about rogue private providers, or
institutions using online learning to cut corners or reduce costs without maintaining standards (for
instance, by hiring untrained adjuncts, and giving them an unacceptably high teacher-student ratio to
manage). QA methods can be useful for providing instructors new to teaching with technology, or
struggling with its use, with models of best practice to follow. But for any reputable state university or
college, the same quality assurance standards should apply equally to face-to-face and online teaching,
even if slightly adjusted for the difference in delivery method.
616 Chapter 12: Ensuring quality teaching in a digital age

12.1.5 Quality assurance, innovation and learning outcomes

Most QA processes are front-loaded, in that they focus on inputs - such as the academic qualifications
of faculty, or the processes to be adopted for effective teaching, such as clear learning objectives, or
systems-based course design methods, such as ADDIE - rather than outputs, such as what students
have actually learned. QA processes also tend to be backward-looking, that is, they focus on past best
practices.

   This needs to be considered especially when evaluating new teaching approaches. Butcher and
Hoosen (2014) state:

           The quality assurance of post-traditional higher education is not straightforward, because
           openness and flexibility are primary characteristics of these new approaches, whereas
           traditional approaches to quality assurance were designed for teaching and learning within
           more tightly structured frameworks.

   However, Butcher and Hoosen (2014) go on to say that:

           fundamental judgements about quality should not depend on whether education is provided
           in a traditional or post-traditional manner ...the growth of openness is unlikely to demand
           major changes to quality assurance practices in institutions. The principles of good quality
           higher education have not changed.... Quality distance education is a sub-set of quality
           education...Distance education should be subject to the same quality assurance mechanisms
           as education generally.'

   Such arguments though offer a particular challenge for teaching in a digital age, where learning
outcomes need to include the development of skills such as independent learning, facility in using
social media for communication, and knowledge management, skills that have often not been explicitly
identified in the past. Quality assurance processes are not usually tied to specific types of learning
outcomes, but are more closely linked to general performance measures such as course completion rates,
time to degree completion, or grades based on past learning goals.

   Furthermore, we have already seen in Chapters 9, 10 and 11 that new media and new methods of
teaching are emerging that have not been around long enough to be subject to analysis of best practices.
A too rigid view of quality assessment based on past practices could have serious negative implications
for innovation in teaching and for meeting newly emerging learning needs. `Best practice' may need
occasionally to be challenged, so new approaches can be experimented with and evaluated.

12.1.6 Getting to the essence of quality

Institutional accreditation, internal procedures for program approval and review, and formal quality
assurance processes, while important, particularly for external accountability, do not really get to the
heart of what quality is in teaching and learning. They are rather like the pomp and circumstance of
state occasions. The changing of the guard in front of the palace is ceremonial, rather than a practical
defence against revolution, invasion or a terrorist attack on the President or the monarchy. As important
as ceremonies and rituals are to national identity, a strong state is bound by deeper ties. Similarly, an
effective school, college or university is much more than the administrative processes that regulate
teaching and learning.
                                                                      12.1 What do we mean by quality when teaching in a digital age? 617

   At its worst, quality management can end up with many boxes on a questionnaire being ticked,
in that the management processes are all in place, without in fact investigating whether students are
really learning more or better as a result of using technology. In essence, teaching and learning are very
human activities, often requiring for success a strong bond between teacher and learner. There is a
powerful affective or motivational aspect of learning, which a `good' teacher can tap into and steer.

   One reason for the concern of many teachers and instructors about using technology for teaching is
that it will be difficult or even impossible to develop that emotional bond that helps see a learner through
difficulties or inspires someone to greater heights of understanding or passion for the subject. However,
technology is now flexible and powerful enough, when properly managed, to enable such bonds to be
developed, not only between teacher and learner, but also between learners themselves, even though they
may never meet in person.

   Thus any discussion of quality in education needs to recognise and accommodate these affective or
emotional aspects of learning. This is a factor that is too often ignored in behaviourist approaches to
the use of technology or to quality assurance. Consequently, in what follows in this chapter, as well as
incorporating best practices in technical terms, the more human aspects of teaching and learning are
considered, even or especially within technology-based learning environments.

12.1.7 Quality assurance: fit for purpose in a digital age

At the end of the day, the best guarantees of quality in teaching and learning fit for a digital age are:

         · well-qualified subject experts also well trained in both teaching methods and the use of
            technology for teaching;

         · highly qualified and professional learning technology support staff;

         · adequate resources, including appropriate teacher/student ratios;

         · appropriate methods of working (teamwork, project management);

         · systematic evaluation leading to continuous improvement.

Much more attention needs to be directed at what campus-based institutions are doing when they move
to hybrid or online learning. Are they following best practices, or even better, developing innovative,
better teaching methods that exploit the strengths of both classroom and online learning? The design
of xMOOCs and the high drop-out rates in the USA of many two year colleges new to online learning
suggest they are not.

   If the goal or purpose is to develop the knowledge and skills that learners will need in a digital
age, then this is the `standard' by which quality should be assessed, while at the same time taking
into account what we already know about general best practices in teaching. The recommendations for
quality teaching in a digital age that follow in this chapter are based on this key principle of `fit for
purpose'.

References and further reading

Butcher, N. and Hoosen, S. (2014) A Guide to Quality in Post-traditional Online Higher Education
Dallas TX: Academic Partnerships

   Chickering, A., and Gamson, Z. (1987) `Seven Principles for Good Practice in Undergraduate
Education' Washington Center News (originally published in AAHE Bulletin, March 1987)
618 Chapter 12: Ensuring quality teaching in a digital age

   Clarke-Okah, W. and Daniel, J. (2010) The Commonwealth of Learning: Review and Improvement
Model Burnaby BC: Commonwealth of Learning

   Jung, I. and Latchem, C. (2012) Quality Assurance and Accreditation in Distance Education and e-
Learning New York/London: Routledge

                                                          Activity 12.1 Defining quality in teaching and learning

   What do you think of the current system of
              · institutional accreditation and
              · internal quality assurance processes?

      Do these current processes guarantee quality in teaching and learning for a digital age? If not, why not?
12.2 Nine steps to quality teaching in a digital age

Figure 12.2.1 Stepping stones, Dovedale, UK Image: Tony Bates

   In the previous section, I pointed out that there are lots of excellent quality assurance standards,
organizations and research available online, and I'm not going to duplicate these. Instead, I'm going to
suggest a series of practical steps towards implementing such standards.
12.2.1 An alternative to using the ADDIE model to assure quality
I am assuming that all the standard institutional processes towards program approval have been taken,

                                                                   619
620 Chapter 12: Ensuring quality teaching in a digital age

although it is worth pointing out that it might be worth thinking through my nine steps outlined
below before finally submitting a proposal for a new blended or online course or program. My nine steps
approach would also work when considering the redesign of an existing course.

   The `standard' quality practice for developing a fully online course would be to develop a systems
approach to design through something like the ADDIE model (see Chapter 4, Section 3). Puzziferro and
Shelton (2008) provide an excellent example.

   However, I have already pointed to some of the limitations of a systems approach in the volatile,
uncertain, chaotic and ambiguous digital age (Chapter 4, Section 7), and in any case, I think we need a
process that works not only for fully online courses but also for face-to-face, blended and hybrid courses
and programs. So I am aiming for a more flexible but still systematic approach to quality course design,
but broad enough to include a wide range of delivery methods. To get a sense of the difference in my
approach to a `standard' systems model, the ADDIE model wouldn't kick in until around Step 6 below.

   Furthermore, it is not enough just to look at the actual teaching of the course, but also at building
a complete learning environment in which the learning will take place (see Chapter 6). So to provide a
quality framework, I will outline nine steps, although they are more likely to be developed in parallel
than sequentially. Nevertheless there is a logic to the order.

       1. Step 1: Decide how you want to teach

       2. Step 2: Decide on mode of delivery

       3. Step 3: Work in a Team

       4. Step 4: Build on existing resources

       5. Step 5: Master the technology

       6. Step 6: Set appropriate learning goals

       7. Step 7: Design course structure and learning activities

       8. Step 8: Communicate, communicate, communicate

       9. Step 9: Evaluate and innovate

These steps will draw on material from earlier in this book. Indeed, if you have been doing the activities
thoroughly, you may already be able to answer the questions raised as you work through each of the nine
steps.

Reference

Puzziferro, M., & Shelton, K. (2008). A model for developing high-quality online courses: Integrating a
systems approach with learning theory Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, Vol. 12, Nos. 3-4
12.3 Step One: Decide how you want to teach

12.3.1 How do I want to teach?
Image: Remix © by Tony Bates, 2010: original photos: UBC Library

   Of all the nine steps, this is the most important, and, for most instructors, the most challenging, as it
may mean changing long established patterns of behaviour.
12.3.1 How would I really like to teach this course?
This question asks you to consider your basic teaching philosophy. What is my role as an instructor? Do
I take an objectivist view, that knowledge is finite and defined, that I am an expert in the subject matter
who knows more than the students, and thus my job is to ensure that I transfer as effectively as possible
that information or knowledge to the student? Or do I see learning as individual development where my
role is to help learners to acquire the ability to question, analyse and apply information or knowledge?

   Do I see myself more as a guide or facilitator of learning for students? Or maybe you would like
to teach in the latter way, but you are faced in classroom teaching with a class of 200 students which

                                                                   621
622 Chapter 12: Ensuring quality teaching in a digital age

forces you to fall back on a more didactic form of teaching. Or maybe you would like to combine both
approaches but can't because of the restrictions of timetables and curriculum.

   Chapters 2, 3 and 4 set out some of the choices available to you in deciding how you want to teach, in
terms of overall philosophy.

12.3.2 What's wrong with the way I'm teaching at the moment?

Another place to start would be by thinking about what you don't like about the current course(s) you
are teaching. Is there too much content to be covered? Could you deal with this in another way, perhaps
by getting students to find, analyse and apply content to solve problems or do research? Could you focus
more on skills in this context? If so, how could you provide appropriate activities to enable students to
practice these skills? How much of this could they do on their own, so you can manage your workload
better?

   Are the students too diverse, in that some students really struggle while others are impatient to move
ahead? How could I make the teaching more personalised, so that students at all levels of ability could
succeed in this course? Could I organise my teaching so that students who struggle can spend more time
on task, or those that are racing ahead have more advanced work to do?

   Or perhaps you are not getting enough discussion or critical thinking because the class is too large.
Could you use technology and re-organise the class differently to get students studying in small groups,
but in such a way you can monitor and guide the discussions? Can you break the work up into chunks
that the students should be able to do on their own, such as mastering the content, so you can focus on
discussion and critical thinking with students when they come to class?

   For instance, by moving a great deal of the content online, maybe you can free up more time for
interaction with students, in large or smaller groups, either in class or online, and at the same time reduce
the number of lectures to large classes. Some instructors have redesigned large lecture classes of 200
students, by breaking down the class into 10 groups, moving much of the lecture material online, and
then the instructor spends at least one week with each of the 10 groups in online discussion, interaction
and group activities, thus getting more interaction with all the students.

   In another context, do you feel restricted by the limitations of what can be done in labs or workshops,
because of the time it takes to set up experiments or equipment, or because students don't really have
enough hands-on time? Could I re-organise the teaching so that students do a lot of preparation online,
so they can concentrate in the lab or workshop on what they have to do by hand. Could they report on
their lab or workshop experiences afterwards, online, through an e-portfolio, for instance? Can I find
good open educational resources, such as video or simulations, that would reduce the need for lab time?
Or could I create good quality demonstration videos, so I can spend more time talking with students
about the implications?

   Finally, are you just overloaded with work on this course, because there are too many student
questions to be answered, or too many assignments to mark? How could you re-organise the course to
manage your work-load more easily? Could students do more by working together and helping each
other? if so, how would you create groups that might meet this goal? Could you change the nature of the
assignments so that students do more project work, and slowly build e-portfolios of their work during the
course so you can more easily monitor their progress, while at the same time building up an assessment
of their learning?
                                                 12.3 Step One: Decide how you want to teach 623

12.3.3 Use technology to re-think your teaching

Considering using new technologies or an alternative delivery method will give you an opportunity to
rethink your teaching, perhaps to be able to tackle some of the limitations of classroom teaching, and to
renew your approach to teaching. One way to help you rethink how you want to teach is to think of how
you could build a rich learning environment for the course (see Chapter 6).

   Using technology or moving part or all of your course online opens up a range of possibilities for
teaching that may not be possible in the confines of a scheduled three credit weekly semester of lectures
(see Chapter 4). It may mean not doing everything online, but focusing the campus experience on what
can only be done on campus. Alternatively, it may enable you to totally rethink the curriculum, to exploit
some of the benefits of online learning, such as getting students to find, analyse and apply information
for themselves.

   Thus if you are thinking about a new course, or redesigning one that you are not too happy with,
take the opportunity before you start teaching the course or program to think about how you'd really
like to be teaching, and whether this can be accommodated in a different learning environment. It's not
a decision you have to make immediately though. As you work through the nine steps, it will become
easier to make this decision. The important point is to be open to doing things differently.

   Chapter 4 and Chapters 10 and 11 suggest a variety of approaches to teaching that might fit with the
answers to some of these questions.

12.3.4 What NOT to do

However, you can be sure of one thing. If you merely put your lecture notes up on the web, or record
your 50 minute lectures for downloading, then you are almost certain to have lower student completion
rates and poorer grades than for your face-to-face class. I make this point because it is tempting for
face-to-face instructors merely to move their method of classroom teaching online, such as using lecture
capture for students to download recorded classroom lectures at home, or using web conferencing to
deliver live lectures over the internet. However there is much evidence to suggest that doing this does
not lead to good results (see for instance, Figlio, Rush and Yin, 2010).

   The problem with just moving lectures online is that it fails to take account of a key requirement for
most online learners: flexibility. When students are studying online, their needs are different from when
they are in class. Restricted `office hours' when the instructor is available for students do not provide the
flexibility of contact that students need when working online. Students tend to work in smaller chunks
of time when studying online, in several short bursts, and rarely more than an hour without a break.
Online work then needs to be broken up into manageable `chunks.' A synchronous web cast may be
scheduled at times when online students are working. More importantly, online learning allows us to
deliver content or information in ways that lead to better learning than through a one hour lecture.

   Thus it is important to design teaching in such a way that it best suits the different modes of learning
that students will use. Fortunately, there has been a lot of experience and research that have identified
the key design principles for both classroom and online teaching. This is what the next eight steps are
about.

12.3.5 A chance to fly

Technologies and new modes of delivery open up wonderful opportunities to rethink completely the
teaching process. Teachers and instructors with deep knowledge of their subject can now find many
624 Chapter 12: Ensuring quality teaching in a digital age

unique and exciting ways to open up their teaching and to integrate their research into their teaching.
The main restriction now is not time nor money, but lack of imagination. Those with the imagination
will be able to fly into previously unthinkable ways of teaching their subject.

Reference

Figlio, D., Rush, N. and Yin, L. (2010) Is it Live or is it Internet? Experimental Estimates of the Effects
of Online Instruction on Student Learning Cambridge MA: National Bureau of Economic Research

                                                           Activity 12.3 Re-thinking your teaching

      1. Can you write down your philosophy of teaching - how you'd really like to teach your subject, if you
   weren't constrained?

      2. What are the main problems you are facing at the moment with your classroom teaching?
      3. Now think whether, by moving a course online, you could teach in new ways that better fit your
   philosophy of teaching, with the increased flexibility of access and the resources available through the Internet.
   What would your teaching approach now look like?
      There is no feedback provided for this activity: it is for your reflection.
12.4 Step two: what kind of course or program?

Figure 12.4.1 The continuum of technology-based teaching (from Chapter 10)

12.4.1 Choosing mode of delivery
Determining what kind of course in terms of the mix of face-to-face and online teaching is the natural
next step after considering how you want to teach a course. This topic has been dealt with extensively in
Chapter 10, so to summarise, there are four factors or variables to take into account when deciding what
`mix' of face-to-face and online learning will be best for your course:

         · your preferred teaching philosophy - how you like to teach (see Step 1)
         · the needs of the students (or potential students)
         · the demands of the discipline
         · the resources available to you.
Although an analysis of all the factors is an essential set of steps to take in making this decision, in the
end it will come down to a mainly intuitive decision, taking into account all the factors. This becomes
particularly important when looking at a program as a whole.

                                                                   625
626 Chapter 12: Ensuring quality teaching in a digital age

12.4.2 Who should make the decision?

While individual instructors should be heavily involved in deciding the best mix of online and face-
to-face teaching in their specific course, it is worth thinking about this on a program rather than an
individual course basis. For instance, if we see the development of independent learning skills as a key
program outcome, then it might make sense to start in the first year with mainly face-to-face classes, but
gradually over the length of the program introduce students to more and more online learning, so that
the end of a four year degree they are able and willing to take some of their courses fully online.

   Certainly every program should have a mechanism for deciding not only the content and skills or
the curriculum to be covered in a program, but also how the program will be delivered, and hence
the balance or mix of online and face-to-face teaching throughout the program. This should become
integrated into an annual academic planning process that looks at both methods of teaching as well as
content to be covered in the program (see Bates and Sangrà, 2011).

Reference

Bates, A. and Sangrà, A. (2011) Managing Technology in Higher Education San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass/John Wiley and Co

                                                     Activity 12.3 Which mode of delivery?

   If you did not do Activities 10.2, 10.3, 10.4, go back and do them now.
      If you have done these activities, review your answers in terms of deciding on the best mix of face-to-face

   and online teaching for your course.
      There is no feedback provided for this activity.
12.5 Step three: work in a team

Figure 12.5.1 Work in a team

   One of the strongest means of ensuring quality is to work as a team. This is addressed at several points
in the book, such as Chapter 9, Section 7, Chapter 10, Section 4, and Chapter 13, Sections 3 and 5.
12.5.1 Why work in a team?
For many teachers and instructors, classroom teaching is an individual, largely private activity between
the instructor and students. Teaching is a very personal affair. However, blended and especially fully

                                                                   627
628 Chapter 12: Ensuring quality teaching in a digital age

online learning are different from classroom teaching. They require a range of skills that most teachers
and instructors, and particularly those new to online teaching, are unlikely to have, at a least in a
developed, ready-to-use form.

   The way an instructor interacts online has to be organized differently from in class, and particular
attention has to be paid to providing appropriate online activities for students, and to structuring content
in ways that facilitate learning in an asynchronous online environment. Good course design is essential
to achieve quality in terms of developing the knowledge and skills needed in a digital age. These are
pedagogical issues, in which most post-secondary instructors have had little training. In addition, there
are also technology issues. Novice teachers and instructors are likely to need help in developing graphics
or video materials, for example.

   Another reason to work in a team is to manage workload. There is a range of technological activities
that are not normally required of classroom teachers and instructors. Just managing the technology will
be extra work if instructors do it all themselves. Also, if the online component of a course is not well
designed or integrated with the face-to-face component, if students are not clear what they should do,
or if the material is presented in ways that are difficult to understand, the teacher or instructor will
be overwhelmed with student e-mail. Instructional designers, who work across different courses, and
who have training in both course design and technology, can be an invaluable resource for novices
teaching online for the first time.

   Thirdly working with colleagues in the same department who are more experienced in online learning
can be a very good means to get quickly to a high quality online standard, and again can save time. For
instance, in one university I worked in, three faculty members in the same department were developing
different courses with online components. However, these courses often needed graphics of the same
equipment discussed in all three courses. The three instructors got together, and worked with a graphic
designer to create high quality graphics that were shared between all three instructors. This also resulted
in discussions about overlap and how best to make sure there was better integration and consistency
between the three courses. They could do this with their online courses more easily than with the
classroom courses, because the online course materials can be more easily shared and observed.

   Lastly, especially where large lecture classes are being re-designed, there may be a cohort of teaching
assistants that may need to be trained, organised and managed. In some institutions, part-time adjunct
faculty will also need to be involved. This means clarifying roles for the senior faculty member, the
adjunct or contract faculty, the teaching assistants, and the learning technology support staff.

   For many teachers and instructors, developing teaching in a team is a big cultural shift. However,
the benefits of doing this for online or blended learning are well worth the effort. As teachers and
instructors become more experienced in blended and online learning, there is less need for the help of
an instructional designer, but many experienced instructors now prefer to continue working in a team,
because it makes life so much easier for them.

12.5.2 Who is in the team?

This will depend to some extent on the size of the course. In most cases, for a blended or online
course with one main faculty member or subject expert, and a manageable number of students, the
instructor will normally work with an instructional designer, who in turn can call on more specialist staff,
such as a web or graphic designer or a media producer, as needed.

   If however it is a course with many students and several instructors, adjunct faculty and/or teaching
assistants, then they should all work together as a team, with the instructional designer. Also in some
institutions a librarian is an important member of the team, helping identify resources, dealing with
                                                                                                                    12.5 Step three: work in a team 629

copyright issues and ensuring that the library is able to respond to learners' needs when the course is
being offered.

12.5.3 What about academic freedom? Do I lose it working in a team?

No. The instructor(s) will always have final say over content and how it is to be taught. Instructional
designers are advisers but responsibility for the content of the course, the way it is taught, and assessment
methods always remains with the faculty member.

   However, instructional and media producers should not be treated as servants, but as professionals
with specialized skills. They should be respected and listened to. Often the instructional designer will
have more experience of what will work and what will not in blended or online learning. Surgeons work
with anaesthetists and nurses, and trust them to do their jobs properly. The working relationship between
instructors and instructional designers and media producers should be similar.

12.5.4 Conclusion

Working in a team makes life a lot easier for instructors when teaching blended or online courses. Good
course design, which is the area of expertise of the instructional designer, not only enables students to
learn better but also controls faculty workload. Courses look better with good graphic and web design
and professional video production. Specialist technical help frees up instructors to concentrate on
teaching and learning. What's not to like?

   This of course will depend heavily on the institution providing such support through a centre of
teaching and learning. Nevertheless this is an important decision that needs to be implemented before
course design begins.

                                                          Activity 12.5 Working in a team

   There is no activity for this section.
12.6 Step four: build on existing resources

Figure 12.6.1 Radiating charge simulation, phET: click on image to run simulation
Image: © University of Colorado-Boulder

   The importance of using existing resources has been stressed in several parts of the book, particularly
Chapters 8 and 11.
12.6.1 Moving content online
Time management for teachers and instructors is critical. A great deal of time can be spent converting
classroom material into a form that will work in an online environment, but this can really increase
workload. For instance, PowerPoint slides without a commentary often either miss the critical content,
or fail to cover nuances and emphasis. This may mean either using lecture capture to record the lecture,

                                                                   631
632 Chapter 12: Ensuring quality teaching in a digital age

or having to add a recorded commentary over the slides at a later date. Transferring lecture notes into
pdf files and loading them up into a learning management system is also time consuming. However, this
is not the best way to develop online materials, both for time management and pedagogical reasons.

   In Step 1 I recommended rethinking teaching, not just moving recorded lectures or class PowerPoint
slides online, but developing materials in ways that enable students to learn better. Now in Step 4
I appear to be contradicting that by suggesting that you should use existing resources. However, the
distinction here is between using existing resources that do not transfer well to an online learning
environment (such as a 50 minute recorded lecture), and using materials already specifically developed
or suitable for learning in an online environment.

12.6.2 Use existing online content

The Internet, and in particular the World Wide Web, has an immense amount of content already
available, and this was discussed extensively in Chapter 11. Much of it is freely available for educational
use, under certain conditions (e.g. acknowledgement of the source - look for the Creative Commons
license usually at the end of the web page). You will find such existing content varies enormously in
quality and range. Top universities such as MIT, Stanford, Princeton and Yale have made available
recordings of their classroom lectures , etc., while distance teaching organizations such as the UK Open
University have made all their online teaching materials available for free use. Much of this can be found
at these sites:

         · OpenCourseWare (MIT)

         · iTunesU

         · OpenLearn (U.K. Open University)

         · The Open Education Consortium (courses in STEM: science, technology, engineering, math)

         · Open Learning Initiative (Carnegie Mellon)

         · MERLOT

However, there are now many other sites from prestigious universities offering open course ware. (A
Google search using `open educational resources' or' OER' will identify most of them.)

   In the case of the prestigious universities, you can be sure about the quality of the content - it's usually
what the on-campus students get - but it often lacks the quality needed in terms of instructional design
or suitability for online learning (for more discussion on this see Hampson (2015); or OERs: The Good,
the Bad and the Ugly). Open resources from institutions such as the UK Open University or Carnegie
Mellon's Open Learn Initiative usually combine quality content with good instructional design.

   Where open educational resources are particularly valuable are in their use as interactive simulations,
animations or videos that would be difficult or too expensive for an individual instructor to develop.
Examples of simulations in science subjects such as biology and physics can be found here: PhET, or at
the Khan Academy for mathematics, but there are many other sources as well.

   But as well as open resources designated as `educational', there is a great deal of `raw' content on the
Internet that can be invaluable for teaching. The main question is whether you as the instructor need to
find such material, or whether it would be better to get students to search, find, select, analyze, evaluate
and apply information. After all, these are key skills for a digital age that students need to have.

   Certainly at k-12, two-year college or undergraduate level, most content is not unique or original.
                                                                                                      12.6 Step four: build on existing resources 633

Most of the time we are standing on the shoulders of giants, that is, organizing and managing knowledge
already discovered. Only in the areas where you have unique, original research that is not yet published,
or where you have your own `spin' on content, is it really necessary to create `content' from scratch.
Unfortunately, though, it can still be difficult to find exactly the material you want, at least in a form
that would be appropriate for your students. In such cases, then it will be necessary to develop your own
materials, and this is discussed further in Step 7. However, building a course around already existing
materials will make a lot of sense in many contexts.

12.6.3 Conclusion

You have a choice of focusing on content development or on facilitating learning. As time goes on, more
and more of the content within your courses will be freely available from other sources over the Internet.
This is an opportunity to focus on what students need to know, and on how they can find, evaluate and
apply it. These are skills that will continue well beyond the memorisation of content that students gain
from a particular course. So it is important to focus just as much on student activities, what they need to
do, as on creating original content for our courses. This is discussed in more detail in Steps 6, 7 and 8.

   So a critical step before even beginning to teach a course is look around and see what's available and
how this could potentially be used in the course or program you are planning to teach.

References

Hampson, K. (2015) Masterclass & MOOCs: Notes on the Role of Production Value in Online Learning
The Synapse, July 31

                                                         Activity 12.6 Building on existing resources

      1. How original is the content you are teaching? Could students learn just as well from already existing
   content? If not, what is the `extra' you are adding? How will you incorporate the added value of your own
   contribution in your course design?

      2. Does the content you are already thinking of covering already exist on the web? Have you looked to see
   what's already there? What if any are the restrictions on its re-use for educational purposes?

      3. What are your colleagues doing online - or indeed in the classroom, with respect to digital teaching?
   Could you work together to jointly develop and/or share materials?

      If you feel that your course is currently too much work, then maybe the answers to these questions may
   indicate where the problem lies.

      There is no feedback provided for this activity.
12.7 Step five: master the technology

Figure 12.7.1 A `help' page from Blackboard Learn

   Taking the time to be properly trained in how to use standard learning technologies will in the long
run save you a good deal of time and will enable you to achieve a much wider range of educational goals
than you would otherwise have imagined.
12.7.1 The exponential growth in learning technologies
There are now many common technologies available for educational use:

         · learning managements systems (such as Blackboard Learn, Moodle, D2L,
            Instructure/Canvas);

         · synchronous technologies (such as Blackboard Collaborate, Adobe Connect, Big Blue
            Button, ZOOM, GoToMeeting, Microsoft Teams);

         · lecture recording technologies (such as GarageBand or Audacity for podcasts and Echo360
            for lecture capture);

                                                                   635
636 Chapter 12: Ensuring quality teaching in a digital age

         · tablets and mobile devices, such as iPads, mobile phones, and the apps that run on them;

         · MOOCs and their many variants (SPOCs, TOOCs, etc.);

         · other social media, including blogging software such as WordPress, wikis such as
            MediaWiki, Google Hangouts, Google Docs, and Twitter;

         · learner-generated tools, such as e-portfolios (for example, Mahara)

         · search engines and translation tools, such as Google Search and Google Translate.

It is not necessary to use all or any of these tools, but if you do decide to use them, you need to know not
only how to operate such such technologies well, but also their pedagogical strengths and weaknesses
(see Chapter 7, Chapter 8 and Chapter 9). Although the technologies listed above will change over time,
the general principles discussed in this section will continue to apply to other new technologies as they
become available.

12.7.2 Use the existing institutional technology

If your institution already has a learning management system such as Blackboard Learn, Moodle,
Instructure or D2L, use it. Don't get drawn into arguments about whether or not it is the best tool.
Frankly, in functional terms, there are few important differences between the main LMSs. You may
prefer the interface of one rather than another, but this will be more than overwhelmed by the amount
of effort trying to use a system not supported by your institution. LMSs are not perfect but they have
evolved over the last 20 years and in general are relatively easy to use, both by you and more importantly
by the students. They provide a useful framework for organizing your online teaching, and if the LMS is
properly supported you can get help when needed. There is enough flexibility in a learning management
system to allow you to teach in a variety of different ways. In particular, take the time to be properly
trained in how to use the LMS. A couple of hours of training can save you many hours in trying to get it
to work the way you want.

   A more important question to consider is whether you need to use an LMS at all - but that
question should only be considered if the institution is willing to support alternatives, such as
WordPress or Google Docs, otherwise you could end up spending too much time dealing with pure
technology issues.

   The same applies to synchronous web technologies such as Blackboard Collaborate, Adobe Connect,
Big Blue Button or ZOOM. I have my preferences but they all do more or less the same thing. The
differences in technology are nothing compared with the different ways in which you can use these tools.
These are pedagogical or teaching decisions. Focus on these rather than finding the perfect technology.

   Indeed, think carefully about when it would be best to use synchronous rather than asynchronous
online tools. Synchronous tools are useful when you want to get a group of students together at one
time, but such synchronous tools tend to be instructor-dominated (delivering lectures and controlling
the discussion) and require students to be available at a set time. However, you could encourage
students working in small teams on a project to use Collaborate or another synchronous tool such as
ZOOM, which allows for setting up small sub-groups, to decide roles, discuss a topic and form a group
view, or to finalize a project assignment, for instance. On the other hand, asynchronous tools such
as an LMS provide learners with more flexibility than synchronous tools, and enable them to work
more independently (an important skill for students to develop). And of course both synchronous and
asynchronous tools can be used in conjunction, but that requires working out what each is best for.
                                    12.7 Step five: master the technology 637

12.7.3 Deceptively easy technology

Most of these technologies are deceptively easy to use, in the sense of getting started. They have been
designed so that anyone without a computer science background can use them. However, over time they
tend to become more sophisticated with a wide range of different functions. You won't need to use all
the functions, but it will help if you are aware that they exist, and what they can and can't do. If you do
want to use a particular feature, it is best to get training so that you can use it quickly and effectively.

12.7.4 Keep current, as far as possible

New technologies keep arriving all the time. It is best to focus on new tools that seem functionally
different from existing tools, rather than trying to check every new synchronous meeting system, for
instance. It is too difficult for any single teacher or instructor to keep up to date with newly emerging
technologies and their possible relevance for teaching. This is really the job of any well-run learning
technology support unit. So make the effort to attend a once-a-year briefing on new technologies, then
follow-up with a further session on any tool that might be of interest.

   This kind of briefing and training should be provided by the centre or unit that provides learning
technology support. If your institution does not have such a unit, or such training, think very carefully
about whether to use technology extensively in your teaching - even teachers and instructors with a lot
of experience in using technology for teaching need such support.

   Furthermore, new functions are constantly being added to existing tools. For instance, if you are using
Moodle, there are `plug-ins' (such as Mahara) that allow students to create and manage their own e-
portfolios or electronic records of their work. Learning analytics software for LMSs, which allow you to
analyze the way students are using the LMS and how this relates to their performance, is another recent
wave of plug-ins.

   Thus a session spent learning the various features of your learning management system and how best
to use them will be well worthwhile, even if you have been using it for some time, but didn't have a full
training on the system. Particularly important is knowing how to integrate different technologies, such
as online videos within an LMS, so that the technology appears seamless to students.

   Lastly, don't get locked into using only your favourite technology, and keeping a closed mind against
anything else. It is is a natural tendency to try to protect the use of a technology that has taken a good deal
of time and effort to master, especially if it has served you and your students well in the past, and new
technology is not necessarily better for teaching than old technology. Nevertheless, game-changers do
come along occasionally, and may well have educational benefits that were not previously considered.
One tool is unlikely to do everything you need as a teacher; a well-chosen mix of tools is likely to be
more effective. Keep an open mind and be prepared to make a shift if necessary.

12.7.5 Relate your technology training to how you want to teach

There are really two distinct but strongly related components of using technology:
         · how the technology works; and
         · what it should be used for.
638 Chapter 12: Ensuring quality teaching in a digital age

12.7.5.1 Focus on the learning outcomes

These are tools built to assist you, so you have to be clear as to what you are trying to achieve with the
tools. This is an instructional or pedagogical issue. Thus if you want to find ways to engage students, or
to give them practice in developing skills, such as solving quadratic equations, learn what the strengths
or weaknesses are of the various technologies for doing this (see Chapter 7 and Chapter 8 for more on
this).

   This is somewhat of an iterative process. When a new tool or a new feature is being described or
demonstrated, think of how this might fit with or facilitate one of your teaching goals. But also be open
to possibly changing your goals or methods to take advantage of a tool in enabling you to do something
you had not thought of doing before. For example, an e-portfolio plug-in might lead you to change
the way you assess students, so that learning outcomes are more `authentic' and evidence-based than
say with a written essay. (This will be discussed further in the next step `Setting appropriate goals for
learning.')

12.7.5.2 Avoid duplicating your classroom teaching

Podcasts and lecture capture enable lectures to be recorded, stored and downloaded by students. So why
bother to learn how to use other online technologies such as an LMS? In Chapter 3, Section 3, evidence-
based research on the limitations of lectures was discussed. In brief, students in general don't learn well
online using recordings of `transmissive' classroom lectures. Perhaps of equal importance, you are likely
to end up doing more work because you are likely to be inundated with individual e-mails asking for
clarification, or have a very high student failure rate, if you do not adapt the lecture to the online learning
environment.

   This is not to say that the occasional recording from you as the instructor would not be valuable.
However, it is best to keep it to 10-15 minutes maximum, and it should add something unique to the
course, such as being about your own research, or a guest professor being interviewed, or your relating
a news item to issues or principles being studied in the course. It may even be better as an audio-only
podcast, so students can concentrate on the words and possibly relate them to other learning materials,
such as diagrams, graphics or animations on a web site.

   If you must use lecture capture, think about structuring your in-class lecture so that it can be edited
into separate sections of say 10-15 minutes. One way of doing this is pausing at an appropriate point
to ask for questions from the classroom students, thus providing a clear `editing' point for the video
version. Then provide online work to follow up each of the recorded components, such as a topic for
discussion on an online forum, some online student research or further reading on the topic.

   However, in general, delivery of content is much better done through a learning management system,
where it is permanent, organized and structured (see Step 7 later), available in discrete amounts, can be
accessed at any time, and can be repeated as often as is needed by the learner. Or it may be even better
to get students to find, analyse and organise content for themselves, in which case you may need tools
other than an LMS, such as blog software such as WordPress, an e-portfolio or wiki. Again, the decision
should be driven by pedagogical thinking, rather than trying to make one tool fit every circumstance.

12.7.6 Benefits of mastering the technology

Online learning technologies such as learning management systems have been designed to fit the online
                                                                                                             12.7 Step five: master the technology 639

learning environment. This requires some adjustment and learning on the part of teachers and instructors
whose primary experience is in classroom teaching.

   Like any tool, the more you know about it the better you are likely to use it. Thus formal training
on the technology is necessary but need not be onerous. Usually a total of two hours specific and
well organized instruction should be sufficient on how to use any particular tool, such as a learning
management or lecture capture system, e-portfolio or synchronous webinar tool, with a one hour review
session every year.

   The harder part will be figuring out how best to use the tools educationally. This requires you to bring
a clear conception of how students best learn (Chapter 2 and Chapter 6), what methods you need to
match how students learn (Chapter 3 and Chapter 4), and how to design such teaching through the use
of learning technologies (Chapter 7, Chapter 8 and Chapter 9). Whenever you receive training on a new
tool, try to apply what you have learned in these chapters to how you may be able best to use that tool in
the future.

                                                            Activity 12.7 Mastering the technology

      1. How much formal training have you had on your institutional learning management, lecture capture
   systems or video conferencing/synchronous technologies? Is this enough or are you now fully confident that
   you know all the features and how best to use them?

      2. When should you use a synchronous technology such as Blackboard Collaborate? What are the
   disadvantages of synchronous technologies for online students? (See Chapter 7.6 for more on this).

      3. Should you rethink entirely your teaching when considering blended learning or could you use mainly
   your classroom material?

      4. What would be the possible disadvantages of using recorded lectures online?

      There is no feedback provided for this activity. The answers are in the chapters highlighted in this section.
12.8 Step six: set appropriate learning goals

Figure 12.8.1 Set appropriate learning goals
Image: © www.geograph.ie

12.8.1 Setting goals for learning in a digital age
In many school systems, curriculum and learning goals are already pre-determined by national, state
or provincial curriculum committees and/or ministries of education. In many trades and vocational
areas, industry training boards or employers' associations set learning goals or desired outcomes or
competencies that need to be followed for qualifications to be accredited. Even in a university, an
instructor (particularly a contract instructor or adjunct) may `inherit' a course where the goals are already
set, either by a previous instructor or by the academic department.

   Nevertheless, there remain many contexts where teachers and instructors have a degree of control over
the goals of a particular course or program. In particular, a new course or program - such as an online
masters program aimed at working professionals - offers an opportunity to reconsider desired learning
outcomes and goals. Especially where curriculum is framed mainly in terms of content to be covered
rather than by skills to be developed, there may still be room for manoeuvre in setting learning goals that
would also include, for instance, intellectual skills development. In other contexts, the development or
focus may be on more affective skills, such as sympathy or empathy, or on the development of manual
or operational skills.

                                                                   641
642 Chapter 12: Ensuring quality teaching in a digital age

12.8.2 Learning goals for a digital age

In Chapter 1, Section 2, I listed a number of skills that learners will need in a digital age, including:

         · modern communication skills;

         · independent learning;

         · ethics and responsibility;

         · teamwork and flexibility;

         · thinking skills including:

                      critical thinking;

                      problem solving;

                      creative thinking;

                      strategising and planning;

         · digital skills;

         · knowledge management.

These are examples of the kinds of goal that need to be identified. More traditional goals might also be
included, such as comprehension and application of specific areas of content. These goals or outcomes
might be expressed in terms of Bloom's taxonomy (1956) or the Royal Bank of Canada's (2018) or in a
variety of other ways. All these skills need to be embedded or built within the needs of a specific subject
domain. In other words, they are skills that need to be specific to a subject area rather than general. At
the same time, students who develop such skills within any particular subject area will be better prepared
for a digital age.

   Your list of goals for a course may - indeed, should be - different from mine, but it will be essential
to do the kind of analysis recommended in Step 1 (deciding how you want to teach), and then to decide
on what the learning goals should be, based on:

         · your understanding of the needs of the students;

         · the needs of the the subject domain;

         · the demands of the external world.

I have placed a particular emphasis on the development of intellectual skills. As with all learning goals,
the teaching needs to be designed in such a way that students have opportunities to learn and practice
such skills, and in particular, such skills need to be evaluated as part of the formal assessment process.
Perhaps more challenging is to identify what you will be adding to general skills development such as
critical thinking. What is the level of critical thinking skills that students will come with, and how do
I make sure they progress in their ability in this skill during the course? This emphasises the value of
having learning outcomes clearly identified for a whole program, perhaps using a curriculum mapping
tool such as Daedalus.

   What this means in terms of course design is using the Internet increasingly as a major resource for
learning, giving students more responsibility for finding and evaluating information themselves, and
instructors providing criteria and guidelines for finding, evaluating, analysing and applying information
                                                                                                    12.8 Step six: set appropriate learning goals 643

within a specific knowledge domain. This will require a critical approach to online searches, online
data, news or knowledge generation in specific knowledge domains - in other words the development
of critical thinking about the Internet and modern media - both their potential and limitations within a
specific subject domain.

12.8.3 Bring in the outside world

One great characteristic of modern media is the opportunity to bring in the world to your teaching in
many ways, for instance:

         · by directing students to online sites, and encouraging them to identify and share relevant
            sites;

         · students themselves can collect data or provide real world examples of concepts or issues
            covered in the course, through the use of cameras in mobile phones, or audio interviews of
            local experts, or identifying relevant open educational resources;

         · setting up a course wiki that both you and the students contribute to, and make it open to
            other professors and students to contribute to, depending on the topic;

         · if you are teaching professional masters or diploma programs, or MOOCs, the students
            themselves will have very relevant world experiences that can be drawn into the program.
            This is a great way to enable students to evaluate and apply knowledge within their subject
            domain.

There are many other possible goals that are either impossible to meet without using the Internet, or
would be very difficult to do in a purely classroom environment. The art of the instructor is to decide
which are relevant, and which in particular could be key learning goals for the course.
644 Chapter 12: Ensuring quality teaching in a digital age

Figure 12.8.2 Using social media during the Arab Spring in Egypt, 2011

12.8.4 Learning goals: the same or different, depending on mode of delivery?
In many cases, it will be appropriate (indeed, essential) to keep the same teaching goals for an online
course as in a similar face-to-face course. Many dual-mode institutions, campus-based institutions who
also offer credit courses online, such as the University of British Columbia, Penn State, University of
Nebraska, offer the same courses both face-to-face and online, particularly in the fourth year of an
undergraduate program. Usually the transcript of the exam grade makes no distinction as to whether the
course was done online or face-to-face, since the students take the same end of course exam, and the
actual content covered is usually identical in each version.

   Nevertheless, there may be occasions where some goals in the campus-based class may need to be
sacrificed for different but equally valuable goals that can be achieved better online. It is also important
to remember that although it may be possible to achieve the same goals online as in class, the design of
the teaching will likely have to be different in the online environment. Thus often the goals remain the
same, but the method changes. This will be discussed further in Steps 7 and 8. The important point is
to be aware that some things can be more easily done in a campus environment, and others better done
online, then to build your teaching around these somewhat different goals. Using a blended approach
may enable you to widen the range of goals, but be careful not to overload students by doing this.
                              12.8 Step six: set appropriate learning goals 645

12.8.5 Assessment is the key

It is pointless to introduce new learning goals or outcomes then not assess how well students have
achieved those goals. Assessment drives student behaviour. If they are not to be assessed on the skills
outlined above, they won't make the effort to develop them. The main challenge may not be in setting
appropriate goals for online learning, but ensuring that you have the tools and means to assess whether
students have achieved those goals.

   And even more importantly, it is necessary to communicate very clearly to students these new learning
goals and how they will be assessed. This may come as a shock to many students who are used to being
fed content then tested on their memory of it.

12.8.6 Conclusion

In some ways, with the Internet (as with other media), the medium is the message. Knowledge is not
completely neutral. What we know and how we know it are affected by the medium through which we
acquire knowledge. Each medium brings another way of knowing. We can either fight the medium, and
try to force old content into new bottles, or we can shape the content to the form of the medium. Because
the Internet is such a large force in our lives, we need to be sure that we are making the most of its
potential in our teaching, even if that means changing somewhat what and how we teach. If we do that,
our students are much more likely to be better prepared for a digital age.

Reference

Bloom, B. S.; Engelhart, M. D.; Furst, E. J.; Hill, W. H.; Krathwohl, D. R. (1956). Taxonomy of
educational objectives: The classification of educational goals. Handbook I: Cognitive domain. New
York: David McKay Company

   Royal Bank of Canada (2018) Humans Wanted Toronto ON: Royal Bank of Canada

                              Activity 12.8 Setting learning goals

   1. Take a course you are teaching in class at the moment. Write down the learning goals. Given the need for
developing the skills needed in a digital age, would you want to change the goals of this course? If so, would
you have to change your teaching methods and/or use of technology?

   2. If you could design this course from scratch, would the learning goals change or just the teaching
methodology?

   3. If you were to introduce some of the skills for a digital age listed in Chapter 1, Section 2, what activities
would need to be built into the course to enable students to develop such skills? How would you assess these
skills?

   Again there is no feedback on this activity; other chapters in the book contain some guidelines or answers.
12.9 Step seven: design course structure and learning activities

Figure 12.9.1 A good structure is critical for a quality course or program
Image: © Arisean Reach, 2012

   The importance of providing students with a structure for learning and setting appropriate learning
activities is probably the most important of all the steps towards quality teaching and learning, and yet
the least discussed in the literature on quality assurance.
12.9.1 Some general observations about structure in teaching
First a definition, since this is a topic that is rarely directly discussed in either face-to-face or online

                                                                   647
648 Chapter 12: Ensuring quality teaching in a digital age

teaching, despite structure being one of the main factors that influences learner success. Three dictionary
definitions of structure are as follows:

  1. Something made up of a number of parts that are held or put together in a particular way.
  2. The way in which parts are arranged or put together to form a whole
  3. The interrelation or arrangement of parts in a complex entity.

Teaching structure would include two critical and related elements:

         · the choice, breakdown and sequencing of the curriculum (content);

         · the deliberate organization of student activities by teacher or instructor (skills development;
            and assessment).

This means that in a strong teaching structure, students know exactly what they need to learn, what they
are supposed to do to learn this, and when and where they are supposed to do it. In a loose structure,
student activity is more open and less controlled by the teacher (although a student may independently
decide to impose his or her own `strong' structure on their learning). The choice of teaching structure of
course has implications for the work of teachers and instructors as well as students.

   In terms of the definition, `strong' teaching structure is not inherently better than a `loose' structure,
nor inherently associated with either face-to-face or online teaching. The choice (as so often in teaching)
will depend on the specific circumstances. However, choosing the optimum or most appropriate teaching
structure is critical for quality teaching and learning, and while the optimum structures for online
teaching share many common features with face-to-face teaching, in other ways they differ considerably.

   The three main determinants of teaching structure are:
        (a) the organizational requirements of the institution;
        (b) the preferred philosophy of teaching of the instructor;
        (c) the instructor's perception of the needs of the students.

12.9.2 Institutional organizational requirements of face-to-face teaching

Although the institutional structure in face-to-face teaching is so familiar that it is often unnoticed or
taken for granted, institutional requirements are in fact a major determinant of the way teaching is
structured, as well as influencing both the work of teachers and the life of students. I list below some
of the institutional requirements that influence the structure of face-to-face teaching in post-secondary
education:

         · the minimum number of years of study required for a degree;

         · the program approval and review process;

         · the number of credits required for a degree;

         · the relationship between credits and contact time in the class;

         · the length of a semester and its relationship to credit hours;

         · instructor:student ratios;

         · the availability of classroom or laboratory spaces;

         · time and location of examinations.
                                                                          12.9 Step seven: design course structure and learning activities 649

There are probably many more. There are similar institutional organizational requirements in the school
system, including the length of the school day, the timing of holidays, and so on. (To understand the
somewhat bizarre reasons why the Carnegie Unit based on a Student Study Hour came to be adopted in
the USA, see Wikipedia.)

   As our campus-based institutions have increased in size, so have the institutional organizational
requirements `solidified'. Without this structure it would become even more difficult to deliver
consistent teaching services across the institution. Also such organizational consistency across
institutions is necessary for purposes of accountability, accreditation, government funding, credit
transfer, admission to graduate school, and a host of other reasons. Thus there are strong systemic
reasons why these organizational requirements of face-to-face teaching are difficult if not impossible to
change, at least at the institutional level.

   Thus any teacher is faced by a number of massive constraints. In particular, the curriculum needs to fit
within the time `units' available, such as the length of the semester and the number of credits and contact
hours for a particular course. The teaching has to take into account class size and classroom availability.
Students (and teachers and instructors) have to be at specific places (classrooms, examination rooms,
laboratories) at specific times.

   Thus despite the concept of academic freedom, the structure of face-to-face teaching is to a large
extent almost predetermined by institutional and organizational requirements. I am tempted to digress
to question the suitability of such structural limitations for the needs of learners in a digital age, or
to wonder whether faculty unions would accept such restrictions on academic freedom if they did not
already exist, but the aim here is to identify which of these organizational constraints apply also to online
learning, and which do not, because this will influence how we can structure teaching activities.

12.9.3 Institutional organizational requirements of online teaching

One obvious challenge for online learning, at least in its earliest days, was acceptance. There was (and
still is) a lot of skepticism about the quality and effectiveness of online learning, especially from those
that have never studied or taught online. So initially a lot of effort went into designing online learning
with the same goals and structures as face-to-face teaching, to demonstrate that online teaching was `as
good as' face-to-face teaching (which, research suggests, it is).

   However, this meant accepting the same course, credit and semester assumptions of face-to-face
teaching. It should be noted though that as far back as 1971, the UK Open University opted for a degree
program structure that was roughly equivalent in total study time to a regular, campus-based degree
program, but which was nevertheless structured very differently, for instance, with full credit courses of
32 weeks' study and half credit courses of 16 weeks' study. One reason was to enable integrated, multi-
disciplinary foundation courses. The Western Governors' University, with its emphasis on competency-
based learning, and Empire State College in New York State, with its emphasis on learning contracts
for adult learners, are other examples of institutions that have different structures for teaching from the
norm.

   If online learning programs aim to be at least equivalent to face-to-face programs, then they are likely
to adopt at least the minimum length of study for a program (e.g. four years for a bachelor's degree in
North America), the same number of total credits for a degree, and hence implicit in this is the same
amount of study time as for face-to-face programs. Where the same structure begins to break down
though is in calculating `contact time', which by definition is usually the number of hours of classroom
instruction. Thus a 13 week, 3 credit course is roughly equal to three hours a week of classroom time
over one semester of 13 weeks.
650 Chapter 12: Ensuring quality teaching in a digital age

   There are lots of problems with this concept of `contact hours', which nevertheless is the standard
measuring unit for face-to-face teaching. Study at a post-secondary level, and particularly in universities,
requires much more than just turning up to lectures. A common estimate is that for every hour of
classroom time, students spend a minimum of another two hours on readings, assignments, etc. Contact
hours vary enormously between disciplines, with usually arts/humanities having far less contact hours
than engineering or science students, who spend a much larger proportion of time in labs. Another
limitation of `contact hours' is that it measures input, not output.

   When we move to blended or hybrid learning, we may retain the same semester structure, but the
`contact hour' model starts to break down. Students may spend the equivalent of only one hour a week
in class, and the rest online - or maybe 15 hours in labs one week, and none the rest of the semester.

   A better principle would be to ensure that the students in blended, hybrid or fully online courses
or programs work to the same academic standards as the face-to-face students, or rather, spend the
equivalent `notional' time on doing a course or getting a degree. This means structuring the courses
or programs in such a way that students have the equivalent amount of work to do, whether it is
online, blended or face-to-face. However, the way that work will be distributed can very considerably,
depending on the mode of delivery.

12.9.4 How much work is an online course?

Before decisions can be made about the best way to structure a blended or an online course, some
assumption needs to be made about how much time students should expect to study on the course. We
have seen that this really needs to be equivalent to what a full-time student would study. However, just
taking the equivalent number of contact hours for the face-to-face version doesn't allow for all the other
time face-to-face students spend studying.

   A reasonable estimate is that a three credit undergraduate course is roughly equivalent to about 8-9
hours study a week, or a total of roughly 100 hours over 13 weeks. (A full-time student then taking 10 x
3 credits a year, with five 3 credit courses per semester, would be studying between 40-45 hours a week
during the two semesters, or slightly less if the studying continued over the inter-semester period.).

   Now this is my guideline. You don't have to agree with it. You may think this is too much or too little
for your subject. That doesn't matter. You decide the time. The important point though is that you have
a fairly specific target of total time that should be spent on a course or program by an average student,
knowing that some will reach the same standard more quickly and others more slowly. This total student
study time for a particular chunk of study such as a course or program provides a limit or constraint
within which you must structure the learning. It is also a good idea to make it clear to students from the
start how much time each week you are expecting them to work on the course.

   Since there is far more content that could be put in a course than students will have time to study,
this usually means choosing the minimum amount of content for the course for it to be academically
sound, while still allowing students time for activities such as individual research, assignments or project
work. In general, because instructors are experts in a subject and students are not, there is a tendency
for instructors to underestimate the amount of work required by a student to cover a topic. Again, an
instructional designer can be useful here, providing a second opinion on student workload.

12.9.5 Strong or loose structure?

Another critical decision is just how much you should structure the course for the students. This will
depend partly on your preferred teaching philosophy and partly on the needs of the students.
                                                                          12.9 Step seven: design course structure and learning activities 651

   If you have a strong view of the content that must be covered in a particular course, and the sequence
in which it must be presented (or if you are given a mandated curriculum by an accrediting body),
then you are likely to want to provide a very strong structure, with specific topics assigned for study at
particular points in the course, with student work or activities tightly linked.

   If on the other hand you believe it is part of the student's responsibility to manage and organize their
study, or if you want to give students some choice about what they study and the order in which they do
it, so long as they meet the learning goals for the course, then you are likely to opt for a loose structure.

   This decision should also be influenced by the type of students you are teaching. If students come
without independent learning skills, or know nothing about the subject area, they will need a strong
structure to guide their studies, at least initially. If on the other hand they are fourth year undergraduates
or graduate students with a high degree of self-management, then a looser structure may be more suitable
to their needs. Another determining factor will be the number of students in your class. With large
numbers of students, a strong, well defined structure will be necessary to control your workload, as loose
structures require more negotiation and support for individual students.

   My preference is for a strong structure for fully online teaching, so students are clear about what they
are expected to do, and when it has to be done by, even at graduate level. The difference is that with post-
graduates, I will give them more choices of what to study, and longer periods to complete more complex
assignments, but I will still define clearly the desired learning outcomes in terms of skill development
in particular, such as research skills or analytical thinking, and provide clear deadlines for student work,
otherwise I find my workload increases dramatically.

        ETEC 522 at the University of British Columbia is a loosely structured graduate course, in that students
organize their own work around the course themes. The course design changes every year because the course deals
withafast-changing studydomain (thepotential ofnewtechnologies foreducation), anexample ofagile design.
652 Chapter 12: Ensuring quality teaching in a digital age

Figure 12.9.2 The University of British Columbia's ETEC 522

        The web page illustrated in Figure 12.9.2 though from the 2011 version of the course demonstrates clearly
a relatively loose structure. The weekly topic structure is on the right, covering seven weeks of the course, the
remaining six being time for students to work on their projects. The outcomes of student activities are in the main
body, posted by students through their blogs. Note this is not using a learning management system, but WordPress, a
content management system, whichallows students moreeasily topostandorganize their activities.

   Blended learning provides an opportunity to enable students to gradually take more responsibility
for their learning, but within a `safe' structure of a regularly scheduled classroom event, where they
have to report on any work they have been required to do on their own or in small groups. This means
thinking not just at a course level but at a program level, especially for undergraduate programs. A
good strategy would be to put a heavy emphasis on face-to-face teaching in the first year, and gradually
                                                                          12.9 Step seven: design course structure and learning activities 653

introduce online learning through blended or hybrid classes in second and third year, with some fully
online courses in the fourth year, thus preparing students better for lifelong learning.

12.9.6 Moving a face-to-face course online

This is the easiest way to determine the structure for an online course. The structure of the course will
have already been decided to a large extent, in that the content of each week's work is clearly defined
by lecture topics. The main challenge will not be structuring the content but ensuring that students
have adequate online activities (see later). Most learning management systems enable the course to be
structured in units of one week, following the classroom topics. This provides a clear timetable for
the students. This applies also to alternative approaches such as problem-based learning, where student
activities may be broken down almost on a daily basis.

   However, it is important to ensure that the face-to-face content is moved in a way that is suitable for
online learning. For instance, Powerpoint slides may not fully represent what is covered in the verbal
part of a lecture. This often means reorganizing or redesigning the content so that it is complete in an
online version (your instructional designer should be able to help with this). At this point, you should
look at the amount of work the online students will need to do in the set time period to make sure that
with all the readings and activities it does not exceed the rough average weekly load you have set. It
is at this point you may have to make some choices about either removing some content or activities,
or making the work `optional.' However, if optional it should not be assessed, and if it's not assessed,
students will quickly learn to avoid it. Doing this time analysis incidentally sometimes indicates that
you've overloaded the face-to-face component as well.

   It needs to be constantly in your mind that students studying online will almost certainly study in a
more random manner than students attending classes on a regular basis. Instead of the discipline of being
at a certain place at a certain time, online students still need clarity about what they are supposed to do
each week or maybe over a longer time period as they move into later levels of study. What is essential
is that students do not procrastinate online and hope to catch up towards the end of the course, which is
often the main cause of failure in online courses (as in face-to-face classes).

   We will see that defining clear activities for students is critical for success in online learning. We shall
see when we discuss student activities below that there is often a trade-off to be made between content
and activities if the student workload is to be kept to manageable proportions.

12.9.7 Structuring a blended learning course

Many blended learning courses are designed almost by accident, rather than deliberately. Online
components, such as a learning management system to contain online learning materials, lecture notes or
online readings, are gradually added to regular classroom teaching. There are obvious dangers in doing
this if the face-to-face component is not adjusted at the same time. After a number of years, more and
more materials, activities and work for students is added online, often optional but sometimes essential
for assignments. Student workloads can increase dramatically as a result - and so too can the instructor's,
with more and more material to manage.

   Rethinking a course for blended learning means thinking carefully about the structure and student
workload. Means et al. (2010) hypothesised that one reason for better results from blended learning was
due to students spending more time on task; in other words, they worked harder. This is good, but not
if all their courses are adding more work. It is essential therefore when moving to a blended model to
make sure that extra work online is compensated by less time in class (including travel time).
654 Chapter 12: Ensuring quality teaching in a digital age

12.9.8 Designing a new online course or program

If you are offering a course or program that has not to date been offered on campus (for instance a
professional or applied masters program) then you have much more scope for developing a unique
structure that best fits the online environment and also the type of students that may take this kind of
course (for example, working adults).

   The important point here is that the way this time is divided up does not have to be the same as for
a face-to-face class, because there is no organizational need for the student to be at a particular time or
place in order to get the instruction. Usually an online course will be `ready' and available for release to
the students before the course officially begins. Students could in theory do the course more quickly or
more slowly, if they wished. Thus the instructor has more options or choices about how to structure the
course and in particular about how to control the student work flow.

   This is particularly important if the course is being taken mainly by lifelong learners or part-time
students, for instance. Indeed, it may be possible to structure a course in such a way that different
students could work at different speeds. Competency-based learning means that students can work
through the same course or program at very different speeds. Some open universities even have
continuous enrolment, so they can start and finish at different times. Most students opting for an online
course are likely to be working, so you may need to allow them longer to complete a course than full-
time students. For instance, if on-campus masters programs need to be completed in one or two years,
students may need up to five years to complete an online professional masters program.

12.9.9 Key principles in structuring a course

Now there may be good reasons for not doing some of these things, but this will be because of
pedagogical rather than institutional organizational reasons. For instance, I'm not keen on continuous
enrollment, or self-paced instruction, because especially at graduate level I make heavy use of online
discussion forums and online group work. I like students to work through a course at roughly the same
pace, because it leads to more focused discussions, and organizing group work when students are at
different points in the course is difficult if not impossible. However, in other courses, for instance a math
course, self-paced instruction may make a lot of sense.

   I will discuss other non-traditional course structures when we discuss student activities below.
However you structure the course, though, two basic principles remain:

         · there must be some notional idea of how much time students should spend each week on the
            course;

         · students should be clear each week about what they have to do and when it needs to be done.

12.9.10 Designing student activities

This is the most critical part of the design process, especially for fully online students, who have
neither the regular classroom structure or campus environment for contact with the instructor and other
students nor the opportunity for spontaneous questions and discussions in a face-to-face class. Regular
student activities though are critical for keeping all students engaged and on task, irrespective of mode
of delivery. These can include:
                                                                          12.9 Step seven: design course structure and learning activities 655

         · assigned readings, with some activity that enables students to demonstrate their
            understanding;

         · simple multiple choice self-assessment tests of understanding with automated feedback,
            using the computer-based testing facility within a learning management system;

         · questions requiring short paragraph answers which may be shared with other students for
            comparison or discussion;

         · formally marked and assessed monthly assignments in the form of short essays or reports;

         · individual or group project work spaced over several weeks;

         · an individual student blog or e-portfolio that enables the student to reflect on their recent
            learning, and which may be shared with the instructor or other students;

         · online discussion forums, which the instructor will need to organize and monitor.

There are many other activities that instructors can devise to keep students engaged. However, all such
activities need to be clearly linked to the stated learning outcomes for the course and can be seen by
students as helping them prepare for any formal assessment. If learning outcomes are focused on skills
development, then the activities should be designed to give students opportunities to develop or
practice such skills.

   These activities also need to be regularly spaced and an estimate made of the time students will need
to complete the activities. In step eight, we shall see that student engagement in such activities will
need to be monitored by the instructor.

   It is at this point where some hard decisions may need to be made about the balance between
`content' and `activities'. Students must have enough time to do regular activities (other than just
reading) once each week at least, or their risk of dropping out or failing the course will increase
dramatically. In particular they will need some way of getting feedback or comments on their activities,
either from the instructor or from other students, so the design of the course will have to take account
of the instructors' workload as well as the students'.

   In my view, most university and college courses are overstuffed with content and not enough
consideration is given to what students need to do to absorb, apply and evaluate such content. I have a
very rough rule of thumb that students should spend no more than half their time reading content and
attending lectures, the rest being spent on interpreting, analyzing, or applying that content through the
kinds of activities listed above. As students become more mature and more self-managed the
proportion of time spent on activities can increase, with the students themselves being responsible for
identifying appropriate content that will enable them to meet the goals and criteria laid down by the
instructor. However, that is my personal view. Whatever your teaching philosophy though, there must
be plenty of activities with some form of feedback for online students, or they will drop like flies on a
cold winter's day.

12.9.11 Many structures, one high standard

There are many other ways to ensure an appropriate structure for an online course. For instance, the
Carnegie Mellon Open Learning Initiative provides a complete course `in a box' for standard first and
second year courses in two year colleges. These include a learning management system site with
content, objectives and activities pre-loaded, with an accompanying textbook. The content is carefully
structured, with in-built student activities. The instructors' role is mainly delivery, providing student
656 Chapter 12: Ensuring quality teaching in a digital age

feedback and marking where needed. These courses have proved to be very effective, in that most
students successfully complete such programs.

   The History instructor in Scenario D kept a normal three lectures a week structure for the first three
weeks, then students worked entirely online in small groups on a major project for five weeks, then
returned to class for one three-hour session a week for five weeks for students to report back on and
discuss their projects as a whole class group.

   We saw that in competency-based learning, students can work at their own speed through highly
structured courses academically, in terms of topic sequences and learner activities, that nevertheless
have flexibility in the time students can take to successfully complete a competency.

   The Integrated Science Program at McMaster University is built around 6-10 week undergraduate
research projects.

   cMOOC's such as Stephen Downes, George Siemen's, and Dave Cormier's #Change 11 (Milligan,
2012) have a loose structure, with different topics with different contributors each week, but student
activities, such as blog posts or comments, are not organized by the course designers but left to the
students. However, these are not credit courses, and few students work all the way through the whole
MOOC, and that is not their intent. The Stanford and MIT xMOOC's on the other hand are highly
structured, with student activities, and the feedback is fully automated. Less than 10 per cent of
students who start these MOOCs successfully complete them, but they too are non-credit courses.
Increasingly MOOCs are becoming shorter, some of as little as three or four weeks in length.

   Online learning enables teachers and instructors to break away from a rigid three semester, 13 week,
three lectures a week structure, and build courses around structures that best meet the needs of learners
and the preferred teaching method of the teacher or instructor. My aim in a credit course or program is
to ensure high academic quality and high completion rates. For me that means developing an
appropriate structure and related learning activities as a key step in achieving quality in credit online
courses.

References

Means, B. et al. (2010) Evaluation of Evidence-Based Practices in Online Learning: A Meta-Analysis
and Review of Online Learning Studies Washington, DC: US Department of Education

   Milligan, C. (2012) Change 11 SRL-MOOC study: initial findings Learning in the Workplace,
December 19

                                                     Activity 12.9 Structuring your course or program

      1. How many hours a week should a typical student spend studying a three credit course? If your answer
   differs from mine (8-9 hours), why?

      2. If you were designing an online credit program from scratch, would you need to follow a `traditional'
   structure of three credits over 13 weeks? If not, how would you structure such a program, and why?

      3. Do you think most credit courses are `overstuffed' with content and do not have enough learning
   activities? Do we focus too much on content and not enough on skills development in higher education? How
   does that affect the structure of courses? How much does it affect the quality of the learning?

      Again, no feedback provided on this activity.
12.10 Step eight: communicate, communicate, communicate

Figure 12.10.1 Communicate!
Image: Care2, 2012

   Some methods of teaching, such as online collaborative learning (Chapter 4, Section 4), depend on
high quality discussion between instructor and students. However, there is substantial research evidence
to suggest that ongoing, continuing communication between teacher/instructor and students is essential
in all online learning. At the same time it needs to be carefully managed in order to control the teacher/
instructor's workload.
12.10.1 The concept of `instructor presence'
In a classroom environment, the presence of the teacher or instructor is taken for granted. Usually, the

                                                                   657
658 Chapter 12: Ensuring quality teaching in a digital age

teacher is at the front of the class and at the centre of attention. Students may want to ignore a teacher
but that is not always easy to do, even in a very large lecture theatre. The instructor just being there in
the room is often considered to be enough. We can learn a lot though about the important pedagogical
aspects of teacher presence from the research into online learning, where instructor presence has to be
worked at.

12.10.2 Instructor presence and the loneliness of the long distance learner

Research has clearly indicated that `perceived instructor presence' is a critical factor for online student
success and satisfaction (Jonassen et al., 1995; Anderson et al., 2001; Garrison and Cleveland-Innes,
2005; Baker, 2010; Sheridan and Kelly, 2010). Students need to know that the instructor is following
the online activities of students and that the instructor is actively participating during the delivery of the
course.

   The reasons for this are obvious. Online students often study from home, and if they are fully online
may never meet another student on the same course. They do not get the important non-verbal cues from
the instructor or other students, such as the stare at a stupid question, the intensity in presentation that
shows the passion of the instructor for the topic, the `throwaway' comment that indicates the instructor
doesn't have much time for a particular idea, or the nodding of other students' heads when another
student makes a good point or asks a pertinent question. An online student does not have the opportunity
for a spontaneous discussion by bumping into the instructor in the corridor.

   However, a skilled instructor can create just as compelling a learning environment online, but it needs
to be deliberately planned and designed, and be done in such a way that the instructor's workload can be
controlled.

12.10.3 Setting students' expectations

It is essential right at the start of a course for the instructor to make it clear to students what is expected
of them when they are studying online, whether in a blended or fully online course. On reflection, why
would we not do the same for face-to-face teaching?

   Most institutions have a code of behaviour for the use of computers and the Internet, but these are
often lengthy documents written in a bureaucratic language, and are more concerned with spam, general
online behaviour such as `flaming' or bullying, or hacking. Although necessary, this is not sufficient
for teaching purposes. Thus instructors are advised to develop a set of specific requirements for student
behaviour that is related to the needs of the particular course, and deals with the academic requirements
of studying online. Some guidelines or principles for developing meaningful online discussion can found

in Chapter 4, Section 4.4.4. However, there are some other specific actions that teachers and
instructors can take to ensure instructor presence.

   A small task can be set in the first week of a course that sets up student expectations for the rest of the
course. For instance students can be asked to post their bio and respond to other students bio posts, or
can be asked to comment on a topic related to the course and their views on this before the course really
begins, using the discussion forum facility in the learning management system. It is important to pay
particular attention to this activity, because research indicates that students who do not respond to set
activities in the first week are at high risk of non-completion. Instructors should follow up with a phone
call or e-mail to non-respondents at the end of the first week, and ensure that each student is following
the guidelines or doing the task set, even if students are experienced in studying online. Students know
that the instructor is then following what they do (or more importantly don't do) from the outset.
                                                                               12.10 Step eight: communicate, communicate, communicate 659

   Different courses may require different guidelines. For instance a math or science course may not put
so much emphasis on discussion forums, but more on self-assessed computer-marked multiple choice
questions. It should be made clear whether students must do these or if they are optional, or how
much time should be spent as a minimum on doing such non-graded activities, and their relationship to
activities that are graded or assessed. They should get such an activity within the first week of a course,
and the instructor should follow up with those that avoid the activity or have difficulties with it.

   Lastly, instructors should follow their own guidelines. Your comments should be helpful and
constructive, rather than negative. You should actively encourage discussion by being `present' and
stepping in on a discussion where necessary - for instance if the comments are getting off topic or too
personal.

12.10.4 Teaching philosophy and online communication

Instructors who have a more objectivist approach to teaching are more likely to focus on whether
students are not only covering the necessary content but are also understanding it. This often requires
students going back over content, providing misunderstood or difficult content in an alternative manner
(e.g. a video as well as text), and instructor or automated (computer-based) feedback. Most LMSs
will provide summaries of student activities, and it is important to track each individual student's
progress. Instructors with a more constructivist approach are more likely to emphasize online discussion
and argument.

   Whatever your approach, students want to know where you stand on some of the topics. Thus while
it is necessary often to present content objectively with an `on the one hand... on the other...' approach,
students usually feel more committed to a course where the instructor's own views or approach to
a topic are made clear. This can be done in a variety of ways, such as a podcast on a topic, or an
intervention in a discussion, or a short video of how you would go about solving an equation. These
personal interventions have to be carefully judged, but can make a big difference to student commitment
and participation.

12.10.5 Choice of medium for instructor communication

There is now a wide variety of media by which instructors can communicate with students, or students
can communicate with each other. Basically, though, they fall into four categories:

         · face-to-face, such as set office hours, scheduled classes or serendipity (bumping into each
            other in the corridor);

         · synchronous communication media, including voice phone calls, text and audio conferencing
            over the web (for example, Blackboard Collaborate), or even video-conferencing (for
            example, ZOOM);

         · asynchronous communication media, including e-mail, podcasts or recorded video clips, and
            online discussion forums within an LMS;

         · social media, such as blogs, wikis, text or voice messages on mobile phones, Facebook and
            Twitter.

In general, I much prefer asynchronous communication for two reasons. Students are often working
and have busy lives; asynchronous discussion, questions and answers are more convenient for them.
660 Chapter 12: Ensuring quality teaching in a digital age

Asynchronous communications can be accessed at any time. Also, they are much more convenient for
me as an instructor. For instance I can go to a conference even in another country yet still log on to my
course when I have some free time. I also have a record of what I have said to students. If using an LMS,
it is password protected and communications can be kept within the class group.

   However, asynchronous communication can be frustrating for students when complex decisions need
to be made within a tight timescale, such as deciding the roles and responsibilities for group work,
the final draft of a group assignment, or a student's lack of understanding that is blocking any further
progress on the topic. Then face-to-face or technology-based synchronous communication is better,
depending on whether it is a blended or fully online course.

   In a fully online course, I also sometimes use a conferencing system such as Blackboard Collaborate
or ZOOM to bring all the students together once or twice during a semester, to get a feeling of
community at the start of a course, to establish my `presence' as a real person with a face or voice at the
start of a course, or to wrap up a course at the end, and I try to provide plenty of opportunity for questions
and discussion by the students themselves. However, these synchronous `lectures' are always optional
as there will always be some students who cannot be present (although they can be made available in
recorded format).

   For a blended course, though, I would organise a series of relatively small face-to-face group sessions
in the first or second week of a course, so students can get to know each other as well as me, then keep
them in the same groups for any group work or discussions.

   Blogs or e-portfolios can be used by students to record their learning or to reflect on what they have
learned, and blogs can be a useful way for the instructor to comment on news or events relevant to a
course, but care is needed to keep a clear separation between students' private lives and conversations,
and the more formal in-class communications.

12.10.6 Managing online discussion

Whole books have been written on this topic (see Salmon, 2000, Paloff and Pratt, 2007; Harasim,
2017) and this is discussed in detail in Chapter 4, Section 4.4.4. However, there are some basic
guidelines to follow.

12.10.6.1 Threaded discussion

Use the threaded discussion forum facility in the LMS (in some LMSs the instructor has to choose to
switch this on).
                                                                               12.10 Step eight: communicate, communicate, communicate 661

     Figure 12.10.2 Example of a threaded discussion topic. This is an old LMS (WebCT) but illustrates
     clearly the value of a threaded discussion.
   Although LMSs are losing some of their original appeal, with more and more instructors using
WordPress or other content management systems, I like to use the LMS forum discussion tool because I
can organize the discussion by separate topics (a forum for each topic).
   In a threaded discussion, a student comment on someone else's post on a topic is posted next to the
post, allowing either the student making the original post or other students to respond to the comment.
This way a `thread' of comments linked to a specific topic can be followed. A well chosen topic or sub-
topic will often have ten or more threaded comments, and the instructor can tell at a glance which topics
have gained `traction'.
   The alternative, comments posted in time order, as in comments on a blog, for instance, make it
difficult to follow a thread of an argument. Also I like to keep a least some of the discussion `private',
662 Chapter 12: Ensuring quality teaching in a digital age

just between me and the students on the course, as I am using the discussion forum to identify areas of
misunderstanding and to develop skills such as critical thinking and clear communication.

12.10.6.2 Be there!

By that I mean ensure that students are aware of your regular online presence. This means monitoring
the discussions on a regular basis, and occasionally intervening when appropriate, without hogging the
discussion.

   For more guidance on handling online communication with students, take a look particularly at the
books by Gilly Salmon, Rena Paloff and Keith Pratt, and Linda Harasim in the references below.

12.10.7 Cultural and other student differences

The most interesting and exciting courses that I have taught have included a wide range of international
students from different countries. However, even if all the students are within one hour's commute of
the institution, they will have different learning styles and approaches to studying online. This is why it
is important to be clear about the desired learning outcomes, and the goals for discussion forums.

   Students learn in different ways. If one of the desired learning outcomes is critical thinking, students
can achieve that in different ways. Some may prefer to discuss course issues with other students over a
coffee. Some may do a lot of reading, seeking out different viewpoints. Others may prefer to work
mainly in the online discussion forums. Some students learn a lot by lurking online but never contribute
directly. Now if you are trying to improve international students' language skills, then you may require
them to participate in the online discussions, and will assess them on their contributions. However, I try
not force students to participate. I see it as my challenge to make the topic interesting enough to draw
them in. I don't really care how they achieve the learning outcomes so long as they do.

   Having said that, much can be done to facilitate or encourage students to participate. I taught one
graduate course where I had about 20 of the 30 students in my class with Chinese surnames. From the
student records and the short bios they posted I noted that a few students were from the Chinese
mainland, several more were living in Hong Kong, and the rest had Canadian addresses. However even
the latter consisted of two quite different groups: recent immigrants to Canada, and at least one student
whose great grandfather had been one of the first immigrants to Canada in the 19th century.

   Although it is dangerous to rely on stereotypes, I noticed that the further away `psychologically' or
geographically the student was, the less they were initially inclined to participate online. This was
partly a language issue but also a cultural issue. The mainland Chinese in particular were very reluctant
to post comments. Fortunately we had a visiting Chinese scholar with us and she advised us to get the
three mainland Chinese women on the course to develop a collective contribution to the discussion and
then ask them to send it to me to check that it was `appropriate' before they posted. I made a few
comments then sent it back and they then posted it. Gradually by the end of the course they each had
the confidence to post individually their own comments. But it was a difficult process for them. (On the
other hand, I had Mexican students who commented on everything, whether it was about the course or
not, and especially about the World Cup soccer tournament that was on at the time).

   Students differences (and possibly stereotypes) also change over time. I am not sure whether 20
years later the differences would apply to students with Chinese names today. The important point is
that different students respond differently to online discussion and the instructor needs sensitivity to
these differences, and strategies to ensure participation from everyone.
                    12.10 Step eight: communicate, communicate, communicate 663

12.10.8 Conclusion

This is a big topic and difficult to cover adequately in one section. However, the importance of instructor
presence cannot be overemphasized for getting students successfully to complete any course with an
online component. The lack of instructor online presence in xMOOCs is one reason so few students
complete the courses.

   There is an unlimited number of ways in which you, as an instructor, can communicate now with
students, but it is also essential at the same time to control your workload. You cannot be available 24×7,
and this means designing the online delivery in such a way that your `presence' is used to best effect. At
the same time, communication with online students can end up being the most interesting and satisfying
part of teaching.

                    Activity 12.10 Communicating with your students

   1. How could you apply some of the principles of instructor presence in an online course to a large lecture
class?

   2. In a blended class where students have at least one classroom session once a week, how would you decide
what interactions with students should be done on campus, and what online? What are the reasons for your
decision? Does it matter?

   3. How important is student discussion in your subject area? What learning goals does it support? How can
you help students to achieve these goals through discussion?

   4. Interaction/communication between students and teachers/instructors is one of the main cost drivers
of education. Could the goals that justify the use of discussion or other forms of communication between
learners and teachers or instructors be achieved in other, less costly, ways? Could this be replaced by
computers, for instance? If not, why not?

   For feedback on this activity, click on the podcast below:

   An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=323

References and further reading

(This is just a small sample of many publications on this topic,)
   Anderson, T., Rourke, L., Garrison, R., & Archer, W. (2001). Assessing teaching presence in a

computer conferencing context Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, Vol. 5, No.2.
   Baker, C. (2010) The Impact of Instructor Immediacy and Presence for Online Student Affective

Learning, Cognition, and Motivation The Journal of Educators Online Vol. 7, No. 1
   Garrison, D. R. & Cleveland-Innes, M. (2005). Facilitating cognitive presence in online learning:

Interaction is not enough American Journal of Distance Education, Vol. 19, No. 3
   Harasim, L. (2017) Learning Theory and Online Technologies 2nd edition New York/London: Taylor

and Francis
664 Chapter 12: Ensuring quality teaching in a digital age

   Jonassen, D., Davidson, M., Collins, M., Campbell, J. and Haag, B. (1995) `Constructivism and
Computer-mediated Communication in Distance Education', American Journal of Distance Education,
Vol. 9, No. 2, pp 7-26.

   Paloff, R. and Pratt, K. (2007) Building Online Learning Communities San Francisco: John Wiley and
Co.

   Salmon, G. (2000) E-moderating London/New York: Taylor and Francis
   Sheridan, K. and Kelly, M. (2010) The Indicators of Instructor Presence that are Important to
Students in Online Courses MERLOT Journal of Online Learning and Teaching, Vol. 6, No. 4
12.11 Step nine: evaluate and innovate

Figure 12.11.1 Evaluate and innovate Image: Hilary Page-Bucci, 2002
                                                                   665
666 Chapter 12: Ensuring quality teaching in a digital age

   The last key `fundamental' of quality teaching and learning in a digital age is evaluation and
innovation: assessing what has been done, and then looking at ways to improve on it (for a more in-depth
discussion of the issues involved in evaluating online learning, see Gunawardena et al., 2000)

12.11.1 Why evaluation is important

For tenure and promotion, it is important if you are teaching to be able to provide evidence that
the teaching has been successful. New tools and new approaches to teaching are constantly coming
available. They provide the opportunity to experiment a little to see if the results are better, and if we
do that, we need to evaluate the impact of using a new tool or course design. It's what professionals do.
But the main reason is that teaching is like golf: we strive for perfection but can never achieve it. It's
always possible to improve, and one of the best ways of doing that is through a systematic analysis of
past experience.

12.11.2 What to evaluate: summative

In Step 1, I defined quality very narrowly:

     teaching methods that successfully help learners develop the knowledge and skills they will
     require in a digital age.

   It will be clear from reading this book that I believe that to achieve these goals, it will be necessary to
re-design most courses and programs. So it will be important to know whether these redesigned courses
are more effective than the `old' courses. One way of evaluating these new courses is to see how they
compared with the older courses, for instance:

         · completion rates will be at least as good if not better for the new version of the course(s)
         · grades or measures of learning will be at least as good if not better for the new version.

The first two criteria are relatively easily measured in quantitative terms. We should be aiming for
completion rates of at least 85 per cent, which means of 100 students starting the course, 85 complete by
passing the end of course assessment (unfortunately, many current courses fail to achieve this rate, but if
we value good teaching, we should be trying to bring as many students as possible to the set standard).

   The second criterion is to compare the grades. We would expect at least as many As and Bs in our
new version as in the old classroom version, while maintaining the same (hopefully high) standards or
higher.

   However, to be valid the evaluation will also would need to define the knowledge and skills within a
course that meet the needs of a digital age, then measuring how effective the teaching was in doing this.
Thus a third criterion would be:

         · the new design(s) will lead to new and different learning outcomes that are more relevant to
            the needs of a digital age.

This third criterion is more difficult, because it suggests a change in the intended learning goals for
courses or programs. This might include assessing students' communication skills with new media, or
                                                                                                           12.11 Step nine: evaluate and innovate 667

their ability to find, evaluate, analyze and apply information appropriately within the subject domain
(knowledge management), which have not previously been (adequately) assessed in the classroom
version. This requires a qualitative judgement as to which learning goals are most important, and this
may require endorsement or support from a departmental curriculum committee or even an external
accreditation body.

   With a new design, and new learning outcomes, it may be difficult to reach these standards
immediately, but over two or three years it should be possible.

12.11.3 What to evaluate: formative

However, even if we measure the course by these three criteria, we will not necessarily know what
worked and what didn't in the course. We need to look more closely at factors that may have influenced
students' ability to learn. We have laid out in steps 1-8 some of these factors. Some of the questions for
which you may want answers are as follows:

         · Were the learning outcomes or goals clear to students?
         · What learning outcomes did most students struggle with?
         · Was the teaching material clear and well structured?
         · Were the learning materials and tools students needed easily accessible and available 24 x 7?
         · What topics generated good discussion and what didn't?
         · Did students draw appropriately on the course materials in their discussion forums or

            assignments?
         · Did students find their own appropriate sources and use them well in discussions,

            assignments and other student activities?
         · Which student activities worked well, and which badly? Why?
         · What of the supplied learning materials did students make most and least use of?
         · Did the assignments adequately assess the knowledge and skills the course was aiming to

            teach?
         · Were the students overloaded with work?
         · Was it too much work for me as an instructor?
         · If so, what could I do to better manage my workload (or the students') without losing

            quality?
         · How satisfied were the students with the course?
         · How satisfied am I with the course?

I will now suggest some ways that these questions can be answered without again causing a huge amount
of work.
668 Chapter 12: Ensuring quality teaching in a digital age

12.11.4 How to evaluate factors contributing to or inhibiting learning
There is a range of resources you can draw on to do this, much more in fact than for evaluating traditional
face-to-face courses, because online learning leaves a traceable digital trail of evidence:

         · student grades;
         · individual student participation rates in online activities, such as self-assessment questions,

            discussion forums, podcasts;
         · qualitative analysis of the discussion forums, for instance the quality and range of comments,

            indicating the level or depth of engagement or thinking;
         · student e-portfolios, assignments and exam answers;
         · student questionnaires;
         · focus groups.
However, before starting, it is useful to draw up a list of questions as in the previous section, and then
look at which sources are most likely to provide answers to those questions.

Figure 12.11.2 Analysis of a sample of exam answers will often provide information about course structure and the
presentation of materials
                                                                                                           12.11 Step nine: evaluate and innovate 669

   At the end of a course, I tend to look at the student grades, and identify which students did well and
which struggled. This depends of course on the number of students in a class. In a large class I might
sample by grades. I then go back to the beginning of the course and track their online participation as far
as possible (learning analytics make this much easier, although it can also be done manually if a learning
management system is used). I find that some factors are student specific (e.g. a gregarious student who
communicates with everyone) and some are course factor specific, for example, related to learning goals
or the way I have explained or presented content. This qualitative approach will often suggest changes
to the content or the way I interacted with students for the next version of the course. I may for instance
determine next time to manage more carefully students who `hog' the conversation.

   Many institutions have a `standard' student reporting system at the end of each course. These are
often useless for the purposes of evaluating courses with an online component. The questions asked
need to be adapted to the mode of delivery. However, because such questionnaires are used for cross
course comparisons, the people who manage such evaluation forms are often reluctant to have a different
version for online teaching. Secondly, because these questionnaires are usually voluntarily completed by
students after the course has ended, completion rates are often notoriously low (less than 20 per cent).
Low response rates are usually worthless or at best highly misleading. Students who have dropped out of
the course won't even get the questionnaire in most cases. Low response rates tend to be heavily biased
towards successful students. It is the students who struggled or dropped out that you need to hear from.

   I find small focus groups work better than student questionnaires, and for this I prefer either face-
to-face or synchronous tools such as Blackboard Collaborate. I will deliberately approach 7-8 specific
students covering the full range of achievement, from drop-out to A, and conduct a one hour discussion
around specific questions about the course. If one selected student does not want to participate, I try to
find another in the same category. If you can find the time, two or three such focus groups will provide
more reliable feedback than just one.

12.11.5 Innovate

Usually I spend quite a bit of time at the end of the first presentation of a redesigned course evaluating it
and making changes in the next version, usually working with a trusted instructional designer. After that
I concentrate mainly on ensuring completion rates and grades are at the standard I have aimed for.

   What I am more likely to do in the third or subsequent offerings is to look at ways to improve the
course that are the result of new external factors, such as new software (for instance. an e-portfolio
package), or new processes (for instance, student-generated content, using mobile phones or cameras,
collecting project-related data). This keeps the course `fresh' and interesting. However, I usually limit
myself to one substantive change, partly for workload reasons but also because this way it is easier to
measure the impact of the change.

   It is indeed an exciting time to be an instructor. In particular, the new generation of web 2.0 tools,
including WordPress, new, instructor-focused `lightweight' LMSs such as Instructure/Canvas, open
educational resources, mobile learning, tablets and iPads, MOOCs, and emerging technologies such
as serious games, virtual and augmented reality and artificial intelligence, all offer a wide variety of
opportunities for innovation and experiment. These can be either be integrated within the existing LMS
and existing course structure, or designs can be more radical. Chapters 3 to 5 discuss a wide range of
possible designs.

   However, it is important to remember that the aim is to enable students to learn effectively. We do
670 Chapter 12: Ensuring quality teaching in a digital age

have enough knowledge and experience to be able to design `safe', effective learning around standard
LMSs. New is not always better. Thus for instructors starting in online learning, I would urge caution.
Follow the experienced route, then gradually add and evaluate new tools and new approaches to learning
as you become more experienced.

   Lastly, if you do make an interesting innovation in your course, make sure you properly evaluate it as
suggested above, then share these findings with colleagues and help them either include the innovation
within their own course, or help them make the innovation even better through their own modifications.
That way we can all learn from each other.

Reference/further reading

Gunawardena, C., Lowe, C. & Carabajal, K. (2000) Evaluating Online Learning: models and methods in
D. Willis et al. (eds.), Proceedings of Society for Information Technology & Teacher Education
International Conference 2000 San Diego CA

                                                     Activity 12.11 Evaluating your course or program

      1. Design and conduct an evaluation of your course using the questions in Section 12.11.3 and the data and
   methods suggested in Section 12.11.4. What changes, if any, will you make as a result?

      Ther eis no feedback provided for this activity.
12.12 Building a strong foundation of course design

Figure 12.12 Building a strong foundation for quality teaching
Image: © Wikipedia Commons

   The emphasis in this series of steps is on getting the fundamentals of teaching right. The nine steps
are based on two foundations:

         · effective strategies resulting from learning theories tested in both classroom and online
            environments;

         · experience of successfully teaching both in classrooms and online (best practices).
The discerning reader will have noted that there isn't much in this chapter about exciting new tools,
MOOCs, the Khan Academy, MIT's edX, mobile learning, artificial intelligence, and many other new
developments. These tools and new programs offer great potential and these have been discussed
extensively in other chapters. However, it doesn't matter what revolutionary tools or teaching
approaches are being used, what we know of how people learn does not change a great deal over time,

                                                                   671
672 Chapter 12: Ensuring quality teaching in a digital age

and we do know that learning is a process, and you ignore the factors that influence that process at your
peril.

   A subsidiary aim is to encourage you to work with other professionals, such as instructional and web
designers and media producers, and preferably in a team with other online instructors.

   I have focused mainly on using learning management systems, because that is what most institutions
currently have, and LMSs provide an adequate `framework' within which the key processes of teaching
and learning can be managed, whatever the mode of delivery. I have more difficulty with
integrating lecture capture or web conferencing within the nine steps, because the pedagogy they require
is not suitable for developing the skills needed in a digital age.

   But if you get the fundamentals of the nine steps right, they will transfer well to the use of new tools,
and the design of new courses and new programs; if they don't transfer well, such tools are likely to be a
passing fad and will eventually fade away in education, because they don't enable the key processes that
support learning for a digital age. For example, MOOCs may reach hundreds of thousands of students,
but if there is no suitable communication with or `online presence' from an instructor, then most students
will fail or lose interest (as is the case at the moment), unless there is significant support from other, more
experienced, co-learners, as in cMOOCs. However, this support needs to be structured and organised for
effective learning to take place.

   The approach I have suggested is quite conservative, and some may wish to jump straight into what
I would call second generation flexible learning, based on social media such as mobile learning, blogs
and wikis, and so on. These do offer intriguing new possibilities and are worth exploring. Nevertheless,
whether or not an LMS is used, for learning leading to qualifications, it is important to remember
that most students need:

         · well-defined learning goals;

         · a clear timetable of work, based on a well-structured organization of the curriculum;

         · manageable study workloads appropriate for their conditions of learning;

         · regular instructor communication and presence;

         · a social environment that draws on, and contributes to, the knowledge and experience of
            other students;

         · a skilled teacher or instructor;

         · other motivated learners to provide mutual support and encouragement.

There are many different ways these criteria can be met, with many different tools.

                                                                            Key Takeaways

      1. For the purposes of this book, quality is defined as: teaching methods that successfully help learners
   develop the knowledge and skills they will require in a digital age.

      2. Formal national and institutional quality assurance processes do not guarantee quality teaching and
   learning. In particular, they focus on past `best' practices, processes to be done before actual teaching, and
   often ignore the affective, emotional or personal aspects of learning. Nor do they focus particularly on the
   needs of learners in a digital age.
                                                                                     12.12 Building a strong foundation of course design 673

   3. New technologies and the needs of learners in a digital age require a re-thinking of traditional campus-
based teaching, especially where it is has been based mainly on the transmission of knowledge. This means re-
assessing the way you teach and determining how you would really like to teach in a digital age. This requires
imagination and vision rather than technical expertise.

   4. It is important to determine the most appropriate mode of delivery, based on teaching philosophy, the
needs of students, the demands of the discipline, and the resources available.

   5. It is best to work in a team. Blended and especially fully online learning require a range of skills that most
instructors are unlikely to have. Good course design not only enables students to learn better but also controls
faculty workload. Courses look better with good graphic and web design and professional video production.
Specialist technical help frees up instructors to concentrate on the knowledge and skills that students need to
develop.

   6. Full use should be made of existing resources, including institutionally-supported learning technologies,
open educational resources, learning technology staff, and the experience of your colleagues.

   7. The main technologies you will be using should be mastered, so you are professional and knowledgeable
about their strengths and weaknesses for teaching.

   8. Learning goals that are appropriate for learners in a digital age need to be set. The skills students need
should be embedded within their subject domain, and these skills should be formally assessed.

   9. A coherent and clearly communicable structure and learning activities for a course should be developed
that are manageable in terms of workload for both students and instructor.

   10. Regular and on-going instructor/teacher presence, especially when students are studying partly or wholly
online, is essential for student success. This means effective communication between teacher/instructor and
students. It is particularly important to encourage inter-student communication, either face-to-face or online.

   11. The extent to which the new learning goals of re-designed courses aimed at developing the knowledge
and skills needed in a digital age have been achieved should be carefully evaluated and ways in which the
course could be improved should be identified.
Chapter 13: Supporting teachers and instructors in a
digital age

                                                                    The purpose of the chapter

      When you have read this chapter, you should be able to:
              · recognise the need for professional development and training in teaching and define your own
                 needs;
              · recognise the role and importance of learning technology support systems;
              · be able to design a team approach to teaching large classes;
              · understand the need for an institutional strategy to support teaching and learning in a digital age;
              · press for changes within your organisation to ensure that quality teaching is properly supported.

What is covered in this chapter
         · 13.1 Are you a super-hero?
         · 13.2 The development and training of teachers and instructors in a digital age
         · 13.3 Learning technology support
         · 13.4 Conditions of employment
         · 13.5 Team teaching
         · 13.6 An institutional strategy for teaching in a digital age
         · 13.7 Building the future
         · Scenario I Stopping the flu

Also in this chapter you will find the following activities
         · Activity 13.1 There is no activity for this section
         · Activity 13.2 Identifying your professional training needs
         · Activity 13.3 Learning technology support
         · Activity 13.4 Conditions of employment
         · Activity 13.5 Designing a team approach

                                                                   675
676 A.W. (Tony) Bates

         · Activity 13.6 Developing an institutional strategy for supporting teaching and learning

         · Activity 13.7 Develop a future scenario for your teaching

                                                          Key Takeaways (from the book as a whole)

      1. There is increasing pressure from employers, the business community, learners themselves, and also from
   a significant number of educators, for learners to develop the type of knowledge and the kinds of skills that
   they will need in a digital age.

      2. The knowledge and skills needed in a digital age, where all `content' will be increasingly and freely
   available over the Internet, requires graduates with expertise in:

              · knowledge management (the ability to find, evaluate and appropriately apply knowledge);
              · IT knowledge and skills;
              · inter-personal communication skills, including the appropriate use of social media;
              · independent and lifelong learning skills;
              · a range of intellectual skills, including:

                             knowledge construction;
                             reasoning;
                             critical analysis;
                             problem-solving;
                             creativity;

              · collaborative learning and teamwork;
              · multi-tasking and flexibility.

      These are all skills that are relevant to any subject domain, and need to be embedded within that domain.
   With such skills, graduates will be better prepared for a volatile, uncertain, complex and ambiguous world.

      3. To develop such knowledge and skills, teachers and instructors need to set clear learning outcomes and
   select teaching methods that will support the development of such knowledge and skills, and, since all skills
   require practice and feedback to develop, learners must be given ample opportunity to practice such skills. This
   requires moving away from a model of information transmission to greater student engagement, more learner-
   centred teaching, and new methods of assessment that measure skills as well as mastery of content.

      4. Because of the increased diversity of students, from full-time campus-based learners to lifelong learners
   already with high levels of post-secondary education to learners who have slipped through the formal school
   system and need second-chance opportunities, and because of the capacity of new information technologies
   to provide learning at any time and any place, a much wider range of modes of delivery are needed, such as
   campus-based teaching, blended or hybrid learning and fully online courses and programs, both in formal and
   in non-formal settings.

      5. The move to blended, hybrid and online learning and a greater use of learning technologies offers
   more options and choices for teachers and instructors. In order to use these technologies well, teachers and
   instructors require not only to know the strengths and weaknesses of different kinds of technology, but also
   need to have a good grasp of how students learn best. This requires knowing about:
                                                                                                                     Teahing in a Digital Age - 2e 677

           · the research into teaching and learning;

           · different theories of learning related to different concepts of knowledge (epistemology);

           · different methods of teaching and their strengths and weaknesses.

   Without this basic foundation, it is difficult for teachers and instructors to move away from the only model
that many are familiar with, namely the lecture and discussion model, which is limited in terms of developing
the knowledge and skills required in a digital age.

   6. The challenge is particularly acute in universities. There is no requirement to have any training or
qualification in teaching to work in a university in most Western countries. Nevertheless teaching will take up
a minimum of 40 per cent of a faculty member's time, and much more for many adjunct or contract faculty or
full time college instructors. However, the same challenge remains, to a lesser degree, for school teachers
and college instructors: how to ensure that already experienced professionals have the knowledge and skills
required to teach well in a digital age.

   7. Institutions can do much to facilitate or impede the development of the knowledge and skills required in
a digital age. They need to:

           · ensure that all levels of teaching and instructional staff have adequate training in the new
              technologies and methods of teaching necessary for the development of the knowledge and skills
              required in a digital age;

           · ensure that there is adequate learning technology support for teachers and instructors;

           · ensure that conditions of employment and in particular class size enable teaching and
              instructional staff to teach in the ways that will develop the knowledge and skills needed in a
              digital age;

           · develop a practical and coherent institutional strategy to support the kind of teaching needed in a
              digital age.

   8. Although governments, institutions and learners themselves can do a great deal to ensure success in
teaching and learning, in the end the responsibility and to some extent the power to change lies within teachers
and instructors themselves.

   9. It will be the imagination of teachers inventing new ways of teaching that will eventually result in the
kinds of graduates the world will need in the future.
13.1 Are you a super-hero?

Figure 13.1.1 Image: © Simon Bates/eCampus Ontario

   Figure 13.1.1, developed by Simon Bates, Associate Provost, Teaching and Learning at UBC (2016),
encapsulates well the role of a teacher or instructor in a digital age. At this point in the book, you might
be forgiven for thinking that this is all too much, especially if you are a university professor whose
passion is the discipline in which you are an expert, and whose priority is to extend the boundaries
of knowledge in that subject through research or other scholarly work. Where an earth will you find
the time to become expert in teaching if this means completely changing the teaching model you have
become comfortable with? You are not alone in thinking this. Martha Cleveland-Innes (2013) writes:

     It is unrealistic to expect higher education faculty to have sound, current, content expertise, a
     productive research program, an active service commitment AND be expert online teachers. The
     biggest lie in the academy is that the role of faculty, and its rewards and responsibilities, is made
     up of a seemingly balanced set of activities around teaching, research and service (Atkinson, 2001).
     With some variation across type of institution, research is the most valued work and most notably

                                                                   679
680 Chapter 13: Supporting teachers and instructors in a digital age

     rewarded. While this reality has not changed "...classroom teaching and course materials (have
     become) more sophisticated and complex in ways that translate into new forms of faculty work. .....
     such new forms are not replacing old ones, but instead are layered on top of them, making for more
     work." (Rhoades, 2000, p, 38). It is time to clarify this reality and consider how, if at all, changes
     in teaching are, or may be, integrated into the role of faculty member.

   How changes may be integrated into the role of faculty member, instructor or classroom teacher in a
digital age is what this chapter is about. It is not realistic to expect all teachers to be super-heroes (even
if you are the exception), but it is realistic to expect all teachers to be competent and professional in a
digital age.

   The good news though is that if you have read your way through all the chapters in this book, you will
have done what you need to do to be competent and professional for teaching in a digital age, and will
certainly be ahead of 99 per cent of your colleagues on this (at least until they have also read this book).
At the same time, there is much your employing organisation and senior administrators can do to help
you in this, which is the focus of the rest of this chapter.

References

Atkinson, M.P. (2001) `The scholarship of teaching and learning: reconceptualizing scholarship and
transforming the academy' Social Forces, Vol. 79, No. 4 (pp. 1217-1229).

   Bates, S. (2016) The 21st Century Educator Burnaby BC: BCIT Faculty of Nursing Scholarship Day,
May

  Cleveland-Innes, M. (2013) `Teaching in an online community of inquiry: institutional
and individual adjustment in the new higher education`, in Akyol, Z. & Garrison, R.D.
(eds.) Educational communities of inquiry: theoretical framework, research and
practice, (pp. 389-400). Hershey, PA: IGI Global

   Rhoades, G. (2000) `The changing role of faculty' in Losco, J. and Fife, B. (eds.) Higher Education
in Transition: the challenges of the new millennium Westport CT: Bergin and Garvey
13.2 The development and training of teachers and instructors in a
digital age

Figure 13.2.1 A faculty development workshop

13.2.1 The need
By mid-August in most countries in the northern hemisphere, teachers' pro-d and faculty development
workshops and conferences have ended, and everyone has headed off for a well earned vacation. Many
thousands will have learned how to use a learning management or lecture capture system for the first
time, and hundreds of others will have been introduced to new technologies such as e-portfolios, mobile
learning, and open educational resources. A smaller but significant number will have been introduced to
new methods of teaching built around the potential of new technologies. All good stuff - and all totally
inadequate for the needs facing teachers and instructors in a digital age.
13.2.2 A broken professional development model
In universities, faculty are trained, through the doctoral route, to do research, but there is no requirement
to be trained in teaching methods. At best faculty development is voluntary for faculty once appointed,
and although post-doctoral students may be offered short courses or in some instances even a certificate
in preparation for classroom teaching, this is usually voluntary and minimal. Indeed, post-graduate
students interested in experimenting with learning technologies or taking professional courses or
programs in teaching are often deliberately discouraged by their supervisors from doing so, as it would

                                                                   681
682 Chapter 13: Supporting teachers and instructors in a digital age

detract from their research. Increased use of adjunct/contract faculty exacerbates the problem (see
Chapter 13.4). Being on contract, they require payment for any training, but institutions are often
reluctant to train contract workers who may then leave at the end of the contract and take their training
and skills to a competitor.

   The situation is somewhat different in two year colleges. Many jurisdictions (but by no means all)
have a regional, state or provincial Instructor Diploma Program that some colleges require instructors
to take on appointment or shortly afterwards. However, many of these programs have not been adapted
to take account of online learning, and probably none are yet up to date on blended learning. I was
an external reviewer for one such program a while ago, and there was almost no mention of online or
blended learning. Most of the technologies discussed in this program were at least 20 years old.

   The lack of comprehensive and systematic training at a pre-service level places a disproportionate
burden on ongoing professional development, which is at best ad hoc and variable in both quantity
and quality. Above all, it is an entirely voluntary system - in other words, teachers or instructors can
choose not to take any in-service workshops or courses on teaching, if they decide - as most do -
that their professional development time will be better spent focusing on research rather than teaching.
Christensen Hughes and Mighty (2010) argue that less than 10 per cent of all university instructors take
professional development activities focused on improving their teaching, and the faculty that do opt in
are often those in least need of training as they are often already excellent teachers.

   Lastly, most faculty and instructors do not base their teaching practice on empirically-based evidence
or research on the effectiveness of different approaches. Christensen Hughes and Mighty (2010) have
edited a collection of studies on research on teaching and learning in higher education. In the opening
chapter the editors state:

     ...researchers have discovered much about teaching and learning in higher education, but that
     dissemination and uptake of this information have been limited. As such, the impact of educational
     research on faculty-teaching practice and student-learning experience has been negligible.

In the same book, Christopher Knapper (also of Queens University) states (p. 229-230):

     There is increasing empirical evidence from a variety of international settings that prevailing
     teaching practices in higher education do not encourage the sort of learning that contemporary
     society demands....Teaching remains largely didactic, assessment of student work is often trivial,
     and curricula are more likely to emphasize content coverage than acquisition of lifelong and life-
     wide skills....

     [However] there is an impressive body of evidence on how teaching methods and curriculum
     design affect deep, autonomous and reflective learning. Yet most faculty are largely ignorant of this
     scholarship, and instructional practices are dominated by tradition rather than research evidence.

   This book has shown that we do not have to invent or discover what's needed to teach well in a digital
age. There is a well-established literature and generally agreed best practices, yet, as Christensen Hughes
and Mighty have pointed out, many if not a majority of teachers and instructors are unaware or continue
to ignore these standards.

13.2.3 Why the system needs to change

When university education was limited to an elite few students, where faculty had a close, one-on-
                                                     13.2 The development and training of teachers and instructors in a digital age 683

one relationship with students, it was possible to manage quite effectively without formal training
in teaching. That is not the case today. Faculty are challenged by large classes, and heterogeneous
students who learn in a variety of ways, with different learning skills and abilities. The emphasis is
changing from knowledge as content to knowledge as process. Teaching methods need to be chosen that
will develop the skills and competencies needed in a knowledge-based society, and on top of all this,
constantly changing technology requires instructors to have analytical frameworks to help choose and
use technologies appropriately for teaching.

   In particular, the profound effect of the Internet on scholarship, research, work and leisure requires
major reconsideration of our teaching methods, if we are to develop the skills and knowledge our
students will need in a knowledge-based society. This requires comprehensive and systematic training
of our instructors, not a system that depends heavily on opting-in, and that fails to reward adequately
excellence in teaching as measured by the standards required in today's context.

   Moving to blended, hybrid and online learning requires a much higher standard of training for faculty
and instructors. It is not just a question of learning how to use a learning management system or an
iPad. The use of technology needs to be combined with an understanding of how students learn, how
skills are developed, how knowledge is represented through different media and then processed, and
how learners use different senses for learning. It means examining different approaches to learning, such
as the construction of knowledge compared with a transmission model of teaching, and how technology
best works with either approach. Above all, it means linking the use of technology to the specific
requirements of a particular knowledge domain or subject area.

   The expansion into blended and online learning has been facilitated mainly by the establishment
of separate learning technology support units to support faculty and instructors who do not have the
experience or skills to teach online. Although this is essential, it will be prohibitively expensive to
continue to expand such units as blended and online learning continues to grow (Bates and Sangrà,
2011). It is much more cost-effective to provide adequate initial pre-service training so that learning
technology units can concentrate on training, professional development and R&D into new methods of
teaching and learning as new technologies develop.

13.2.4 What needs to be done

Identifying the problem is much easier than fixing it. In particular, the culture especially of universities
protects the existing system. Academic freedom is often used as an argument for the status quo, and
unions in the college system insist on payment for instructors for any time spent on training over and
above their normal teaching load. As Bates and Sangrà (2011) have pointed out, this is a systemic
problem. It is difficult for a university, for example, to change for fear that their best young researchers
will move to another institution where training in teaching is not demanded.

   There are many different ways to address this challenge. I set out one possible strategy below.

13.2.4.1 Recognize that there's a problem

First, it has to be recognized and accepted by institutional leaders, teachers, instructors and faculty, the
relevant unions, quality assurance boards and state funding agencies that there is a major problem here.
Donovan et al. (2019) in a national survey of post-secondary institutions in Canada, found that while 71
per cent of all institutions rated online learning as very or extremely important for their long-term future,
79 per cent reported that the main barrier to greater adoption of online learning was inadequate training,
and in only 29 per cent of institutions was it required in order to teach online.
684 Chapter 13: Supporting teachers and instructors in a digital age

   Developing skilled teachers (and that's what we need in schools, colleges and universities) is as much
an economic development as an educational issue. If we want people with the knowledge and skills
needed in a digital age, then teachers must get the knowledge themselves about how to develop such
skills, and in particular recognize that learning technologies and online learning are critical components
in the development of such skills.

13.2.4.2 Start in graduate school

It is much more economical and effective to prepare instructors properly at the start of their careers
than to try to get large chunks of their time for training while in their mid or late careers. Although
technology will change over time, the basic essentials of teaching and learning are relatively stable.
Thus the problem needs to be tackled at the pre-service level. For those wishing to work as faculty in
universities, we need to examine the post-graduate degree and in particular the Ph.D., to ensure that there
is adequate time for courses on and practice in post-secondary teaching, or develop a parallel route for
developing teaching and research skills.

13.2.4.3 Adopt a system-wide approach

Ideally the state or provincial Council of Universities or Colleges, or school boards, should get together
and develop a comprehensive system of training for all teachers and ensure that such programs
are continually updated. Similarly, a common plan and set of standards needs to be established across
a jurisdiction for hiring and promotion linked to proper training in teaching and learning, through the
establishment of appropriate working groups that would include professionals from learning technology
units and professional development offices.

13.2.4.4 Self-help

We need to walk the talk, and use technology to support professional development. Increasingly, centres
for teaching and learning are creating web sites with `on-demand' resources for faculty and instructors,
such as best practices in using video, podcast production, or designing a course with technology. Too
often, though, other faculty development support sites focus on the technical operation of technology or
just provide a schedule of faculty development workshops, rather than providing pragmatic advice on
best educational practice in the use of a particular technology or medium. Also, teachers and instructors
need to know about such sites - and use them.

13.2.4.5 Set standards

The system-wide working groups should agree on a `core' curriculum, minimum standards, and
measures of performance for pre-service training in teaching for each sector. These standards should
include knowledge and skills needed by learners in a digital age. No person should be hired to new
positions that have a major teaching component without recognized training in teaching, once the
training system is in place.

   ALT (Association of Learning Technologists), UK, provides professional accreditation of learning
technologists, operating at three levels (novice, career, advanced) through certified membership of ALT
(Association of Learning Technologists). It uses a combination of personal portfolios of work and
peer assessment. A similar program could be extended to teachers and instructors, enabling a form of
accreditation based on practice as well as taking courses.
                                                     13.2 The development and training of teachers and instructors in a digital age 685

   For in-service professional development, one strategy would be to require an individual professional
development plan for every teacher or instructor annually negotiated between the teacher and their
head of department. This plan would include regular up-dating in new teaching methods and
technologies, similar to the compulsory professional development programs for medical practitioners.
Different individual professional development plans will be needed for different subject areas.

13.2.4.6 Government as watch dog and enforcer

Governments should exert pressure on school boards, colleges and universities to ensure that an
adequate pre-service and in-service training system is in place, as a condition of future
funding. Governments should refuse to fund any public institution that does not follow the standards for
training in teaching set and endorsed by the relevant system-wide authorities.

13.2.4.7 Integrate internally

Blended and fully online teaching and learning technologies should be seen as integral components
of professional development, not as separate activities. Therefore faculty development offices should
be integrated with learning technology support units into Centres for Teaching and Learning (either
centrally or divisionally, depending on the size of the institution), where this has not already occurred.
686 Chapter 13: Supporting teachers and instructors in a digital age

Figure 13.2.2 Teachers brainstorming about using technology for teaching

13.2.5 Conclusion
We would not dream of allowing doctors or pilots do their work without formal training related to their
main work activities, yet this is exactly the situation regarding teaching in post-secondary education.
We have to move from a system of voluntary amateurism to a professional, comprehensive system of
training for teaching in post-secondary education, and a modern, up-to-date curriculum for pre-service
and in-service training of school teachers. This book attempts to provide at least a basic curriculum for
this kind of training.

   I have suggested some solutions to the systemic problem. Others support the professional
communities of practice route (see for instance Carvalho-Fino et al., 2019), which is more culturally
acceptable to university faculty, but does not meet the test of being comprehensive and systematic.

   Online learning and new learning technologies are not the cause of the problem nor the solution,
but they do provide a necessary catalyst for change. Our students deserve no less than properly trained
teachers. The current situation, at least in post-secondary education, is increasingly unacceptable, a truth
no-one dares to speak. It's about time we dealt with it.
            13.2 The development and training of teachers and instructors in a digital age 687

References

Bates, A. and Sangrà, A. (2011) Managing Technology in Higher Education: Strategies for
Transforming Teaching and Learning San Francisco: Jossey-Bass/John Wiley & Co.

   Carvalho-Fina, M. et al. (2019) Twelve tips for implementing a community of practice for faculty
development Medical Teacher, February 1

   Christensen Hughes, J. and Mighty, J. (eds.) (2010) Taking Stock: Research on Teaching and Learning
in Higher Education Montreal QC and Kingston ON: McGill-Queen's University Press, 350 pp

   Donovan, T. et al. (2019) Tracking Online and Distance Education in Canadian Universities and
Colleges: 2019 Canadian National Survey of Online and Distance Education Halifax NS: Canadian
Digital Learning Research Association

   Knapper, C. (2010) `Changing Teaching Practice: Barriers and Strategies' in ChristensenHughes, J.
and Mighty, J. eds. Taking Stock: Research on Teaching and Learning in Higher Education Toronto ON:
McGill-Queen's University Press

            Activity 13.2 Identifying your professional training needs

   1. Do you believe the professional development system is `broken'? Is this as true for school teacher
education as it is for post-secondary education? Or does the training system in your organisation work
reasonably well for teaching in a digital age?

   2. Would it be better not to train faculty in universities to teach, but just put them in working groups with
instructional designers and media producers?

   3. Having read this book (or parts of it) can you now define your own professional training needs? Can you
get support for this where you work?

   4. In universities, faculty themselves control appointment, tenure and promotion committees. What could be
done to make teaching count for more in appointments, tenure and promotion without weakening the academic
status or standing of a university?

   There is no feedback for this activity; my views on this should be clear from this section!
13.3 Learning technology support

Figure 13.3.1 The University of Bristol Digital Education support site. Click on image to go to web site.

13.3.1 The need for learning technology support systems
There have been many references in this book to the need for teachers and instructors to work, wherever
possible, with instructional designers and media producers when teaching in a digital age. The reasons
for this are fairly obvious:

         · no teacher can be an expert on everything; working in a team covers a wider a range of skills
            and knowledge;

         · technology should be used to decrease instructor and faculty workload, not to increase it, as
            at present; instructional designers in particular should be able to help teachers and faculty to
            manage their workload while still producing high quality teaching; media producers enable

                                                                   689
690 Chapter 13: Supporting teachers and instructors in a digital age

            subject experts to focus on content and skills development;

         · team teaching, with different skills within the team (two or more subject experts,
            instructional designer, media producer) will lead to higher quality teaching.

As a result, over the last ten to twenty years, there has been a rapid expansion in the number of
learning technology support systems, both centrally, and in larger institutions, within different academic
departments. Over time, separate units focusing on faculty development, learning technology support,
and distance education have become merged or integrated into multi-functional units, under a variety of
names, although legacy systems can sometimes take a long while to make this shift.

13.3.2 The scaling problem

As the move to blended, hybrid and online learning increases, so does the demand for these support
units, to such an extent that one university I know well now has over 60 support staff and a budget
of over $12 million a year for its central Centre for Teaching, Learning and Technology, plus
several `satellite' units in the larger faculties. At the other end a small elementary school will be lucky
to have one teacher with some training in maintaining the computers and the Internet added to their
responsibilities. However, many school systems also have a central educational technology unit that can
provide support to individual teachers and schools within the system.

   Institutions are already spending a good deal to support just the fully online courses or programs. We
have good models here based on instructional designers and media specialists working in a team with
instructors in developing fully online courses. This way, the special design requirements for students
studying off campus can be met.

   However, at the moment, fully online courses constitute somewhere around 10-15 per cent of all the
credit-based teaching in North American universities. What happens when we go to 85 per cent or more
of the teaching being blended? The current learning technology support model just won't be able to
handle this expansion, certainly not at the rate that it is being predicted. However, without a design
strategy for blended learning, and adequate support for faculty and instructors, it is almost certain that the
quality will be poor, and it is certain that all the potential benefits of blended learning for transforming
the quality of teaching will not be achieved.

   Trying to extend the support system from fully online to blended courses and programs will ultimately
be unsustainable. Although support units will be essential to get blended learning successfully started,
teaching activities must be economically sustainable, which means faculty and instructors will
eventually need to become able to design and manage blended learning effectively without continuous
and ongoing support from instructional designers and media producers. This will require a huge training
and retraining effort for instructors.

13.3.3 Faculty training or support units? The need for balance

I am a strong supporter of such specialised units to work with teachers and instructors. However, this has
to be balanced against the costs. Funding from these units usually comes from within the overall budget
for teaching and learning which in the end results in larger classes. These support units grow in inverse
proportion to the lack of pre-service and in-service training.

   However, these learning technology support units are essential for the effective development of
teaching in a digital age. Thus a balance needs to be found between the provision of training in the
                                                                                                                  13.3 Learning technology support 691

use of learning technologies and the need for learning technology support units, which is why faculty
development and learning technology units have tended to become integrated, and why institutions need
a defined strategy for supporting teaching and learning. Thus although it is possible for a particularly
dedicated teacher to teach successfully without such support, learning technology support units are
becoming an essential service for most teachers and instructors.

                                                   Activity 13.3 Learning technology support

             1. What kind of learning technology support can you readily access? Is there enough? Can it provide
                 the help you need? Have you tried? Is it close at hand or distant?

             2. What kind of support would you like that isn't being provided at the moment? Have you talked to
                 your learning technology support unit about what kind of help you would like?

             3. Does the unit combine faculty development, learning technology support, and distance education,
                 or are they all in separate units? Does this matter to you?

      There is no feedback on this activity.
13.4 Conditions of employment

Figure 13.4.1 Class size affects the capacity to develop the skills and knowledge needed in a digital age

   There are currently some major changes in conditions of employment that will influence the ability of
individual teachers and instructors to deliver the kind of teaching needed in a digital age.
13.4.1 Class size
The most obvious is class size. Although some economies of scale are definitely achievable through the
use of technology for teaching (see for instance, Bates, 2013), and there is no magic number as to how
many students there should be per teacher, we have seen in earlier chapters that instructor presence and
the interaction between subject experts and students are critical factors in developing the knowledge and
skills needed in a digital age.

   Although technology can replace the need for instructors for the transmission of content, the need for

                                                                   693
694 Chapter 13: Supporting teachers and instructors in a digital age

ongoing communication between teacher and students for deep understanding and the development of
skills, means that there soon becomes a limit, in terms of the number of students per instructor, beyond
which the teaching rapidly starts to become ineffective, at least in terms of the knowledge and skills that
matter most (Carey and Trick, 2013).

   Thus the major challenge is in universities and some large two-year colleges, where first and second
year classes can number in the thousands, and even in third or fourth year classes, in the hundreds. What
can be done to ensure that teacher student ratios are kept to a manageable size? Institutions have taken a
number of different approaches to this challenge.

13.4.2 The increased use of contract instructors and teaching assistants

One of the biggest changes to universities in North America over the last twenty years has been the
growth of non-tenured teaching faculty in universities. An explosion in undergraduate enrolments across
Canada - 400,000 more students from 2002 to 2012 - has come without a corresponding increase in
tenure-track faculty. While the number of instructors doubled between the 1980s and 2006, there was
a decline of 10 per cent in tenure and tenure-track faculty (Chiose, 2015). The position is, if anything,
even more dramatic in the USA, where universities and colleges were much harder hit by the economic
crisis in 2008 than their Canadian counterparts.

   In an article in Canada's leading newspaper, the Globe and Mail, Simona Chiose wrote (2018):

     Canadian universities say they can no longer afford to deliver higher education through tenured
     academics who may spend more than a third of their time engaged in research. Instead, most
     universities have decided that, to staff their classrooms at reasonable cost, they must turn, in
     varying degrees, to contract instructors and teaching-track faculty.

   Contract staff such as adjuncts or sessionals usually have either a doctoral degree in the subject area,
or strongly related work experience for more vocational subjects. In Canada, the union representing
contract instructors (CUPE) is fighting to get multiyear contracts for sessional instructors who now have
to reapply each year for their jobs. Ideally, the union would like universities to give sessional instructors
priority for teaching-track jobs, which do not have tenure, but have more job security than contract
positions. With job security can come opportunities for training in teaching.

   However, an even more alarming development in recent years has been an increasing tendency to use
post-graduate students as teaching assistants, often responsible for delivering lectures to 200 students
or more in first and second year courses. This model is also being increasingly used where institutions
are moving to a hybrid model, combining both online and face-to-face components, especially where a
former very large lecture-based course is being redesigned for hybrid learning. Even including the TAs,
the instructor/student ratio is often 1:100 or higher for these large enrollment courses. There is usually
no additional training for TAs about how to teach online, although in many - but by no means all - cases,
they do get some kind of training in teaching face-to-face.

   With fully online courses, though, a different model has often been used where the instructor:student
ratio has been deliberately targeted at under 40 for undergraduate courses, and under 30 for graduate
courses. Scaling up has been handled by hiring additional part-time adjunct or associate professors on
contract. The adjuncts would be paid to take a short online briefing course on teaching online which sets
out the expectations for online teaching. This was an affordable model because the additional student
tuition fees would more than cover the cost of hiring additional contract instructors, once the course was
developed (Bates and Poole, 2003).
                                                                                                                     13.4 Conditions of employment 695

   However, this has been possible because most of such online courses have been aimed mainly at
higher level undergraduate students or graduate students. With both blended and online courses now
being targeted at large first and second year classes, new models are being developed that may not have
the same level of quality as the `best practice' online courses. This is a particularly difficult issue for
several reasons:

         · practices both for dealing with large face-to-face classes and with online classes vary
            considerably within each form of delivery, and from one institution to another, so making
            generalizations is fraught with danger;

         · decisions about whether to use teaching assistants or part-time, contract instructors, are
            driven more by financial considerations than by best pedagogical practice;

         · there are other factors at work besides money and pedagogy in the use of teaching assistants
            and adjunct faculty, such as the desire to provide financial support to international and
            graduate students, the idea of apprenticeship in teaching, and the supply and demand effects
            on the employment of doctoral graduates seeking a career in university teaching and
            research;

         · there is no golden mean for instructor/student ratios in either blended or online learning. In
            the mainly quantitative/STEM subjects, much higher ratios are sustainable without the loss of
            quality, through the use of automated marking and feedback, for the theory component, while
            the practical component requires much lower ratios due to the need to share equipment and
            monitor students;

         · MOOCs are (wrongly) giving the impression that it is possible to scale up even credit-based
            online learning at lower cost, by eliminating learning support provided by tenured faculty.

Despite these caveats, there is a genuine concern that the over-reliance on teaching assistants for online
and blended courses will have three negative consequences for both students and online learning in
general:

         · as with the large face-to-face classes, the pedagogy for online or blended courses will resort
            more to information transmission, due to the TAs' lack of training and experience in teaching
            online;

         · for the online or hybrid courses, student drop-out and dissatisfaction will increase because,
            especially in first and second year teaching, they will not get the learning support they need
            when studying online. As a result, faculty and students will claim that hybrid or fully online
            learning is inferior to classroom-based instruction;

         · faculty and especially faculty unions will see online learning and blended learning being used
            by administrations to cut costs and over time to reduce the employment of tenured faculty,
            and will therefore try to block its implementation.

Why can't TAs provide the support needed online if they can do this for face-to-face classes? First, it is
arguable whether they do provide adequate support for students in large first year classes, but in online
courses in subject domains where discussion is important, where qualitative judgements and decisions
have to be made by students and instructors, where knowledge needs to be developed and structured,
in other words in any field where the learning requires more than the transmission and repetition of
information, then students need to be able to interact with an instructor that has a deep understanding of
696 Chapter 13: Supporting teachers and instructors in a digital age

the subject area. Thus there are good reasons to hire adjunct faculty (as usually they already have post-
graduate qualifications) to teach online or in blended formats, but not TAs in general (although there will
always be exceptions).

13.4.3 The elephant in the room

However, the discussion about the use of adjuncts and TAs masks a more significant issue. There are
two factors that lead to the very large class sizes in first and second year that faculty and their unions
really don't want to talk about:

         · the starvation of first and second year students of teaching resources; senior faculty
            concentrate more on upper level courses, and want to keep these class sizes smaller. As a
            consequence first and second year students suffer;

         · teaching subsidizes research: too often tuition revenues get filtered off into supporting
            research activities. The most obvious case is that if teachers spent more time teaching and
            less doing research, there would be more faculty available for teaching. Teaching loads for
            experienced, tenured faculty are often quite light and as stated above, focused on small upper
            level classes. A report from the Higher Education Quality Council of Ontario (Jonker and
            Hicks, 2014) suggested that if professors whom it has classified as laggards in research
            doubled their teaching time, it would be the equivalent of adding 1,500 faculty members
            across the province, enough to staff an additional mid-sized university.

13.4.4 The increasing diversity of teachers

Much has been said in this book about the increasing diversity of students, and the implications for
teaching. We should add to that the increasing diversity of teachers:

         · fully tenured, research-focused faculty, with very high academic qualifications but relatively
            little or no training in teaching;

         · contract adjunct or sessional instructors, highly qualified academically, but with little or no
            chance of professional development in the teaching area;

         · teaching assistants, with mid-level academic qualifications and little or no training in
            teaching;

         · work-experienced vocational and technical instructors, with a small amount of training in
            teaching;

         · school teachers, well trained in general teaching methods, but few with training specifically
            for teaching in a digital age.

The reasons for and the significance of this increasing diversity of teachers and instructors is beyond the
scope of this book. Nevertheless, without some kind of job security there is little opportunity or incentive
for training in new technologies and teaching methods.
                                                    13.4 Conditions of employment 697

References

Bates, A. and Poole, G. (2003) Effective Teaching with Technology in Higher Education: Foundations
for Success San Francisco: Jossey-Bass

   Bates, T. (2013) Productivity and online learning redux, Online Learning and Distance Education
Resources, December 23

   Carey, T., & Trick, D. (2013). How Online Learning Affects Productivity, Cost and Quality in Higher
Education: An Environmental Scan and Review of the Literature. Toronto: Higher Education Quality
Council of Ontario,

   Chiose, S. (2018) Increased pressures, class sizes, taking their toll on faculties in academia, Globe and
Mail, May 12

   Jonker, L. and Hicks, M. (2014) Teaching Loads and Research Outputs of Ontario University Faculty:
Implications for Productivity and Differentiation Toronto: Higher Education Quality Council of Ontario

            Activity 13.4 Conditions of employment

      1. Why does class size matter particularly for developing the knowledge and skills needed in a
           digital age?

      2. Some governments think online learning will enable larger classes. Do you agree? What are your
           reasons?

      3. What are the advantages and disadvantages of having just teaching staff in universities, such as
           tenure track teaching professors and/or adjuncts/sessionals/contract instructors, in terms of the
           development of the knowledge and skills required in a digital age?

Click on the podcast below for my views on the above:

                   An audio element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can listen to it online here:
                https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/teachinginadigitalagev2/?p=343
13.5 Team teaching

Figure 15.5.1 Breaking down a large lecture class into smaller groups Image: © University of Texas at San Antonio

   There is no easy solution to the problem of reducing class size to numbers that will ensure all students
can be helped to develop the knowledge and skills needed in a digital age. Alex Usher in his blog One
Thought to Start Your Day examines different ways to allocate teaching loads to instructors, resulting in
classes of different sizes. However, teaching load is usually organised at a departmental level. Too often,
an individual instructor has little choice over the size of class to which they are allocated.

   Whatever the course design, face-to-face, blended or fully online, large numbers of students per
instructor limits what is possible pedagogically. It is extremely difficult to teach the higher level skills
of critical thinking, problem-solving and collaborative working in very large classes. Nevertheless, there
are several successful approaches to re-designing these large introductory courses of 1,000 students or
more, involving the use of blended learning. See for instance:

         · the National Center for Academic Transformation`s course redesign process,
         · a large first year psychology course at McMaster University,
         · an online large enrolment course in anatomy at Dalhousie University
The following design attempts to build in at least some opportunities for the development of high level
skills in a very large class:

                                                                   699
700 Chapter 13: Supporting teachers and instructors in a digital age

         · create a team to design, develop and deliver the course; the team will include a senior tenured
            professor, four TAs, plus an instructional designer and web/multimedia designer allocated to
            help with the initial design;

         · the senior professor acts as a teaching consultant, responsible for the overall design of the
            course, hiring and supervising the work of the TAs, and designing the assessment strategy/
            questions and rubrics, in consultation with the rest of the team;

         · nearly all content is provided online through a combination of short videos and textual
            material designed and loaded on the LMS; this is largely the work of the senior professor
            working with the instructional designer, assisted by the TAs, before the course begins;

         · computer-marked assignments are used to mark student comprehension and understanding,
            and to provide automated feedback/guidance; there is an end-of semester computer-marked
            assignment that provides an individual mark for each student;

         · students are allocated to groups of 33, and each of the TAs is responsible for eight student
            groups, or 250 per TA;

         · each TA acts as the day-to-day link for each of the 33 students in each of the eight groups
            they are responsible for;

         · each class of 33 is divided into five sub-groups of six to seven students, who work on two
            projects a semester; the first project is not assessed, but is subject to student peer review,
            using guidelines/rubrics established by the senior professor; the second project is assessed by
            the TAs (roughly 40 assignments per TA), again using rubrics designed by the senior
            professor. The projects aim to develop specific, pre-identified skills, such as critical thinking,
            problem solving, and collaborative working.

         · students in each group of six or seven work through online discussion forums or face-to-face
            on each project, depending on convenience to the students. The discussion forums are lightly
            moderated by the TAs, mainly to ensure that students are on topic and respectful to each
            other; if serious issues arise, these are referred to the senior professor;

         · TAs mark the group assignments, following rubrics decided earlier, and the senior professor
            monitors and calibrates the marking between instructors; for each student their group mark
            (50%) is added to their individual mark (50%) from the end-of-semester computer-marked
            assignment;

         · the senior professor meets for one hour a week with a different group of 33 students three
            times a week either face-to-face or synchronously online; this means that every student gets
            at least one hour of personal interaction with the senior professor during the semester. The
            sessions are used to discuss key issues in the course and focus on the pre-determined skills
            development.

Whatever detailed design is done, these large courses should have a clear business model to work
with, which basically provides an overall budget for the course, that includes the cost of the TAs, and
takes account of the students numbers (more students, more budgeted money), but allowing the senior
professor to build the team as best as possible within that budget. TAs would receive a briefing on
responsibilities, online mentoring, assessment marking, for which they would be paid in addition to or
as part of their teaching contract.

   Ideally though the organization of teaching should not result in such very large classes, if at all
                                                                                                                                      13.5 Team teaching 701

possible. However, the principle of team teaching should be considered for all classes with more than 30
or so students.

Reference

Sana, F. et al. (2011) A Case Study of the Introductory Psychology Blended Learning Model at
McMaster University The Canadian Journal for the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, Vol. 2, No.1

   Usher, A. (2019) Managing Class Size One Thought to Start Your Day, Higher Education Strategy
Associates, September 18

                                                           Activity 13.5 Designing a team approach

      1. Assume you have a class of 1,600 students for which you are responsible. You have the resources to hire
   two adjunct faculty and six TAs. How would you design the class?

      There is no feedback for this activity.
13.6 An institutional strategy for teaching in a digital age

                                                                   703
704 Chapter 13: Supporting teachers and instructors in a digital age

Figure 13.6.1 The University of Ottawa's e-learning plan. Click on the graphic to access the plan.

   It can be seen that issues around faculty development and training, class size, hiring of contract
instructors and teaching assistants, and team work will influence the organisation's capacity to do the
kind of teaching that will develop the knowledge and skills needed in a digital age (or any other age, for
that matter). It may be possible for you, particularly if you are tenured faculty working in a university,
                                                                                  13.6 An institutional strategy for teaching in a digital age 705

individually to make the necessary changes to your teaching to fit the needs of a digital age, but for the
majority of teachers and instructors, the institution as a whole needs to support the necessary changes to
teaching. It can do this best by having a formal plan or strategy that sets out:

         · the rationale for changes;

         · the goals or outcomes that such changes will lead to (for example, learners with specified
            skills and competencies);

         · actions that will support the changes (for example, funding for new course design, re-
            organisation of services);

         · a financial strategy to support the intended changes, such as funding for innovation in
            teaching;

         · a way of measuring successful implementation of the strategy.

There are various ways in which such a strategy may be developed (see Bates and Sangrà, 2011),
including top-down and bottom-up processes for setting overall goals, but in a university it may be
through an annual academic planning process where departments/faculties must submit their plans for
the next three years, including resources needed, based on meeting the overall academic goals set by the
university. In such a planning cycle, it is important to include the goals for meeting the needs of learners
in a digital age as `targets' for departments when drawing up their plans. These plans should indicate not
only content to be covered but also delivery and teaching methods to be used, with a rationale for them.

   Many universities and colleges are in the process of developing or implementing such plans, such
as the University of British Columbia's Flexible Learning Initiative and the University of Ottawa's e-
learning plan. Indeed, at least in Canada, most institutions have recognised the need for a strategic plan
for `e-learning'. Donovan et al. (2019) found that 71 per cent of responding post-secondary institutions
reported that online learning is very or extremely important for the institution's long-term strategic
or academic plan. However, only 42 per cent actually had implemented or were implementing a
strategic plan for e-learning, and it is not know how closely these plans are tied to the development
of the knowledge and skills needed in a digital age, or whether they focus mainly on resources or
organizational issues. Nevertheless, a good plan, preferably dynamic and continually reviewed, is
essential for such developments.

   Lastly, it is of course important for anyone who has read this book to make sure they are actively
engaged in such processes, to help shape policy and direction. Without institutional support, it will be
difficult to make significant changes.

References

Bates, A. and Sangrà, A. (2011) Managing Technology in Higher Education: Strategies for
Transforming Teaching and Learning San Francisco: Jossey-Bass/John Wiley & Co.

   Donovan, T. et al. (2019) Tracking Online and Distance Education in Canadian Universities and
Colleges: 2019 Canadian National Survey of Online and Distance Education Halifax NS: Canadian
Digital Learning Research Association

   University of British Columbia (2014) Flexible Learning - Charting a strategic vision for UBC
(Vancouver Campus) Vancouver BC: Flexible Learning Implementation Team

   University of Ottawa (2013) Report of the e-Learning Working Group Ottawa ON: The University of
Ottawa
706 Chapter 13: Supporting teachers and instructors in a digital age

                            Activity 13.6 Developing an institutional strategy for supporting teaching and learning

      1. Does your organisation have a strategy for teaching and learning? Is it any good? Does it deal with the
   needs of learners in a digital age?

      2. If you could design or change your organisation's strategy for teaching and learning, what would you
   include?

      There is no feedback provided on this activity.
13.7 Building the future

Figure 13.7.1 Navigating a volatile, uncertain, complex and ambiguous world
Image: © Carol Mase, Free Management Library, 2011, used with permission

13.7.1 The rationale for change
This book really sets out the case for increased training in teaching methods, or more accurately a
different approach to training, for teachers, instructors and faculty, if students are to be fully prepared
for life in a digital age. The argument goes like this:
1. There is increasing pressure from employers, the business community, learners themselves, and also

                                                                   707
708 Chapter 13: Supporting teachers and instructors in a digital age

from a significant number of educators, for learners to develop the type of knowledge and the kinds of
skills that they will need in a digital age.

2. The knowledge and skills needed in a digital age, where all `content' will be increasingly and freely
available over the Internet, requires graduates with expertise in:

         · knowledge management (the ability to find, evaluate and appropriately apply knowledge);

         · IT knowledge and skill;

         · inter-personal communication skills, including the appropriate use of social media;

         · independent and lifelong learning skills;

         · a range of intellectual skills, including:

                      knowledge construction;

                      reasoning;

                      critical analysis;

                      problem-solving;

                      creativity;

         · collaborative learning and teamwork;

         · multi-tasking and flexibility.

These are all skills that are relevant to any subject domain, and need to be embedded within that domain.
With such skills, graduates will be better prepared for a volatile, uncertain, complex and ambiguous
world.

3. To develop such knowledge and skills, teachers and instructors need to set clear learning outcomes
and select teaching methods that will support the development of such knowledge and skills, and, since
all skills require practice and feedback to develop, learners must be given ample opportunity to practice
such skills. This requires moving away from a model of information transmission to greater student
engagement, more learner-centred teaching, and new methods of assessment that measure skills as well
as mastery of content.

4. Because of the increased diversity of students, from full-time campus-based learners to lifelong
learners already with high levels of post-secondary education to learners who have slipped through
the formal school system and need second-chance opportunities, and because of the capacity of new
information technologies to provide learning at any time and any place, a much wider range of modes of
delivery are needed, such as campus-based teaching, blended or hybrid learning and fully online courses
and programs, both in formal and in non-formal settings.

5. The move to blended, hybrid and online learning and a greater use of learning technologies offers
more options and choices for teachers and instructors. In order to use these technologies well, teachers
and instructors require not only to know the strengths and weaknesses of different kinds of technology,
but also need to have a good grasp of how students learn best. This requires knowing about:

         · the research into teaching and learning;
                                                                                                                                13.7 Building the future 709

         · different theories of learning related to different concepts of knowledge (epistemology);

         · different methods of teaching and their strengths and weaknesses.

Without this basic foundation, it is difficult for teachers and instructors to move away from the only
model that many are familiar with, namely the lecture and discussion model, which is limited in terms
of developing the knowledge and skills required in a digital age.

6. The challenge is particularly acute in universities. There is no requirement to have any training or
qualification in teaching to work in a university in most Western countries. Nevertheless teaching will
take up a minimum of 40 per cent of a faculty member's time, and much more for many adjunct or
contract faculty or full time college instructors. However, the same challenge remains, to a lesser degree,
for school teachers and college instructors: how to ensure that already experienced professionals have
the knowledge and skills required to teach well in a digital age.

7. Institutions can do much to facilitate or impede the development of the knowledge and skills required
in a digital age. They need to:

         · ensure that all levels of teaching and instructional staff have adequate training in the new
            technologies and methods of teaching necessary for the development of the knowledge and
            skills required in a digital age;

         · ensure that there is adequate learning technology support for teachers and instructors;

         · ensure that conditions of employment and in particular class size enable teaching and
            instructional staff to teach in the ways that will develop the knowledge and skills needed in a
            digital age;

         · develop a practical and coherent institutional strategy to support the kind of teaching needed
            in a digital age.

13.7.2 Building your own future

Although governments, institutions and learners themselves can do a great deal to ensure success in
teaching and learning, in the end the responsibility and to some extent the power to change lies within
teachers and instructors themselves. In probably no other profession is there such an opportunity to work
in the way that you choose.

   To help you create the kind of teaching needed in a digital age, Chapter 6, Section 10 provides an
exercise for building a rich learning environment for your students, applying the guidelines outlined in
this book.

   Although a sound basis of knowledge and experience is important, no other quality in teachers is more
important than vision and imagination. This book attempts to provide a glimpse into the possibilities
of teaching in the future, but that future still needs to be invented. The demands of the market, the
ethical and moral challenges of society, changing technologies, and the diversity of learning needs are
all components in a complex mix of factors that require an appropriate response from teachers and
instructors.

   This book attempts to provide some foundations for decision-making in this volatile, uncertain,
complex and ambiguous world, and I end with Scenario I that aims to suggest one possibility for the
710 Chapter 13: Supporting teachers and instructors in a digital age

future, but it will be the imagination of you and other teachers inventing new ways of teaching that will
eventually result in the kind of graduates the world will need in the future. I hope this book in some
small way will help you along this road.

                                                Activity 13.7 Develop a future scenario for your teaching

      1. Read Scenario I and/or the other scenarios in this book. Now write your own scenario for your own
   teaching. Do NOT take into account current resources or institutional policies.

      2. What would have to change in your organisation to make your scenario possible?
      There is no feedback provided for this activity.

                                                                            Key Takeaways

      1. There is increasing pressure from employers, the business community, learners themselves, and also from
   a significant number of educators, for learners to develop the type of knowledge and the kinds of skills that
   they will need in a digital age.

      2. The knowledge and skills needed in a digital age, where all `content' will be increasingly and freely
   available over the Internet, requires graduates with expertise in:

              · knowledge management (the ability to find, evaluate and appropriately apply knowledge);
              · IT knowledge and skills;
              · inter-personal communication skills, including the appropriate use of social media;
              · independent and lifelong learning skills;
              · a range of intellectual skills, including:

                             knowledge construction;
                             reasoning;
                             critical analysis;
                             problem-solving;
                             creativity;
              · collaborative learning and teamwork;
              · multi-tasking and flexibility.
      These are all skills that are relevant to any subject domain, and need to be embedded within that domain.
   With such skills, graduates will be better prepared for a volatile, uncertain, complex and ambiguous world.
      3. To develop such knowledge and skills, teachers and instructors need to set clear learning outcomes and
   select teaching methods that will support the development of such knowledge and skills, and, since all skills
   require practice and feedback to develop, learners must be given ample opportunity to practice such skills. This
   requires moving away from a model of information transmission to greater student engagement, more learner-
   centred teaching, and new methods of assessment that measure skills as well as mastery of content.
      4. Because of the increased diversity of students, from full-time campus-based learners to lifelong learners
                                                                                                                            13.7 Building the future 711

already with high levels of post-secondary education to learners who have slipped through the formal school
system and need second-chance opportunities, and because of the capacity of new information technologies
to provide learning at any time and any place, a much wider range of modes of delivery are needed, such as
campus-based teaching, blended or hybrid learning and fully online courses and programs, both in formal and
in non-formal settings.

   5. The move to blended, hybrid and online learning and a greater use of learning technologies offers
more options and choices for teachers and instructors. In order to use these technologies well, teachers and
instructors require not only to know the strengths and weaknesses of different kinds of technology, but also
need to have a good grasp of how students learn best. This requires knowing about:

           · the research into teaching and learning;

           · different theories of learning related to different concepts of knowledge (epistemology);

           · different methods of teaching and their strengths and weaknesses.

   Without this basic foundation, it is difficult for teachers and instructors to move away from the only model
that many are familiar with, namely the lecture and discussion model, which is limited in terms of developing
the knowledge and skills required in a digital age.

   6. The challenge is particularly acute in universities. There is no requirement to have any training or
qualification in teaching to work in a university in most Western countries. Nevertheless teaching will take up
a minimum of 40 per cent of a faculty member's time, and much more for many adjunct or contract faculty or
full time college instructors. However, the same challenge remains, to a lesser degree, for school teachers
and college instructors: how to ensure that already experienced professionals have the knowledge and skills
required to teach well in a digital age.

   7. Institutions can do much to facilitate or impede the development of the knowledge and skills required in
a digital age. They need to:

           · ensure that all levels of teaching and instructional staff have adequate training in the new
              technologies and methods of teaching necessary for the development of the knowledge and skills
              required in a digital age;

           · ensure that there is adequate learning technology support for teachers and instructors;

           · ensure that conditions of employment and in particular class size enable teaching and
              instructional staff to teach in the ways that will develop the knowledge and skills needed in a
              digital age;

           · develop a practical and coherent institutional strategy to support he kind of teaching needed in a
              digital age.

   8. Although governments, institutions and learners themselves can do a great deal to ensure success in
teaching and learning, in the end the responsibility and to some extent the power to change lies within teachers
and instructors themselves.

   9. It will be the imagination of teachers inventing new ways of teaching that will eventually result in the
kinds of graduates the world will need in the future.
Scenario I: Stopping the flu

   Figure 13.I Stopping the flu
   Image: © European Commission, 2015

     Hi, Chris, you asked for an update on what I'm studying at the University of Central Canada. Well,
     I'm about half-way through a really neat program called Global Science. We get to choose from
     about five or six problems to research. At the moment, the problem I've chosen is called `Stopping
     the flu.' Basically, we're looking at the influenza virus, and how to prevent pandemics. I thought
     when I started it would be all medicine, but I'm having to do math, geography, agriculture, even
     management and communications, as well as other types of science because they are all related in

                                                                   713
714 Chapter 13: Supporting teachers and instructors in a digital age

     some way to the problem we are looking at. We work as a group on defining the problem, collecting
     data, and interpreting the results.

     I'm in a group of 25 students, and they are from all over the world. Altogether there are over 2,000
     students taking the program. My main instructor, Dr. Madelaine McVicar, who is responsible for my
     group of 25, is based the other side of the country in a hospital in Halifax, but really she's more like
     a conductor of an orchestra, because the course uses experts from all over the world, some of whom
     come in with just short podcasts or YouTube videos, while others run webinar sessions that deal
     with specific questions as they come up in our research. Dr. McVicar is great at finding resources
     to help us, and we also occasionally get sessions online with some of the professors at UCC who
     helped design the program.

     What threw me at the beginning was the lack of lectures or pre-determined weekly study topics.
     Although we all had to do a set of modules on basic research methods, and we have a sort of
     program guide on the web designed by the UCC profs, we choose study topics and are provided
     with a guide to a wide range of resources, mainly free stuff available all over the Internet, such
     as published papers in open access journals or stuff in MOOCs that will directly help us with the
     research problem we are tackling. The course web site gave us some leads as to where to look,
     and we had to provide an interim report early on to Dr. McVicar that listed the resources we were
     accessing or looking for. Some of these topics, such as the molecular structure of the flu virus, are
     pretty obvious, but other topics we had to identify ourselves. I was particularly interested in the link
     between international travel and the spread of flu. One of the things we have to do always is to
     provide an evaluation of the sources we use and their reliability.

     Each month the group has to create our own online reports - called e-portfolios - which shows the
     progress we've made on the research question each month. In the end, we get 50 per cent of our
     marks from the monthly group e-portfolios and the other 50 per cent from an individual e-portfolio
     we each create summarizing the whole project and our individual contribution to the project. Dr.
     McVicar does the marking and grading.

     There's about 20 other student groups from UCC researching the same question, and we are sharing
     data across the groups, so we get great help and feedback from the other groups as well, through
     a discussion forum and a shared web site for the monthly e-portfolios. Because of my job, I'm
     particularly interested in mortality rates from different kinds of flus and I was able to hook up with
     another student in another group who turns out to be a specialist in that subject, working for a
     Swiss insurance company - it might even lead to a job for me!

     Because of the agreements UCC has made with many hospitals and health authorities around the
     world, we're getting access to some great data. We often have to go and find local data ourselves,
     such as the number of local hospital admissions for flu in a particular week. For instance, we
     were able to track the spread of a particular strain from the first week of our course, when it was
     identified in China, across the world over the following five months. UCC also has an agreement
     with IBM to load the data and use some of their analytics as well. Apparently UCC got money from
     one of the research councils to support some of the research on this program because of the ability
     to draw on so many sources of relatively raw data from around the world, which means my group
     sometimes get Skyped by one of the UCC profs who wants access to our data! Another group even
     got asked by the WHO (the World Health Organization, not the rock group) for their data.
                                                                                                                           Scenario I: Stopping the flu 715

     Many of the international students are in other universities, and will transfer the credits into their
     own program, although a lot of the students are also sponsored by employers, such as hospitals
     or government agencies. You can in fact get a badge for successfully completing just one of the
     research problems, and a diploma for doing all three. However, the final 60 credits of the degree
     program requires me to do my own, individual research project, and I think I'll try and do that,
     because I need that to go on to grad school, although everyone says that doing the individual
     research project is pretty tough, as the standard is very high.

     But what I really like about this program is that I'm learning so much, so quickly. We're dealing with
     a real problem, and you know, having so many people from such different backgrounds all working
     on the same problem means that I feel we are actually making a difference, as well as studying.

   Acknowledgement: This scenario was originally developed for the U.K. Open University and is
used with their permission. The scenario was influenced by McMaster University's integrated science
program. However, the McMaster program is an on-campus program limited to a highly selected group
of 50 students.
Appendix 1: Questions to guide media selection and
use

The questions on the following pages should be used in conjunction with Chapter 8, and address a real
context that you may be facing, such as designing a new course.

   It is recommended you work through each question one by one, possibly making notes of your
answers. It is also recommended that you do this in a fairly systematic manner the first two or three times
when faced with a possible choice of media for a whole course or program. This could take a few days,
allowing time for thinking. Some questions may need to wait until other questions have been answered.
It will likely to be an iterative process.

   After you have worked through the questions, give yourself a day or two if possible before thinking
about what media or technology will best fit with your course or program. Discuss your thoughts about
media use with other instructors and with any professionals such as an instructional designer or media
designer before the design of the course. Leave yourself open to making more final decisions as you start
designing/developing and delivering the course, with the option of checking back with your notes and
more details in Chapter 8.

   After the first two or three times of working through the questions, you will be able to be less
systematic and quicker in making decisions, but the questions and answers to the questions should
always be in your head when making decisions about media for teaching.

                                                                   717
S: Who are your students?

1. What is the mandate or policy of your institution, department or program with respect to access? How
will students who do not have access to a chosen technology be supported?

   2. What are the likely demographics of the students you will be teaching? How appropriate is the
technology you are thinking of using for these students?

   3. If your students are to be taught at least partly off campus, to which technologies are they likely to
have convenient and regular access at home or work?

   4. If they are to be taught at least partly on campus, what is - or should be - your or your department's
policy with regard to students' access to learning technologies in class?

   5. What digital skills do you expect your students to have before they start the program?
   6. If students are expected to provide their own access to technology, will you be able to provide
unique teaching experiences that will justify the purchase or use of such technology?
   7. What prior approaches to learning are the students likely to bring to your program? How suitable
are such prior approaches to learning likely to be to the way you need to teach the course? How could
technology be used to cater for student differences in learning?

                                                                   719
E: Ease of use

8. How intuitively easy to use is the technology you are considering, both by students and by yourself?
   9. How reliable is the technology?
   10. How easy is it to maintain and up-grade the technology?
   11. The company that is providing the critical hardware or software you are using: is it a stable

company that is not likely to go out of business in the next year or two, or is it a new start-up?
What strategies are in place to secure any digital teaching materials you create should the organisation
providing the software or service cease to exist?

   12. Do you have adequate technical and professional support, both in terms of the technology and
with respect to the design of materials?

   13. How fast developing is this subject area? How important is it to regularly change the teaching
materials? Which technology will best support this?

   14. To what extent can the changes be handed over to someone else to do, and/or how essential is it
for me to do them myself?

   15. What rewards am I likely to get for using new technology in my teaching? Will use of a new
technology be the only innovation, or can I also change my way of teaching with this technology to get
better results

   16. What are the risks in using this technology?

                                                                   721
C: What is the cost in money and time?

17. Which media are likely to take a lot of your time to develop? Which could you do quickly and easily?
   18. How much time do you spend preparing lectures? Could that time be better spent preparing

learning materials, then using the time saved from delivering lectures on interaction with students
(online and/or face-to-face)?

   19. Is there a possibility of extra funding for innovative teaching or technology applications? How
could you best use that funding?

   20. What kind of help can you get in your institution from instructional designers and media
professionals for media design and development?

   21. What open educational resources could be used for this course? Could you use an open textbook,
thereby saving students the cost of buying textbooks? Can the library or your learning technology
support group help identify potential OERs for your course?

                                                                   723
T: Teaching and other pedagogical factors

22. What are the desired learning outcomes from the teaching in terms of content and skills?
   23. What instructional strategies will be employed to facilitate the learning outcomes?
   24. What unique pedagogical characteristics of text will be appropriate for this course, in terms of

content presentation and skills development?
   25. What unique pedagogical characteristics of audio will be appropriate for this course, in terms of

content presentation and skills development?
   26. What unique pedagogical characteristics of video will be appropriate for this course, in terms of

content presentation and skills development?
   27. What unique pedagogical characteristics of computing will be appropriate for this course, in terms

of content presentation and skills development?
   28. What unique pedagogical characteristics of social media will be appropriate for this course, in

terms of content presentation and skills development?
   29. What really must be done face-to-face on this course?

                                                                   725
I: Interaction

30. In terms of the skills I am trying to develop, what kinds of interaction will be most useful? What
media or technology could I use to facilitate that kind of interaction?

   31. In terms of the effective use of my time, what kinds of interaction will produce a good balance
between student comprehension and student skills development, and the amount of time I will be
interacting personally or online with students?

                                                                   727
O: Organisational issues

32. How much and what kind of help can I get from the institution in choosing and using media for
teaching? Is help easily accessible? How good is the help? Do they have the media professionalism I
will need? Are they up to date in the use of new technologies for teaching?

   33. Is there possible funding available to `buy me out' for a semester and/or to fund a teaching
assistant so I can concentrate on designing a new course or revising an existing course? Is there funding
for media production?

   34. To what extent will I have to follow `standard' technologies, practices and procedures, such as
using a learning management system, or lecture capture system, or will I be encouraged and supported
to try something new?

                                                                   729
N: Networking

35. How important is it to enable learners to network beyond a course, with others such as subject
specialists, professionals in the field, and relevant people in the community? Can the course, or student
learning, benefit from such external connections?

   36. If this is important, what's the best way to do this? Use social media exclusively? Integrate it
with other standard course technology? Delegate responsibility for its design and/or administration to
students or learners?

                                                                   731
S: Security and privacy

37. What student information am I obliged to keep private and secure? What are my institution's policies
on this?

   38. What is the risk that by using a particular technology my institution's policies concerning privacy
could easily be breached? Who in my institution could advise me on this?

   39. What areas of teaching and learning, if any, need I keep behind closed doors, available only to
students registered in my course? Which technologies will best allow me to do this?

   These 39 questions are just suggestions. You may wish to add other questions (or ignore some of
mine) depending on the context in which you will be working.

                                                                   733
Appendix 2 Online learning quality standards,
organisations and research

     All sites accessible 2 October, 2019. Please report any dead or new links to tony.bates@ubc.ca
Canada
Barker, K. (2001) Creating quality guidelines for online education and training: consultation workbook
Vancouver BC: Canadian Association for Community Education
BC Ministry of Education (2010) Standards for K-12 Distributed Learning in British Columbia
v3.0 Victoria BC: BC Ministry of Education (still current in 2019). More about quality can be found on
the BC Ministry of Education Distributed Learning web site
USA
Quality Matters http://www.qmprogram.org/rubric
Europe
European Association for Quality Assurance in Higher Education
New Zealand
Marshall, S. (2006). E-Learning Maturity Model Version Two: New Zealand Tertiary Institution E-

                                                                   735
736 A.W. (Tony) Bates

Learning Capability: Informing and Guiding E-Learning Architectural Change and Development Project
Report. Wellington NZ: New Zealand Ministry of Education

Australia

Vocational Education and Training E-standards for Training

South Africa

Quality Assurance Toolkit: Distance Higher Education Institutions and Programmes

Quality Assurance Toolkit for Open Schools

Commonwealth of Learning

Quality Assurance Microsite
Quality Assurance Toolkit: Teacher Education

Online education services for students

There are also other conditions beyond management and teaching that contribute toward high quality
e-learning and online learning systems. Flexible transfer of credits that recognise qualifications taken
online as well as face-to-face, and government web sites that provide accurate and reliable information
about the quality of online programs available within their jurisdiction, are also essential components of
a high quality digital learning system. For examples, see:

BC Transfer Guide

Education Planner

BCCampus

Contact North

Research on quality assurance

Probably the best coverage of quality issues in both formal (for-credit) and `post-traditional' (open, non-
credit) online learning are the two papers published by Academic Partnerships:

Butcher, N. and Wilson-Strydom, M. (2013) A Guide to Quality in Online Learning Dallas TX:
Academic Partnerships

Butcher, N. and Hoosen, S. (2014) A Guide to Quality in Post-traditional Online Higher Education
Dallas TX: Academic Partnerships

If you use the category search on "quality" or "quality assurance" on my personal web site, tonybates.ca,
you will find almost 60 articles or postings about this topic on this site.
Appendix 3: Independent reviews

The independent review process

Commercial versus open publishing

Usually, before publishing an academic book or a textbook, commercial publishers will seek
independent reviews at two stages of the process: when an author submits a proposal for a book, and
then when the first complete draft is sent to the publisher. As well as external reviewers, the publishing
company will have an in-house specialist editor who will be the main person in the decision-making
process, and but even then an editor will usually take the final proposal to an internal committee or
even a board meeting for final approval. Each of these stages can take up to three months, sometimes
longer for the second stage, much longer if the author is required to make substantial changes before
publication. Lastly, after the book is published, it may be reviewed, again independently, in academic
journals specializing in the field.

   Although this lengthy approval and review process can be very frustrating for an author, the process
does ensure that the author gets a lot of feedback, and above all it is part of the quality control process,
which is one reason why books count so much in the academic tenure and promotion process.

   Self-published books need not follow any of this process, although open textbooks, such as those from
OpenStax or the BCcampus open textbook project, are nearly always independently reviewed by faculty
in the jurisdiction where these books may be adopted.

   However, this book is somewhat different. It was written from scratch for a different market, faculty
and instructors, rather than students, and it is not part of the BC government's open textbook project that
BCcampus manages. Although BCcampus offered essential technical services, they were not responsible
for editing or reviewing the book.

   I decided therefore to obtain three independent reviews, and, as with the BCcampus textbooks, these
reviews would be published without changes as part of the book.

Criteria for selecting reviewers

In approaching potential reviewers, the following criteria were used:

Independence

Obviously, for an independent review it is necessary to find reviewers who will be as objective as
possible. I needed to find professionals in the subject area who had not been closely associated with
me during my 40 years working in the field and who would be seen as being objective and sufficiently
`distant' from me and my career.

                                                                   737
738 A.W. (Tony) Bates

Qualified or experienced in the subject domain

In terms of qualification, I needed reviewers who were also experts in the field of digital teaching and
learning, instructional design, online learning or open education area. Although there are many who
meet this criteria, they must also be seen to be independent.

   Also, because the book is also targeted at faculty and instructors, it was important to find at least one
reviewer who is a mainline faculty member interested in teaching and learning but who did not know or
was not involved with my previous work, and who would judge it strictly from a faculty or instructor
perspective.

Willingness and availability

The amount of work involved in reviewing a 500 page textbook is quite significant. Usually publishers
pay a small fee for external reviewers, which no way compensates for the work involved, but at least it
helps sweeten the pot. However, if I paid the reviewers as an author, that may have been seen as unduly
influencing the independence of the reviewer.

   I approached a total of four reviewers who met one or both of the two criteria above, and three
immediately agreed to review the book. None of the reviewers I approached requested or even
mentioned a fee. Each of the three who agreed to do a review submitted their review within one month
of being asked. Brief descriptions of each reviewer is given as an introduction to the following reviews.

Guidelines for the review

Commercial publishers, when commissioning reviewers, usually send a letter or a standard document
that sets out guidelines for reviewing a book in its first, full draft before printing and distribution, to
ensure both consistency between reviewers, and to identify to reviewers what the publisher is looking
for. Although sometimes the publishing editor will require responses to elements that are specific to a
particular book, there are also a number of guidelines that are generic.

   The situation is somewhat different for a self-published textbook, where it is the responsibility of
the author to decide whether to get independent reviews and if so, to provide appropriate guidelines to
the reviewers. Although I encouraged reviewers to use their own criteria, I sent them some suggested
guidelines, set out below, adapted from the guidelines used by BCcampus for external reviewers of open
textbooks:

       1. To what extent is the book successful in meeting the needs of its primary market (faculty and
            instructors)?

       2. Does the book meet the requirements of a scholarly work? Is it research and evidence-based,
            and does it provide a critical analysis of the key issues in the field?

       3. Does it provide evidence-based, practical guidelines for faculty and instructors that will help
            them improve their teaching?

       4. Does it cover adequately the main contemporary issues in teaching in a digital age?

       5. Is the book well written? Does it read well? Is it well organized and structured? Are there
            errors of grammar or serious typographical errors? Are the graphics and cases appropriately
            chosen?
                                                                                                                         Teahing in a Digital Age - 2e 739

       6. What major changes, if any, are needed before you can recommend this book? What minor
            changes would you like to see?

       7. If this book were to be offered to a commercial publisher, would you recommend it for
            publication?

Each of the book reviews is published separately, as received, in the following sections.
A review from a faculty perspective: Professor James Mitchell

James Mitchell, Professor and Director of the Architectural & Environmental Engineering
Program, Drexel University, Pennsylvania, USA.

   Many of us recognize that much has changed, is changing, and will continue to change in our
professional environment. Even those who are not so old depend on tools that didn't exist when we were
children: Google searches; shared documents, analytic tools, simulations, videos and the not-so-lowly
cell phone. We suspect those changes should be reflected in who, what, and how we teach. Teaching in
a Digital Age is Dr. Tony Bates' field guide for those wishing to explore this new continent. Perhaps in
a hundred years there will be the same retrospective guffaws that we experience when reading of early
European opinions of the Americas they'd never visited or perhaps trod lightly on a sliver of the eastern
shore. It's hard, however, to imagine a better guide than Dr. Bates.

   Is author credible? Can you check what he asserts? Does he present it in an organized manner?
Does he have relevant experience? Has he practiced what he preached? Does this "book" exemplify the
changed approach for which he argues? The answer to all of these questions is "yes." There are some
splendid "no" opinions as well. Technology will not solve all problems. Critical thinking shouldn't be
abandoned.

   First, is Dr. Bates credible? It's difficult to imagine someone with better, experience. In a career of
fifty years he's taught in elementary school, helped start the UK's Open University, developed and taught
online and blended courses, consulted worldwide. He's written multiple academic papers and books.
He's paid his dues.

   Can you check what he asserts? Yes. Wherever possible this book cites sources with active links to
make checking the source easy. He's consistent and thorough throughout.

   Is the material presented in an organized manner? Yes. A review of the Table of Contents
shows that he proceeds from addressing the question of change, through an examination of the nature
of knowledge, on to the ways that teaching can occur both face-to-face and online, to detailed
considerations of the differences between media, and finally to the methods for choosing, assessing and
supporting the varied approaches. He has covered the range in a manner that allows the reader to move
progressively and also to jump rapidly to an area of particular interest.

   Does this document progress beyond the traditional book? Does Dr. Bates practice what he
preaches? Yes. The Table of Contents (TOC) reads much like a traditional book, but he has taken
advantage of the online experience. The TOC is always present in a sidebar with active links. Tony has
inserted his voice in audio clips. Videos illustrate his point where appropriate. The references are links
wherever possible. More subtly, but equally important, the book is a live document. It was drafted online
via a blog, with readers invited to enhance the book by responding (that's how this reviewer became
involved, an engineer no less). It is presented under a Creative Commons license so that anyone may use
pieces of it with appropriate attribution. Further, the online version is structured so it can evolve.

   Does technology answer all questions? Where Dr. Bates long experience and strong British
fundamentals enhance his approach shows most beneficially in his recognition of the importance of
the teacher's epistemological approach as well as the tradition of education. He values, as the book
shows, the second order thinking represented by the abstractions of academic discourse. He understands
that a belief in a behaviorist's tabula rasa is going to produce a very different understanding of what's
important in education from that of a constructivist or connectivist. He addresses those differences

                                                                   741
742 Appendix 3: Independent reviews

and attempts valiantly to include them in the many detailed discussions of the many media now
available. Although Bates doesn't mention him I suspect he'd be very sympathetic to this reviewer's
favorite teaching reference, The Art of Teaching by Gilbert Highet (1950), written well before computer
technology complicated matters.

   Are There Important Topics Not Included? Yes, not surprisingly. First, there is comparatively
little attention paid to what we know from good research about how the individual student learns, what
motivates them, what impedes them, how to determine when they're ready for a particular approach, and
the many ways to approach the same goals. Certainly the many media he presents are vehicles to address
the requirements of each student, but Bates' focus is more on the delivery tools than on understanding
the students' needs. Is that bad? No. Had he attempted that as well, this already ample document would
have been far, far longer. How Learning Works (Ambrose, Bridges, DiPietro, Lovett, Norman 2010)
would be a splendid companion to Teaching in a Digital Age.

   Similarly, how to change existing institutions so that they truly embrace and act on these new modes
of education is minimally addressed. The explicit audience of this document is the individual instructor
or graduate student, not the person with budget power. Undoubtedly this was a conscious decision
since Dr. Bates has spent many years working with academic decision makers. Here he's attempting to
empower the individual, quite possibly hoping they'll become the decision maker of the next generation.

   Should you read it, and will you enjoy it? Emphatically yes if you share an unease about making
elegant barouches while Mr. Ford is introducing the Model-T. Most importantly, Dr. Bates' thinking is
grounded, organized and inclusive. His writing is clear, the references abundant, the variety of examples
edifying. Your efforts will be well rewarded.

   Received: 7 June 2015
A review from an open and distance education perspective: Sir John
Daniel

By Sir John Daniel, former President of the Commonwealth of Learning, former Vice Chancellor of the
UK Open University, and former Assistant Director-General, Education at UNESCO, currently Senior
Advisor to Academic Partnerships International and Education Master in the Beijing DeTao Masters
Academy, China.

   Tony Bates, one of the world's most knowledgeable and thoughtful commentators on educational
technology, has distilled the wisdom acquired over 50 years of work into this magisterial book. Although
once a sceptic about Open Education Resources, he has published Teaching in a Digital Age as an open
textbook through BCcampus, making this admirable work available to a global readership as a dynamic,
living project.

   Four features make this book stand out in the growing literature on online learning. First, it addresses
cogently the changing skill and content requirements for teaching and learning in the 21st century.
Second, it offers direct help to academics in a variety of institutional settings who are grappling with the
challenges and opportunities of integrating technology into their teaching. Third, it provides a 50-year
historical perspective on the use of technology in teaching, citing research on student use of media from
the 1970s onwards that is as relevant as ever. Finally, the beautiful structure and scaffolding of this e-
Textbook reflect great credit on the author and his BCcampus editorial team.

   Of the book's twelve chapters the first five address the purposes and requirements of teaching in a
digital age. It begins with a discussion of the fundamental changes taking place in education, exploring
contemporary structural changes in economies and societies in order to draw out the skills needed in a
digital age, identify the right relationship between education and the job market and assess the impact
of expanding enrolments on teaching methods. Is the nature of knowledge evolving and how should
different views about it modify our approaches to teaching?

   This first chapter, which notes that `students are probably the most changed part of higher education
in the last 50 years', sets the stage for what follows. The challenge today is to enable growing numbers
of increasingly diverse students to achieve success. Attempts to reinforce elite systems by `dialling the
clock back to the 1950s' (Bates' comment on current UK policy) will not serve 21st century societies
well.

   Chapter 2 dives into epistemology and provides a thorough and well-researched account of theories
of learning: objectivism, behaviourism, cognitivism, constructivism and connectivism. It summarises
lucidly the important debate about whether knowledge is changing. The author concludes that the times
require more emphasis on developing the skills of applying knowledge rather than merely teaching
content. But he argues that the values and goals of academic knowledge do not - and should not - change
much, although the way it is represented and applied must evolve.

   The strengths and weaknesses of different methods of teaching are divided helpfully between Chapter
3 on solely campus-based instruction and Chapter 4 on fully online teaching. This is the second
admirable aspect of the book: it starts where people - particularly academic faculty members - really
are. Especially enjoyable are the occasional scenarios - doubtless only semi-fictional - which capture,
candidly and entertainingly, the tenor of conversations at dinner parties, in staff common rooms and in
the privacy of homes when academics discuss the impact of technology on their work and the latest bees
in their deans' bonnets.

                                                                   743
744 Appendix 3: Independent reviews

   Bates is an acute commentator on the strengths and weaknesses of MOOCs and devotes chapter 5 to
them. The ongoing media coverage of MOOCs has stimulated interest in online teaching everywhere
and made them a driver of change. But they are at an early stage of maturation and have major structural
limitations for developing deep or transformative learning, or for developing the high-level knowledge
and skills needed in a digital age. As the design of MOOCs improves they may come to occupy a
significant niche and replace some forms of traditional teaching such as large lecture classes. But the
most promising applications of MOOCs may well not be in higher education but in tackling large global
problems through community action.

   Chapters 6 to 9 will be especially useful to those who are designing teaching for the online space. In
summarising decades of research on educational technology - to which he has been a notable contributor
- Bates observes that technologies are vehicles for various media, which he helps us examine in terms
of their formats, symbols systems, and cultural values. Chapter 8, where he presents the SECTIONS
model for media selection that he has refined over many years, is particularly compelling, while Chapter
9 explores choices of modes of delivery.

   The three concluding chapters look at trends in open education, the challenge of ensuring quality
and the need to support teachers and instructors in this digital age. Developments in open educational
resources, open textbooks, open research and open data will be more important than MOOCs - and
far more revolutionary because they will shift power from teachers to students. He defines quality as
`teaching methods that successfully help learners develop the knowledge and skills they will require in
a digital age' and argues for newer concepts of quality that recognise and accommodate the affective
or emotional aspects of learning. The design of many MOOCs and the high dropout rates in US two-
year colleges new to online learning suggest that institutions are not yet following best practices or
developing teaching methods that exploit the strengths of both classroom and online learning.

   Finally, the author argues that we must get real about the need to train teachers for the digital age.
`We have to move from a system of voluntary amateurism to a professional, comprehensive system of
training for teaching in post-secondary education, and a modern, up-to-date curriculum for pre-service
and in-service training of school teachers'. This impressive book provides a curriculum for such training.
It is a splendid work, replete with engaging scenarios and lived experiences. Tony Bates shows us how
to `walk the talk' about teaching in a digital age.

   Received: 21 June, 2015
A review from a digital education perspective: Digital Education
Strategies, Ryerson University

By Leonora Zefi and the team at Digital Education Strategies, the G. Raymond Chang School of
Continuing Education, Ryerson University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada

   As a team dedicated to supporting instructors in using educational technology as a vehicle for
instruction, our collective review of Tony Bates' latest work, Teaching in a Digital Age, has been
anchored in the practical realities of supporting pedagogical change in higher education. After decades
of contributions to the evolving knowledge base and discourse around educational technology, including
twelve texts related to the subject, Bates has now provided educators worldwide with the gift of a
resource for moving forward in somewhat perplexing times. This book is a model in many respects.
It is published in open format - an increasingly adopted, if somewhat debated, mode of knowledge
dissemination with which anyone in research and education today must familiarize themselves.

   Bates (2014) offers the book as a "coach" to support instructors in fostering the required "thinking and
knowledge" for student success in learning environments that are increasingly impacted by technology
(p. 1). The work lives up to this coaching analogy to the extent that it offers a rounded and realistic
training regimen of sorts, to help strengthen the instructional design and decision making skills of
instructors and educational administrators; however, just as the artifacts and content of technology-
enhanced teaching must be strategically organized and presented to best support learners, Bates' ideas
and commentary require further organization and clarification to optimize their benefit to his audience.

   One of the greatest strengths of Teaching in a Digital Age is that Bates "walks the talk" of active
facilitation of learning rather than the passive transmission of knowledge. From the very beginning,
Bates makes clear why his selected topics and stated objectives matter and how they will make a
meaningful difference in the professional practice of his intended audience. To support his own work
and observations, he guides readers, through references and web links, to many valuable, supplementary
resources. He brings theories and concepts alive through vignette-like scenarios, practical real-world
examples, and case studies from a range of institutions of higher education. Like any good facilitator,
Bates presents content in a range of formats, including text and rich media such as videos, photos,
diagrams and illustrations. Learning activities and reflective questions motivate readers to immediately
apply Bates' ideas to their own work and context. As such, the book is a tremendous primer in effective
pedagogy for all modes of teaching and learning.

   Chapters 6 to 8 of Teaching in a Digital Age guide the reader through the world of educational
technology and new media. For instructors and course designers who are exploring different media
to enhance their courses, these chapters are "must reads." Bates presents his previously published
SECTIONS model as a framework for when, how and why media should be used in instruction, and
realistically conveys the complications that can surround its implementation. While these chapters are
comprehensive and provide varied practical supports to decision making, the book would benefit from
additional examination of issues such as the impact of mobile technologies on media selection and
compliance requirements for accessibility.

   It may be that Bates' strategic choice of an open and transparent authoring process precipitated certain
challenges to organization and clarity for the book. Prior to its official launch, the book was circulated for
feedback among Bates' colleagues and, through his blog, the wider professional community. The type
of commentary emerging from these consultations, while undeniably valuable, cannot replace the adept,

                                                                   745
746 Appendix 3: Independent reviews

professional editing that typically accompanies commercial publishing. For example, after establishing a
solid theoretical and practical foundation in teaching theory and methods in Chapters 1 to 4, Bates offers
a full and lengthy chapter examining the unavoidable and controversial topic of Massive Open Online
Courses or MOOCs (Chapter 5). There is no question that a book such as this one should acknowledge
and examine this trend, given its extensive reach and impact on the field (and Bates does so throughout
many of his other chapters); however, the flow of the book would be well served if some of his key
messages from Chapter 5 could be redistributed where relevant throughout the book. Similarly, Chapter
9, which looks at modes of delivery, might integrate more effectively if placed earlier in the book, i.e.,
adjacent to the chapters on teaching methods (Chapters 3 and 4). Additionally, the "Key Takeaways"
section - a very helpful feature of the book - is provided at both the beginning and the end of each
chapter. Offering just one instance of this section, at the end of each chapter, might help to streamline the
content. Addressing issues of sequencing and repetition such as these will enhance the overall impact of
Bates' message.

   Having identified some highlights and drawbacks of the book, the fact remains that Bates has shared
his singular abundance of knowledge in an engaging and accessible way. Readers who may not be
familiar with his earlier publications are brought up to speed with key issues to consider in the area of
educational technology, while loyal followers of his past work will find Bates' analysis of the current
state of the field to be as helpful and practical as ever. Ultimately, because of the book's open format,
readers may take from it that which best suits their own learning needs, their professional style and their
teaching context. In fact, Bates states in the Introduction that there are many ways in which the book
may be used. Given that Bates has acknowledged the book as a "work in progress", some additional
attention to the organization and sequencing of his materials will help to ensure that readers gain equal
value from each and every element of the work.

   A sign of true passion for one's life's work is an unfailing commitment to the advancement and
evolution of the field. Tony Bates is an outstanding example of this type of passion and demonstrates it
through this book and through his dedication to its continuous improvement.

   Received: 26 June, 2015
MERLOT II Peer Review

MERLOT is a curated collection of free and open online teaching, learning, and faculty development
services contributed and used by an international education community. All MERLOT materials, unlike
the materials in other learning materials collections, are examined in various ways to ensure that they are
useful for the MERLOT community. The Peer Review process is led by an Editor, and includes editorial
board members and peer reviewers.

   This book was independently selected and reviewed by MERLOT. The original review can be
accessed here: https://www.merlot.org/merlot/viewCompositeReview.htm?id=1356177

   A shortened version of the review is reproduced here:

Reviewed: Jan 5, 2018 by Teacher Education
Type of Material: Open (Access) Textbook
Recommended Uses: Course reading and class discussions, professional development and continuing
education material
Technical Requirements: Can be read online at https://opentextbc.ca/teachinginadigitalage/ or
downloaded as a PDF (requiring PDF reader software, which is freely available).
Target Student Population: This book is appropriate for use by teacher educators, instructional
designers, curriculum designers, practicing instructors, administration, those who support teachers, and
those who are studying in the field of education.
Identify Major Learning Goals: The book examines the underlying principles that guide effective
teaching in an age when everyone, and in particular the students we are teaching, are using technology.
A framework and a set of guidelines are suggested for making decisions about your teaching, while
understanding that every subject is different, and every teacher and instructor has something unique and
special to bring to their teaching.

                                                                   747
748 Appendix 3: Independent reviews

Prerequisite Knowledge or Skills: Familiarity with basic pedagogical theory and practice is helpful.
Feedback on Activities

                                                                   749
Appendix 4: Feedback on Activity 1.8 Main conclusions from Chapter
1

                                                        Activity 1.8 Main conclusions from Chapter 1

      Write down at least five conclusions you would draw as an instructor from this chapter (besides the Key
   Takeaways)

There are many possible conclusions one could draw, but here are mine:

       1. Universities and colleges have a broader purpose than just meeting short-term labour market
            demands. On the other hand, there is a `hidden contract' between the expansion of post-
            secondary education, and the need to create a work-force that is skilled, adaptable and
            competitive. I don't see a necessary conflict here. Many of the activities we consider to be
            central to the purpose of a university can fulfill these work-force needs with relatively little
            tweaking.

       2. The diversity of the student body and the easy availability of content raises the importance of
            good quality teaching based on sound pedagogical principles and research in learning. This
            means professionalizing teaching in post-secondary education.

       3. Technology change is constant. Indeed if anything it is accelerating. New technologies that
            could be applied in education are being developed all the time. So technology is not going
            away. It's no use shutting your eyes and hoping that you can manage without making some
            decisions about whether to use technology or not in your teaching. The pressure to use
            technology is going to increase, rather than ease up.

       4. Relatively few technologies are designed specifically for education. There is more push from
            manufacturers and technology advocates than pull from instructors. Nevertheless it is clear
            that over time, many technologies have proved valuable educational tools.

       5. There's a lot to choose from, and there are some major differences between tools.
            Researchers and instructors need to understand the educational differences, if any, between
            different technologies.

       6. It is only in the last few years that technology has started to make major changes to the way
            we deliver education. Distance education and online learning were more of a fringe or
            peripheral activity to the main provision of learning, which was in classrooms and on
            campuses. But this is definitely beginning to change. Technology is forcing us to examine
            more fundamentally the purpose and process of teaching, what constitutes valid knowledge,
            and how best to acquire it.

       7. All this means you need some kind of framework for making decisions about whether or not
            to use a technology, and how best to use it. This is the main purpose of this book.

                                                                   751
Appendix 4: Feedback on Activity 7.1 How many technologies can you
see in Figure 7.1?

Well, this is an unfair question, partly because the photo doesn't show all the technologies, and also
because you wouldn't know what software or services were included, but just for the record, here's my
list:

   Hardware
   1. Laptop computer
   2. Music CD
   3. Book: yes, a printed book is a technological artefact! It doesn't have to be digital to be a technology.
   4. Mobile phone
   5. Satellite receiver/converter
   6. Television monitor
   7. DVD player
   8. Apple TV box
   9. Audio-visual receiver/control box with 7 channels, 1080p HDMI, Dolby and DTS format support
   10. Loudspeakers (3 in picture, including a woofer, back right)
   11. Remote control (one: for all equipment except computer, mobile phone and book)
   Software
   Almost impossible to list and unobservable anyway, but would include iTunes, iPhoto (uses photos
from iPhoto library as a screen saver for the TV monitor when music is playing), digital conversion in
the A/V receiver, etc., etc.
   Networks
   Wi-fi
   Internet
   Telephone
   Radio
   Satellite TV (could have been cable, or broadband telephone, but isn't)
   Services
   Satellite broadcast television channels
   Radio stations (global choice, via Sonos)
   Apple TV (including Netflix and other streaming services)
   Sonos music (including Deezer, a service similar to Netflix for music)
   Necessary for integration
   Single remote control (eHarmony)
   Audio-visual receiver
   Apple TV
   Apple Mac Pro laptop computer
   Mobile phone (controls Sonos and iTunes)
   My wish for the future: one portable box, please!!!!!!!!
   I think whoever owns this home entertainment system could do with a model for technology selection
(OK, I'll admit it, it's mine). Or is it that the home entertainment industry needs to get its act together
regarding standardization? But I digress. All this changed in 2016, when my Internet provider upgraded

                                                                   753
754 Feedback on Activities

to fibre optic and 5G from coaxial cable and 2.4G and offered a `deal' on integrated services. I decided
at the same time to upgrade the whole system with a new TV monitor, control box, modem, speaker
system, and more apps such as Amazon Prime and DAZN, but the `live' cable television programs are
still just as awful as before!
Appendix 4: Feedback on Activity 7.5 Broadcast or communicative

From the list below:

         · a learning management system
         · a blog
         · online collaborative learning
         · Twitter
         · virtual worlds (e.g. Second Life)
         · a podcast
         · an open textbook

1. Determine which is a medium and which a technology, or which could be both, and under what
conditions.

learning management system     either: technology as software, medium when used for course delivery
blog                           medium (WordPress or other blog software is the technology)
online collaborative learning  medium
Twitter                        either, but mainly a medium
Virtual worlds                 medium
podcast                        medium
open textbook                  medium

2. Decide where, from your experience, each medium or technology should be placed on Figure
6.4.3. Write down why.

                               755
756 Feedback on Activities

3. Which were easy to categorize and which difficult?
   Difficult:
         · online collaborative learning, because it is highly communicative but the teacher has a good
            deal of control over the medium
         · Twitter, because it is definitely under the control of the learner, but it is also as much a
            broadcast as a communicative medium.

With both these, I gave more importance to the broadcast/communicative dimension compared with the
control dimension.

   4. How useful?
   Understanding where different media are likely to fit on the broadcast/communicative dimension will
help in choosing media, depending on my epistemological position. If I want a high level of student
activity and interaction I would tend toward more communicative media. If I am more concerned with
information transmission and comprehension, I would tend to use more broadcast media. However, in
most cases I would want a mix of both. Knowing where each medium `fits' on this dimension is one
component I could use in my decision-making.
Bibliography

Adamson, C. (2012) Learning in a VUCA world, Online Educa Berlin News Portal, November 13
Agarwal, A. (2013) The Developing World of MOOCs Boston: MIT (Linc 2013 conference video: 1hr 34 mins in.)
Allen, I. and Seaman, J. (2014) Grade Change: Tracking Online Learning in the United States Wellesley MA: Babson College/Sloan

   Foundation
Anderson, C. (2008) The End of Theory: The Data Deluge Makes the Scientific Method Obsolete Wired Magazine, 16.07
Anderson, L. and Krathwohl, D. (eds.) (2001). A Taxonomy for Learning, Teaching, and Assessing: A Revision of Bloom's Taxonomy of

   Educational Objectives New York: Longman
Anderson, T. (ed.) (2008) The Theory and Practice of Online Learning Athabasca AB: Athabasca University Press
Anderson, T., Rourke, L., Garrison, R., & Archer, W. (2001) Assessing teaching presence in a computer conferencing context Journal of

   Asynchronous Learning Networks, Vol. 5, No.2
Asubel, D. et al. (1978) Educational Psychology: A Cognitive View New York: Holt, Reinhart and Winston
Atherton J. S. (2013) Learning and Teaching; Bloom's taxonomy, retrieved 18 March 2015
Atkinson, M.P. (2001) The scholarship of teaching and learning: reconceptualizing scholarship and transforming the academy Social

   Forces, Vol. 79, No. 4 (pp. 1217-1229)
AUCC (2011) Trends in Higher Education: Volume 1-Enrolment Ottawa ON: Association of Universities and Colleges of Canada

Baker, C. (2010) The Impact of Instructor Immediacy and Presence for Online Student Affective Learning, Cognition, and Motivation The
   Journal of Educators Online Vol. 7, No. 1

Balfour, S. P. (2013) Assessing writing in MOOCs: Automated essay scoring and calibrated peer review Research & Practice in
   Assessment, Vol. 8

Barnard, R. et al. (2014) Detecting bias in meta-analyses of distance education research: big pictures we can rely on Distance Education
   Vol. 35, No. 3

Bates, A. (1981) `Some unique educational characteristics of television and some implications for teaching or learning' Journal of
   Educational Television Vol. 7, No.3

Bates, A. (1985) Broadcasting in Education: An Evaluation London: Constables
Bates, A. (1995) Teaching, Open Learning and Distance Education London/New York: Routledge
Bates, A.W. (2005) Technology, e-Learning and Distance Education London/New York: Routledge
Bates, A. and Gallagher, M. (1977) Improving the Effectiveness of Open University Television Case-Studies and Documentaries Milton

   Keynes: The Open University (I.E.T. Papers on Broadcasting, No. 77)
Bates, A. and Poole, G. (2003) Effective Teaching with Technology in Higher Education: Foundations for Success San Francisco: Jossey-

   Bass
Bates, A. and Sangrà, A. (2011) Managing Technology in Higher Education San Francisco: Jossey-Bass/John Wiley and Co
Bates, T. (2011) Cloud-based educational technology and privacy: a Canadian perspective, Online Learning and Distance Education

   Resources, March 25
Bates, T. (2011) Marshall McLuhan and his relevance to teaching with technology, Online Learning and Distance Education Resources,

   July 20
Bates, T. (2011) `Understanding Web 2.0 and Its Implications for e-Learning' in Lee, M. and McCoughlin, C. (eds.) Web 2.0-Based E-

   Learning Hershey NY: Information Science Reference
Bates, T. (2012) Pedagogical roles for video in online learning, Online Learning and Distance Education Resources, March 10
Bates, T. (2012) What's right and what's wrong with Coursera-style MOOCs Online Learning and Distance Education Resources, August

   5

                                                                   757
758 A.W. (Tony) Bates

Bates, T. (2013) UBC is going big with online and flexible learning Online and Distance Education Resources, March 12
Bates, T. (2103) Productivity and online learning redux, Online Learning and Distance Education Resources, December 23
Bates, T. (2014) Synergies between online learning, on-campus teaching and flexible learning Online Learning and Distance Education

   Resources, April 20
Bayne, S. (2014) Teaching, Research and the More-than-Human in Digital Education Oxford UK: EDEN Research Workshop (keynote:

   no printed record available)
Baytak, A. (undated) Media selection and design: a case in distance education Academia.edu
Beasly-Murray, J. (2008) Was introducing Wikipedia to the classroom an act of madness leading only to mayhem if not murder? Wikipedia,

   March 18
Berk, R.A. (2009) Multimedia teaching with video clips: TV, movies, YouTube and mtvU in the college classroom, International Journal

   of Technology in Teaching and Learning, Vol. 91, No. 5
Bertram, J. (2013) Agile Learning Design for Beginners New Palestine IN: Bottom Line Performance
Bishop, J. (2011) Facebook Privacy Policy: Will Changes End Facebook for Colleges? The Higher Ed CIO, October 4
Bligh, D. (2000) What's the Use of Lectures? San Francisco: Jossey-Bass
Bloom, B. S.; Engelhart, M. D.; Furst, E. J.; Hill, W. H.; Krathwohl, D. R. (1956). Taxonomy of educational objectives: The classification

   of educational goals. Handbook I: Cognitive domain. New York: David McKay Company
Book, P. (2103) ACE as Academic Credit Reviewer-Adjustment, Accommodation, and Acceptance WCET Learn, July 25
Book, P. (2014) All Hands on Deck: Ten Lessons form Early Adopters of Competency-based Education Boulder CO: WCET
Boswell, J. (1791), The Life of Samuel Johnson, New York: Penguin Classics (edited by Hibbert, C., 1986)
Brindley, J., Walti, C. and Blashke, L. (2009) Creating Effective Collaborative Learning Groups in an Online Environment International

   Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning, Vol. 10, No. 3
Brokop, F. (2008) Accessibility to E-Learning for Persons With Disabilities: Strategies, Guidelines, and Standards Edmonton AB:

   NorQuest College/eCampus Alberta
Brown, J. and Duguid, Paul (2000). Balancing act: How to capture knowledge without killing it. Harvard Business Review
Butcher, N. and Wilson-Strydom, M. (2013) A Guide to Quality in Online Learning Dallas TX: Academic Partnerships
Butcher, N. and Hoosen, S. (2014) A Guide to Quality in Post-traditional Online Higher Education Dallas TX: Academic Partnerships

Cambridge, D., Kaplan, S. and Suter, V. (2005) Community of Practice Design Guide Louisville CO: EDUCAUSE
Cañado, P. and Luisa, M. (eds.) (2013) Competency-based Language Teaching in Higher Education New York: Springer
Candy, P. (1991) Self-direction for lifelong learning San Francisco: Jossey-Bass
Carey, K. (2015) The End of College New York: Riverhead Books
Carey, T., & Trick, D. (2013). How Online Learning Affects Productivity, Cost and Quality in Higher Education: An Environmental Scan

   and Review of the Literature. Toronto: Higher Education Quality Council of Ontario
Castells, M. (2000) The Rise of the Network Society Oxford: Blackwell
Chauhan, A. (2014) Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCS): Emerging Trends in Assessment and Accreditation Digital Education

   Review, No. 25
Chickering, A., and Gamson, Z. (1987) `Seven Principles for Good Practice in Undergraduate Education' AAHE Bulletin, March 1987.
Christensen, C. (2010) Disrupting Class, Expanded Edition: How Disruptive Innovation Will Change the Way the World Learns New York:

   McGraw-Hill
Christensen Hughes, J. and Mighty, J. (2010) Taking Stock: Research on Teaching and Learning in Higher Education Montreal and

   Kingston: McGill-Queen's University Press
Clark, R. (1983) Reconsidering research on learning from media Review of Educational Research, Vol. 53. No. 4
Clarke-Okah, W. et al. (2014) The Commonwealth of Learning Review and Improvement Model for Higher Education Institutions

   Vancouver BC: Commonwealth of Learning
Cleveland-Innes, M. (2012) `Teaching in an online community of inquiry: student, faculty, and institutional adjustment in the new higher

   education', in Akyol, Z. & Garrison, R.D. (Eds.) Educational communities of inquiry: theoretical framework, research and practice, (pp.
   389-400). Hershey, PA: IGI Global.
                                                                                                                         Teahing in a Digital Age - 2e 759

Collins, E. (2013) SJSU Plus Augmented Online Learning Environment Pilot Project Report San Jose CA: San Jose State University
Colvin, K. et al. (2014) Learning an Introductory Physics MOOC: All Cohorts Learn Equally, Including On-Campus Class, IRRODL, Vol.

   15, No. 4
Committee on Higher Education (1963), Higher education: report of the Committee appointed by the Prime Minister under the

   Chairmanship of Lord Robbins 1961-63, Cmnd. 2154, London: HMSO
Conference Board of Canada (2014) Employability Skills 2000+ Ottawa ON: Conference Board of Canada
Contact North (2013) The Colorado Community College System Sudbury ON: Contact North
Council of Ontario Universities (2012) Increased numbers of students heading to Ontario universities Toronto ON: COU

Dabbagh, N. (2007). The online learner: characteristics and pedagogical implications. Contemporary Issues in Technology and Teacher
   Education, Vol. 7, No. 3, pp 217- 226.

Daniel, J. (1998) Mega-Universities and Knowledge Media: Technology Strategies for Higher Education. London: Kogan Page
Daniel, J. (2012) Making sense of MOOCs: Musings in a maze of myth, paradox and possibility Seoul: Korean National Open University
Dick, W., and Carey, L. (2004). The Systematic Design of Instruction. 6th edition Boston MA: Allyn & Bacon
Dillenbourg, P. (ed.) (1999) Collaborative-learning: Cognitive and Computational Approaches. Oxford: Elsevier
Dillenbourg, P. (2014) MOOCs: Two Years Later, Oxford UK: EDEN Research Workshop (keynote: no printed record available)
Downes, S. (2007) What connectivism is Half An Hour, February 3
Downes, S. (2012) Massively Open Online Courses are here to stay, Stephen's Web, July 20
Downes, S. (2014) The MOOC of One, Stephen's Web, March 10
Durbridge, N. (1983) Design implications of audio and video cassettes Milton Keynes: Open University Institute of Educational

   Technology
Durbridge, N. (1984) Audio cassettes, in: Bates, A. (ed.) The Role of Technology in Distance Education London: Routledge (re-published

   in 2014)
Dziuban, C. et al. (2000) Reactive behavior patterns go online The Journal of Staff, Program and Organizational Development, Vol. 17,

   No.3

Earle, L. (2003) Assessment as Learning Thousand Oaks CA: Corwin Press
Engle, W. (2104) UBC MOOC Pilot: Design and Delivery Vancouver BC: University of British Columbia
Entwistle, N. (2000) Promoting deep learning through teaching and assessment: conceptual frameworks and educational contexts

   Leicester UK: TLRP Conference
Entwistle, N. and Peterson, E. (2004) Conceptions of Learning and Knowledge in Higher Education: Relationships with Study Behaviour

   and Influences of Learning Environments International Journal of Educational Research, Vol. 41. pp. 407-428
Entwistle, N. (2010) `Taking Stock: An Overview of Research Findings' in Christensen Hughes, J. and Mighty, J. (eds.) Taking Stock:

   Research on Teaching and Learning in Higher Education Montreal and Kingston: McGill-Queen's University Press
Evans, T., Haughey, M. and Murphy, D. (2008) International Handbook of Distance Education Bingley UK: Emerald Publishing

Falchikov, N. and Goldfinch, J. (2000) Student Peer Assessment in Higher Education: A Meta-Analysis Comparing Peer and Teacher
   Marks Review of Educational Research, Vol. 70, No. 3

Falconer, I. et al. (2013) Overview and Analysis of Practices with Open Educational Resources in Adult Education in Europe Seville, Spain:
   European Commission Institute for Prospective Technological Studies

Fallow, S. and Stevens, C. (2000) Integrating key skills in higher education Sterling VA/London: Routledge
Farrar, D. (2014) Flexible Learning: September 2014 Update Flexible Learning, University of British Columbia (accessed 20 February,

   2015, but no longer available)
Figlio, D., Rush, N. and Yin, L. (2010) Is it Live or is it Internet? Experimental Estimates of the Effects of Online Instruction on Student

   Learning Cambridge MA: National Bureau of Economic Research
Finnie, R. et al. (2018) Measuring Critical-thinking Skills of Postsecondary Students Toronto ON: HEQCO
Firmin, R. et al. (2014) Case study: using MOOCs for conventional college coursework Distance Education, Vol. 35, No. 2
760 A.W. (Tony) Bates

Fischer, K. (1980) A Theory of Cognitive Development: The Control and Construction of Hierarchies of Skills, Psychological Review, Vol.
   87, No. 6

Fontana, D. (1981) Psychology for Teachers London: Macmillan/British Psychological Society
Frenette, M. (2017) Postsecondary Enrolment by Parental Income: Recent National and Provincial Trends Ottawa: Statistics Canada
Friedland, T. (2013) Revolution Hits the Universities New York Times, January 26
Freire, P. (2004) Pedagogy of Indignation Boulder CO: Paradigm
Fukuyama, F. (2011) The Origins of Political Order: From Prehuman Times to the French Revolution New York: Farrar Strauss and Giroux
Fukuyama, F. (2014) Political Order and Political Decay: From the Industrial Revolution to the Globalisation of Democracy New York:

   Farrar Strauss and Giroux

Gardner, H. (1983) Frame of Mind: The Theory of Multiple Intelligences New York: Basic Books
Gardner, H. (2006) Multiple Intelligences: New Horizons and Theory in Practice New York: Basic Books
Garrison, R., Anderson, A. and Archer, W. (2000) Critical Inquiry in a Text-based Environment: Computer Conferencing in Higher

   Education The Internet and Higher Education, Vol. 2, No. 3
Garrison, D. R. & Cleveland-Innes, M. (2005). Facilitating cognitive presence in online learning: Interaction is not enough. American

   Journal of Distance Education, Vol. 19, No. 3
Gibson, J.J. (1979) The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception Boston: Houghton Mifflin
Gilbert, J. (2005) Catching the Knowledge Wave: the Knowledge Society and the Future of Education Wellington, NZ: New Zealand

   Council for Educational Research
Golding, W. (1954) The Lord of the Flies London: Faber and Faber
Graham, C. et al. (2001) Seven Principles of Effective Teaching: A Practical Lens for Evaluating Online Courses The Technology Source,

   March/April
Green, C. (2013) Open Education, MOOCs, Student Debt, Textbooks and Other Trends Vancouver BC: COHERE 2013 conference
Green, K. (2013) Mission, money and MOOCs Association of Governing Boards Trusteeship, No. 1, Volume 21
Grundin, H. 1981) Open University Broadcasting Times and their Impact on Students' Viewing/Listening Milton Keynes: The Open

   University Institute of Educational Technology
Guhlin, M. (2011) Education Experiment Ends, Around the Corner - MGuhlin.org, September 22
Gunawardena, C., Lowe, C. & Carabajal, K. (2000). Evaluating Online Learning: models and methods. In Willis, D. et al.

   (eds.), Proceedings of Society for Information Technology & Teacher Education International Conference 2000 (pp. 1677-1684). Chesapeake, VA:
   AACE.
Guo, P. (2013) Optimal video length for optimal student engagement, edX, 13 November

Halverson, L. R., Graham, C. R., Spring, K. J., & Drysdale, J. S. (2012). `An analysis of high impact scholarship and publication trends in
   blended learning' Distance Education, Vol. 33, No. 3

Hampson, K. (2013) The next chapter for digital instructional media: content as a competitive difference Vancouver BC: COHERE 2013
   conference

Harasim, L. (2012) Learning Theory and Online Technologies New York/London: Routledge
Haynie, D. (2014). State Department hosts `MOOC Camp' for online learners US News, January 20
Hernandez, R. et al. (2014) Promoting engagement in MOOCs through social collaboration Oxford UK: Proceedings of the 8th EDEN

   Research Workshop
Heslop, J. (2016) Education Pathways for High School Graduates and Non-Graduates Victoria BC: Student Transitions Project,

   Government of British Columbia
Hill, P. (2012) Four Barriers that MOOCs Must Overcome to Build a Sustainable Model e-Literate, July 24
Hill, P. (2013) Some validation of MOOC student patterns graphic, e-Literate, August 30
Hilton, J., Wiley, D., Stein, J., & Johnson, A. (2010). The four R's of openness and ALMS Analysis: Frameworks for open educational

   resources. Open Learning: The Journal of Open and Distance Learning, Vol. 25, No. 1
Hiltz, R. and Turoff, M. (1978) The Network Nation: Human Communication via Computer Reading MA: Addison-Wesley
                                                                                                                         Teahing in a Digital Age - 2e 761

Hofer, B. and Pintrich, P. (1997) `The development of epistemological theories: beliefs about knowledge and knowing and their relation to
   learning' Review of Educational Research Vol. 67, No. 1, pp. 88-140

Ho, A. et al. (2014) HarvardX and MITx: The First Year of Open Online Courses Fall 2012-Summer 2013 (HarvardX and MITx Working
   Paper No. 1), January 21

Hollands, F. and Tirthali, D. (2014) MOOCs: Expectations and Realities New York: Columbia University Teachers' College
Holmberg, B. (1989) Theory and Practice of Distance Education New York: Routledge
Hülsmann, T. (2000) The Costs of Open Learning: A Handbook Oldenburg: Bibliotheks- und Informationssytem der Universität Oldenburg
Hülsmann, T. (2003) Costs without camouflage: a cost analysis of Oldenburg University's two graduate certificate programs offered as

   part of the online Master of Distance Education (MDE): a case study, in Bernath, U. and Rubin, E., (eds.) Reflections on Teaching
   in an Online Program: A Case Study Oldenburg, Germany: Bibliothecks-und Informationssystem der Carl von Ossietsky Universität
   Oldenburg

Illich, I. (1971) Deschooling Society, (accessed 6 August, 2014)

Jamison, D. and Klees, S. (1973) The Cost of Instructional Radio and Television for Developing Countries Stanford CA: Stanford
   University Institute for Communication Research

Jaschik, S. (2013) MOOC Mess, Inside Higher Education, February 4
Jaschik, S. and Letterman, D. (2014) The 2014 Inside Higher Ed Survey of Faculty Attitudes to Technology Washington DC: Inside Higher

   Ed
Johnson, H. and Mejia, M. (2014) Online learning and student outcomes in California's community colleges San Francisco CA: Public

   Policy Institute of California
Jones, C. and Shao, B. (2011) The Net Generation and Digital Natives: Implications for Higher Education Milton Keynes: Open

   University/Higher Education Academy
Jonker, L. and Hicks, M. (2014) Teaching Loads and Research Outputs of Ontario University Faculty: Implications for Productivity and

   Differentiation Toronto: Higher Education Quality Council of Ontario
Jung, I. and Gunawardena, C. (eds.) (2014) Culture and Online Learning: Global Perspectives and Research Sterling VA: Stylus
Jung, I. and Latchem, C. (2012) Quality Assurance and Accreditation in Distance Education and e-Learning New York/London: Routledge

Kamenetz, A. (2010) DIY U: Edupunks, Edupreneurs, and the Coming Transformation of Higher Education White River Junction VT:
   Chelsea Green

Kao, J. (2019) Ontario's 2019 budget reveals plan to significantly tie university funding to performance outcomes The Varsity, University
   of Toronto

Kaplan, A. and Haenlein, M. (2010) Users of the world, unite! The challenges and opportunities of social media, Business Horizons, Vol.
   53, No. 1, pp. 59-68

Keegan, D. (ed.) (1990) Theoretical Principles of Distance Education London/New York: Routledge
Keen, A. (2007) The Cult of the Amateur: How Today's Internet is Killing our Culture New York/London: Doubleday
Kennepohl, D. (2010) Accessible Elements: Teaching Science Online and at a Distance Athabasca AB: Athabasca University Press
Klassen, V. (2011) Privacy and Cloud-Based Educational Technology in British Columbia Vancouver BC: BCCampus
Knapper, C. (2010) `Changing Teaching Practice: Barriers and Strategies' in Christensen-Hughes, J. and Mighty, J. eds. Taking Stock:

   Research on Teaching and Learning in Higher Education Toronto ON: McGill-Queen's University Press
Knowles, M. (1984) Andragogy in Action. Applying modern principles of adult education San Francisco: Jossey Bass.
Knox, J. (2014) Digital culture clash: `massive' education in the e-Learning and Digital Cultures Distance Education, Vol. 35, No. 2
Koller, D. (2102) What we're learning from online education TED talks, June 2012
Kolb. D. (1984) Experiential Learning: Experience as the source of learning and development Englewood Cliffs NJ: Prentice Hall
Kop, R. (2011) The Challenges to Connectivist Learning on Open Online Networks: Learning Experiences during a Massive Open Online

   Course International Review of Research into Open and Distance Learning, Vol. 12, No. 3
762 A.W. (Tony) Bates

Kop, R, and Hill, A. (2008) Connectivism: Learning theory of the future or vestige of the past? International Review of Research into Open
   and Distance Learning, Vol. 9., No. 3

Koumi, J. (1994). Media comparisons and deployment: a practitioner's view. British Journal of Educational Technology, Vol. 25, No. 1.
Koumi, J. (2006) Designing video and multimedia for open and flexible learning London: Routledge.
Koumi, J. (2015) Learning outcomes afforded by self-assessed, segmented video-print combinations Academia.edu
Kozma, R. (1994) `Will Media Influence Learning? Reframing the Debate', Educational Technology Research and Development, Vol. 42,

   No. 2, pp. 7-19
Krathwohl, D.R. (2002) A Revision of Bloom's Taxonomy: An Overview. In Theory into Practice, Vol. 41, No. 4 College of Education, The

   Ohio State University. Retrieved from http://www.unco.edu/cetl/sir/stating_outcome/documents/Krathwohl.pdf

Lambert, S. and Williams R. (1999) A model for selecting educational technologies to improve student learning Melbourne,
   Australia: HERDSA Annual International Conference, July

Large, L. (2015) Rebundling College Inside Higher Ed, April 7
Larman, C. and Vodde, B. (2009) Scaling Lean and Agile Development New York: Addison-Wesley
Laurillard, D. (2001) Rethinking University Teaching: A Conversational Framework for the Effective Use of Learning Technologies New

   York/London: Routledge
Lave, J. and Wenger, E. (1991) Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Lee, M. and McCoughlin, C. (eds.) Web 2.0-Based E-Learning Hershey NY: Information Science Reference
Leitonen, T. (2010) Designing Learning Tools: Methodological Insights Aalto, Finland: Aalto University School of Art and Design
Lewin, K. (1951) Field theory in social science; selected theoretical papers. D. Cartwright (ed.). New York: Harper & Row
Li, Y, MacNeill, S., and Kraan, W. (undated) Open Educational Resources - Opportunities and Challenges for Higher Education Bolton

   UK: JISC-CETIS
Lumina Foundation (2014) A stronger nation through higher education Indianapolis IN: The Lumina Foundation
Lyotard, J-J. (1979) La Condition postmoderne: rapport sur le savoir: Paris: Minuit
Lyotard, J-J. (1984) The Post-Modern Condition: A Report on Knowledge Manchester: Manchester University Press

Mackenzie, W. (2002) Multiple Intelligences and Instructional Technology: A Manual for Every Mind. Eugene, Oregon: ISTE
Mackness, J. (2013) cMOOCs and xMOOCs - key differences, Jenny Mackness, October 22
Manguel, A. (1996) A History of Reading London: Harper Collins
Marron, D. Missen, C. and Greenberg, J. (2014) "Lo-Fi to Hi-Fi": A New Way of Conceptualizing Metadata in Underserved Areas with the

   eGranary Digital Library Austin TX: International Conference on Dublin Core and Metadata Applications
Marshall, K. (2011) Employment patterns of post-secondary students, Ontario Undergraduate Student Alliance, November 11
Marshall, L. and Rowland, F. (1993) A Guide to Learning Independently Buckingham UK: Open University Press
Marshall, S. (2007). eMM Version Two Process Assessment Workbook Version 2.3 Wellington NZ: Victoria University of Wellington
Marton, F. and Saljö, R. (1997) Approaches to learning, in Marton, F., Hounsell, D. and Entwistle, N. (eds.) The experience of learning

   Edinburgh: Scottish Academic Press
Mayer, R. E. (2009) Multimedia learning (2nd ed). New York: Cambridge University Press
Mayfield, E. (2013) Six ways the edX Announcement Gets Automated Essay Grading Wrong, e-Literate, April 8
McCoughlin, C. (1999) The implictions of the research literature on learning styles for the design of instructional material Australian

   Journal of Educational Technology, Vol. 15, No. 3
McCoughlin, C. and Lee, M. (2011) `Pedagogy 2.0: Critical Challenges and Responses to Web 2.0 and Social Software in Tertiary

   Teaching', in Lee, M. and McCoughlin, C. (eds.) Web 2.0-Based E-Learning Hershey NY: Information Science Reference
McKeachie, W. and Svinicki, M. (2006) McKeachie's Teaching Tips: Strategies, Research and Theory for College and University Teachers

   Boston/New York: Houghton Mifflin
Means, B. et al. (2009) Evaluation of Evidence-Based Practices in Online Learning: A Meta-Analysis and Review of Online Learning

   Studies Washington, DC: US Department of Education
Meier, D. (2000) The Accelerated Learning Handbook New York: McGraw-Hill
                                                                                                                         Teahing in a Digital Age - 2e 763

Milligan, C., Littlejohn, A. and Margaryan, A. (2013) Patterns of engagement in connectivist MOOCs, Merlot Journal of Online Learning
   and Teaching, Vol. 9, No. 2

Moore, M.G. (1989) Three types of interaction American Journal of Distance Education, Vol.3, No.2
Moore, M. and Kearsley, G. (1996) Distance Education: A Systems View Belmont CA: Wadsworth
Moore, M. and Thompson, M. (1990) The Effects of Distance Education: A Summary of the Literature University Park, PA: American

   Center for Distance Education, Pennsylvania State University
Morrison, Gary R. (2010) Designing Effective Instruction, 6th Edition. Hoboken NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Murphy, E. (2103) Day 2 panel discussion Vancouver BC: COHERE 2013 conference (video: 4'40" from start)

Nel, C., Dreyer, C. and Carstens (2001) Educational Technologies: A Classification and Evaluation Journal for Language Teaching Vol.
   35, No. 4

Ng, A. (2013) Learning from MOOCs Inside Higher Education, January 24
O'Donoghue, M. (2014) Producing video for teaching and Learning New York: Routledge
OECD (2013a) OECD Skills Outlook 2013 First results From the Survey of Adult Skills Paris: OECD
OECD (2013b) Competition Policy and Knowledge-Based Capital: Key Findings Paris: OECD
Olson, D. and Bruner, J. (1974) `Learning through experience and learning through media', in Olson, D. (ed.) Media and Symbols: the

   Forms of Expression Chicago: University of Chicago Press
Ontario (2011) Fact Sheet Summary of Ontario eLearning Surveys of Publicly Assisted PSE Institutions Toronto: Ministry of Training,

   Colleges and Universities
Ontario (2012) Strengthening Ontario's Centres of Creativity, Innovation and Knowledge Toronto ON: Provincial Government of Ontario

Page-Bucci, H. (2002) Developing an Evaluation Model for a Virtual Learning Environment: accessed at http://www.hkadesigns.co.uk/
   websites/msc/eval/index.htm

Paloff, R. and Pratt, K. (2005) Collaborating Online: Learning Together in Community San Francisco: Jossey-Bass
Paloff, R. and Pratt, K. (2007) Building Online Learning Communities: Effective Strategies for the Virtual Classroom San Francisco:

   Jossey-Bass
Parachuri, V. (2013) On the automated scoring of essays and the lessons learned along the way, vicparachuri.com, July 31
Pask, G. (1975) Conversation, Cognition and Learning Amsterdam/London: Elsevier (out of press, but available online)
Patsula, P. (2002) Practical guidelines for selecting media: An international perspective The Useableword Monitor, February 1
Perry, W. (1970) Forms of intellectual development and ethical development in the college years: a scheme New York: Holt, Rinehart and

   Winston
Perry, W. (1976) The Open University Milton Keynes: Open University Press
Peters, O. (1983) Distance education and industrial production, in Sewart et al. (eds.) Distance Education: International Perspectives

   London: Croom Helm
Peters, O. (2002) Distance Education in Transition: New Trends and Challenges Oldenberg FGR: Biblothecks und Informationssystemder

   Carl von Ossietzky Universität Oldenberg
Piaget, J. and Inhelder, B., (1958) The Growth of Logical Thinking from Childhood to Adolescence New York: Basic Books, 1958
Picciano, A., Dziuban, C. and & Graham, C. (eds.), Blended Learning: Research Perspectives, Volume 2. New York: Routledge, 2013
Piech, C., Huang, J., Chen, Z., Do, C., Ng, A., & Koller, D. (2013) Tuned models of peer assessment in MOOCs. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford

   University
Pratt, D. (1998) Five Perspectives on Teaching in Adult and Higher Education Malabar FL: Krieger Publishing Company
Pratt, D. and Johnson, J. (1998) The Apprenticeship Perspective: Modelling Ways of Being in Pratt, D. (ed.) Five Perspectives on Teaching

   in Adult and Higher Education Malabar FL: Krieger Publishing Company
Prensky, M. (2001) Digital natives, Digital Immigrants On the Horizon Vol. 9, No. 5
Puzziferro, M., & Shelton, K. (2008). A model for developing high-quality online courses: Integrating a systems approach with learning

   theory Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, Vol. 12, Nos. 3-4
764 A.W. (Tony) Bates

Rawsthorne, P. (2012) Agile Instructional Design St. John's NF: Memorial University of Newfoundland
Rhoades, G. (2000) `The changing role of faculty' in Losco, J. and Fife, B. (eds.) Higher Education in Transition: the challenges of the

   new millennium Westport CT: Bergin and Garvey
Richardson, J. C., & Swan, K. (2003) Examining social presence in online courses in relation to students' perceived learning and

   satisfaction Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, Vol. 7, No. 1
Ries, E. (2011) The Lean Start-Up New York: Crown Business/Random House
Rivera, C. (2012) Survey offers dire picture of California's two-year colleges Los Angeles Times, August 28
Robbins, L. (1963) Higher Education Report London: Committee on Higher Education, HMSO
Robinson, B. and Moore, A. (2006) Virginia Tech: the Math Emporium, in Oblinger, D. (ed.), Learning Spaces, Louisville CO:

   EDUCAUSE
Robinson, J. (1982) Broadcasting Over the Air London: BBC
Rogers, C. (1969) Freedom to Learn Columbus, OH: Charles E. Merrill Publishing Co
Rothwell, W. and Graber, J. (2010) Competency-Based Training Basics Alexandria VA: ADST
Rousseau, J.-J. (1762) Émile, ou de l'Éducation (Trans. Allan Bloom. New York: Basic Books, 1979)
Royal Bank of Canada (2018) Humans Wanted Toronto ON: Royal Bank of Canada
Rugg, G. (2014) Education versus training, academic knowledge versus craft skills: Some useful concepts Hyde and Rugg, February 23
Rumble, G. (2001) The costs and costing of networked learning, Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, Vol. 5, No. 2
Russell, T. L. (1999) The No Significant Difference Phenomenon Raleigh, NC: North Carolina State University, Office of Instructional

   Telecommunication

Saettler, P. (1990) The Evolution of American Educational Technology Englewood CO: Libraries Unlimited
Salmon, G. (2000) e-Moderating: The Key to Teaching and Learning Online London: Taylor and Francis
Salomon, G. (1979) Interaction of Media, Cognition and Learning San Francisco: Jossey-Bass
Salomon, G. (1981) Communication and Education Beverley Hills CA/London: Sage
Scardamalia, M. and Bereiter, C. (2006) Knowledge Building: Theory, pedagogy and technology, in Sawyer, K. (ed.) Cambridge Handbook

   of the Learning Sciences New York: Cambridge University Press
Shapiro, D., et al. (2016) Time to Degree: A National View of the Time Enrolled and Elapsed for Associate and Bachelor's Degree

   Earners (Signature Report No. 11). Herndon, VA: National Student Clearinghouse Research Center.
Schmidt, S. and Shea, P. (2015) NANSLO Web-based Labs: Real Equipment, Real Data, Real People! WCET Frontiers
Schön, D. (1983) The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think in Action New York: Basic Books
Schramm, W. (1972) Quality in Instructional Television Honolulu HA: University Press of Hawaii
Schramm, W. (1977) Big Media, Little Media Beverley Hills CA/London: Sage
Schroeder, C. (1993) New students - new learning styles, Change, Sept.-Oct
Schunk, D. (2011) Learning Theories: An Educational Perspective (6th edition) New York: Pearson
Searle, J. (1996) The construction of social reality. New York: Simon & Shuster
Selwood, D. (2014) What does the Rosetta Stone tell us about the Bible? Did Moses read hieroglyphs? The Telegraph, July 15
Sharma, S. (2013) The Magic of the Campus Boston MA: LINC 2013 conference (recorded presentation)
Sheridan, K. and Kelly, M. (2010) The Indicators of Instructor Presence that are Important to Students in Online Courses MERLOT Journal

   of Online Learning and Teaching, Vol. 6, No. 4
Siemens, G. (2004) Connectivism: a theory for the digital age eLearningSpace, December 12.
Siemens, G., Downes, S., and Cormier, D. (2011) Connectivism and Connective Knowledge (a MOOC)
Skinner, B. (1968) The Technology of Teaching, 1968. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts
Smith, M. K. (2003) `Communities of practice', The encyclopedia of informal education, accessed 26 September, 2014
Suen, H. (2104) Peer assessment for massive open online courses (MOOCs) International Review of Research into Open and Distance

   Learning, Vol. 15, No. 3
Surowiecki, J. (2004) The Wisdom of Crowds: Why the Many Are Smarter Than the Few and How Collective Wisdom Shapes Business,

   Economies, Societies and Nations New York: Random House
                                                                                                                         Teahing in a Digital Age - 2e 765

Sweller, J. (1988) Cognitive load during problem solving: Effects on learning, Cognitive Science, Vol. 12

Tamim, R. et al. (2011) `What Forty Years of Research Says About the Impact of Technology on Learning: A Second-Order Meta-Analysis
   and Validation Study' Review of Educational Research, Vol. 81, No. 1

Tapscott, D. (2008) Grown Up Digital New York: McGraw Hill
Tapscott, D. (undated) The transformation of education dontapscott.com
To, K. (2014) UC Regents announce online course expansion, The Guardian, UC San Diego, undated, but probably February 5
Trenaman, J. (1967) Communication and Comprehension London: Longmans

UBC Wikis (2014)Documentation: Design Principles for Multimedia Vancouver BC: University of British Columbia
University of Ottawa (2013) Report of the e-Learning Working Group Ottawa ON: University of Ottawa
Usher, A. (2013) Financing Canadian Universities: A Self-Inflicted Wound (Part 5) Higher Education Strategy Associates One Thought a

   Day Blog, September 13

Valenti, M. (2013), in Williams, L., AV trends: hardware and software for sharing screens, University Business, June
van Zundert, M., Sluijsmans, D., van Merriënboer, J. (2010). Effective peer assessment processes: Research findings and future directions.

   Learning and Instruction, No. 20, 270-279
Vygotsky, L. (1978) Mind in Society: Development of Higher Psychological Processes Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press
Vygotsky, L.S. (1987) Thinking and speech, in R.W. Rieber & A.S. Carton (eds.), The collected works of L.S. Vygotsky, Volume 1: Problems

   of general psychology (pp. 39-285). New York: Plenum Press. (Original work published 1934)

Watters, A. (2012) Top 10 Ed-Tech Trends of 2012: MOOCs Hack Education, December 3
Wedemeyer, C. (1981) Learning at the Back Door: Reflections on Non-traditional Learning in the Lifespan Madison: University of

   Wisconsin Press
Weiner, B. (2009) A theory of organizational readiness for change Implementation Science, Vol. 4, No. 67
Weingarten, H. et al. (2018) Measuring Essential Skills of Postsecondary Students: Final Report of the Essential Adult Skills

   Initiative Toronto ON: HEQCO
Weise, M. (2014) Got Skills? Why Online Competency-Based Education Is the Disruptive Innovation for Higher Education EDUCAUSE

   Review, November 10
Wenger, E. (2000) Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning and Identity Cambridge UK: Cambridge University Press
Wenger, E. (2014) Communities of practice: a brief introduction, accessed 26 September, 2014
Wenger, E., McDermott, R., and Snyder, W. (2002) Cultivating Communities of Practice Harvard Business Press
Woodley, A. and Simpson, O. (2014) `Student drop-out: the elephant in the room' in Zawacki-Richter, O. and Anderson, T. (eds.) (2014)

   Online Distance Education: Towards a Research Agenda Athabasca AB: AU Press, pp. 508

Yousef, A. et al. (2014) MOOCs: A Review of the State-of-the-Art Proceedings of 6th International Conference on Computer Supported
   Education - CSEDU 2014, Barcelona, Spain

Zaied, A. (2007) A Framework for Evaluating and Selecting Learning Technologies The International Arab Journal of Information
   Technology, Vol. 4, No. 2

Zawacki-Richter, O. and Anderson, T. (eds.) (2014) Online Distance Education: Towards a Research Agenda Athabasca AB: AU Press,
   pp. 508
Index

There is no need for an index in a digital textbook.
Use the search engine [Search in book (Q)] located at the top right of each section. Type in the term or
name you are looking for. It will provide a list of the sections where this term or name is used.

                                                                   767
